[6367] (371-372) 


(.172-373) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Legal Expenses 31,343.90 

Comfort Fund 10,000.00 

Deficit 


4,252.67 


$236,761.11 $236,761.11 
The above deficit has more than been made up by donations
 since the end of the fiscal year. 


In conclusion: Let us press with vigor on, undaunted by 
the efforts of the adversary to hinder our work or to intimidate 
us to the end that we cease our efforts. Nothing can stop the 
Lord's work until it is completed. Therefore let us do with 
our might what our hands find to do as long as opportunities 
of service remain. "If God be for us, who can be against us ?" 
The Father himself loveth you. 


*A SOFT ANSWER TURNETH AWAY WRATH" 


How many have suffered themselves and brought suffering 
upon others through neglect of the Lord's counsel which says: 
"A soft answer turneth away wrath, but grievous words stir 
up anger!" (Proverbs 15:1) Who cannot see that the whole 
world would be blest by obedience to t.iis counsel, and that a 
very large proportion of the domestic infelicity of the whole 
world arises from a total or a partial neglect of the course 
here pointed out by the divine Counsellor? This familiar 
proverb contains excellent advice for all sorts and conditions 
of men. Let us meditate upon it for a few minutes. 

( 1 ) It is good policy for any one, Christian or worldling, 
to learn to give a soft answer, even under anger-provoking 
conditions. Business people study this as a matter of policy: 
for to them it means custom, sales, profits, wealth. In business
 life whoever ignores this Tule is to be considered foolish. 

(2) But that which is merely an outward form, policy, 
and often hypocritical in worldly people, is to abound much 
more in the child of God, begotten of a new mind. In him 


it is not to be put on for policy's sake, but to be the outgrowth
 or fruitage of the holy spirit or disposition which rules 
him as a "new creature in Christ Jesus." 

Any other reply than "a soft answer" is incompatible with 
the holy spirit of love — with meekness, gentleness, patience 
and brotherly kindness. If the truth must needs be spoken and 
if under the circumstances the truth be severe, hard, nevertheless
 and indeed all the more the hard thing needs to be stated 
as softly as possible. This evidently is the Apostle's thought 
when he recommends "speaking the truth in love." 

Nowhere is this advice more needed than in the home 
circle. Each unkind, ungenerous, hard word or deed is a 
testimony in opposition to our professions tjiat we are the 
Lord's people, begotten of his spirit. Therefore the Christian 
should give earnest heed to the admonition: "Put away all 
these, anger, malice, hatred, strife" ; and in their stead put on 
"the fruits and graces of the holy spirit of love. 


THE GOLDEN RULE THE FULL MEASURE OF A PERFECT MAN'S ABILITY 


"WJtat soever ye would that men should do to 

No part of God's instructions to his church is more important
 than the Golden Rule. Through the Psalmist God declares
 that justice is the very foundation of his throne. Everything
 that he does is based upon this principle; and he has 
invited his people to be like himself. He desires that we 
should develop in our character the four cardinal attributes 
which he himself possesses and has illustrated to us. Many 
people have the thought that justice is a very ordinary quality
, one which practically every one recognizes and practises; 
but this is not the case. On "the contrary all need to learn 
this lesson, Christians as well as others. 

No one has a right to do less than justice to any one. 
Therefore we should exercise ourselves continually to give 
others their just dues. Failure to recognize this principle 
is the main cause of the great time of trouble now upon the 
world. Justice is the very foundation principle upon which 
Ood would have his people build character, the basis upon 
whi ch he is deal i ng with both the church and mankin d 
in general. There is much in the fallen race of Adam that 
one cannot really love. In many people there is very little 
that would call for any response of the heart. But every human
 being calls for justice; and we, as the followers of Christ, 
are to be the foremost in extending justice to all. We are to 
stand up to give mankind their rights. 

IMFOBTAHCE OF THE GOLDEN RTOE 
What a different world this would be if every human being 
would resolve to carry out the instructions of the Golden Rule! 
There would be no taking advantage of another, no disregard
 of another's interest, no endeavor to better self at another
's expense. But selfishness is deeply ingrained in our 
natural body, and by reason of this fact even God's people 
fail to render absolute justice. They cnnnot be absolutely just 
in thought, word and deed. No one is perfect, and therefore 
no one can keep the law of God perfectly. But Jehovah 
has made an arrangement through Christ whereby he can 
deal with the church according to their minds, their intentions
. If. therefore, in the spirit of our minds we are doing 
to others as wo would have them <]o to us, then the blood of 
Jesus Christ is cleansing us from all imperfection. But this 
fact does not excuse u« from always doing our very best. 

W T hoever recognizes the Golden Rule from his heart will be 
seeking to conform all his thoughts to that standard. He will 
think and speak as generously of his neighbor as he would 
wish that neighbor to think and speak of him. He will act 
as generously toward his neighbor as he would wish that 
neighbor to act toward him. As the days go by, this principle 
of doing good to others will go out from him to all with whom 
he comes into contact. 

No matter how imperfect any of God's people may be by 
nature, the work .of grace in his heart should continually increase
. More and more the transforming work should progress, 
in order that he may be more and more like our Lord Jesus 
Christ, WThoever would make his calling and election sure to a 


you, do ye even so to them." — 'Matthew 7:12. 
permanent place in the body of Christ must, as far as his 
heart is concerned, become an exact copy of God's dear Son, 
although he will not he able to nttain to this glorious standard
 in his doings. Continuallv he will find it necessary to 
ask forgiveness for his shortcomings. But God, who knows 
our hearts, is pleased to see tnat his children are endeavoring 
to do the best they can, that they are seeking to grow in 
grace, in knowledge and in all the requirements of the divine 
standards. To such our Lord's statement applies: 'The Father 
himself loveth you." He loves all who are thus trying to live 
up to the great standard set forth in the Golden Rule. This 
is the spirit, the disposition, of our Lord Jesus Christ; and 
the heavenly Father loves us because in us the same spirit 
dwells which was also in Christ Jesus. 

PRO GEE SS IK BIGHTEOTJSNESS EXPECTED 

It is not enough, however, that we have started out to walk 
in God's ways, and that we recognize the downward tendencies 
of sin. The Father wishes us to watch our daily doings 
and to become more and more of his mind. Whoever han 
the spirit of God will strive to do well at all times. He will 
meditate on the divine character and will try to copy the 
attributes which make that character. Whoever is seeking to 
do good unto all men will surely never wish to do less than 
justice; on the contrary he will prefer to do more. Therefore
 the Apostle Paul, in speaking of the divine attribute of 
love, says: (f Love is the fulfilling^ of the law." — Itam. 13:10. 

What did St. Paul mean by this statement? The basic 
principle of the Mosaic law is justice rather than love. Justice
 represents the divine law at all times, past, present and 
future. All of God's intelligent creatures will be required to 
render justice; for whoever will not love righteousness will 
not be permitted to live everlastinglv. Because our Lord Jesus 
loved righteousness and hated iniquity, inequity, injustice, 
therefore the Father highly exalted him to be the Head over the 
church; and because the church is learning to love righteousness
 and to hate iniquity, in due time God will exalt them to 
joint-heirship with our Lord in the Messianic Kingdom. 

There is something beyond this, however; for "Love is the 
fulfilling of the law." The Apostle's meaning is this: When 
our Lord gave the church this new commandment of love 
(John 13:34, 35), it included everything pertaining to the 
Mosaic law. Whoever loves his neighbor as himself will 
surely wish to do that neighl>or the good which he would 
wish that neighbor to do to him. Whoever has this love for 
his neighbor, and who desires to be a follower of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, to walk in the Master's footsteps, will appreciate
 the fact that it was not justice which prompted the Logos 
to leave the heavenly glory and to sacrifice his life on behalf of 
the fallen race of Adam. It was love which prompted hi 5 
course, love for the Father, love to do the will of God. The 
Father did not eomimand our Lord to sacrifice his life; nor 
does be command any one else to sacrifice personal interests 
for the sake of others. 


[6368] 


December 15, 1918 


THE IV A TCH TOWER 


(374-375) 


THE MAINSPRING OF OUB LORD'S CHARACTER 

The heavenly Father had a plan to be carried out; and if 
the Logos wished to fulfil the conditions attached thereto, he 
would receive the high reward which the Father purposed to 
give to the one who would accomplish the divine purpose. The 
fact that our Lord willingly became a propitiation for the 
sin of the world is evidenced in the Apostle's statement that 
Jesus "for the joy set before him endured the cross, despising 
the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the Majesty 
on high." (.Hebrews 12:2) Our Lord was quite willing to 
endure death itself, even the shameful death of the cross, not 
because of justice, but because of love of the Father. He had 
love for mankind also. Having his Father's disposition he 
sympathized with poor, fallen humanity; and therefore the 
Father wished to have human redemption come through the 
Son whom he loved. Thus our Lord's first reason for enduring 
the cross was his great love for his heavenly Father, his desire 
to do the will of the Father, who had sent him into the 
world. 

God had purposed from the very beginning to roll away 
the curse of death which his foreknowledge had known would 
enter the world throxigh Adam's disobedience. The divine plan 
w^s that after death had been in operation upon the earth for 
six thousand years, it should pass away during the seventh 
thousand, the Millennium, the foreordained time when whosoever
 will of mankind may return to divine favor and blessing
. Knowing the divine plan for human salvation, our Lord 
longed to see it accomplished. His motive for doing the 
Father's will was more than justice ; it was love. The Apostle's 
argument, therefore, is that if we desire to do the heavenly 
Father's will, as did our Lord Jesna, and thus to share with 
him both in the* sufferings of the present time and in the 
glories to follow, then we must covenant to make the law of 
love the dominant principle of life; and love works no ill to its 
neighbor. 

The Father does not say to the church: '"You must keep 
both the Mosaic law and the law of love." The Apostle, however
, points out the fact that the law of love includes everything
 along the line of justice. Love goes beyond justice in 
that it would lead one to sacrifice for his friends, for his 
neighbor and for his family. This is more than justice would 
require. Therefore throughout the New Testament this latter 
attribute is left in the background. 

JUSTICE IN THE FAMILY 

Many of the people of God seem to be in danger of forgetting
 that behind love is this greater quality of justice, not 
greater in the sense of being higher, but of reaching further
. God requires justice, (Micah 6:8)' But his consecrated
 children volunteer to render more than justice; they are 
to love even their enemies. The fact that they have given 
their lives in obedience to the promptings of love does not 
excuse them from rendering justice to all, however. Yet many 
Christian people do not seem to see this point. As a result we 
find injustice everywhere, even in the family. Christian people
 who have undertaken to live the life of love sometimes 
fail to practise justice to their own children. la this not 
strange? One would think that even if there were no special 
covenant between themselves and God Christian parents ought 
to have a proper love for their offspring. 

This injustice is manifested in various ways. A parent 
owes it to his children to do more for them than merely 
to bring them into the world and to put them to work for the 
interests of the family. He owes it to each child to provide 
it. with an education which will give it a reasonable start in 
the world. He owes it to his child to see that it has a home 
training, a religious training, a training as to the rights of 
every other member of the home and as to those of others outside
 of the family circle. Very seldom indeed will a rightly 
trained child run away from home. Often it its the case that 
among themselves the children are not treated according to 
the principles of justice; and often the parents themselves fail 
to recognize the rights of those children who are approaching 
maturity, but continue to treat them merely as children. 

There is another side to the proposition, also. Children 
are under certain obligations to their parents. The Golden 
Rule would say: "As ye would that your children should do 
unto you, do ye even so unto your parents." If every child 
were taught to take this viewpoint, no parent would have cause 
to worry as to how his child would in after years manifest 
gratitude for the parental love and care bestowed upon it 
during its infancy. Having been taught the principles of 
righteousness from childhood, such children would have correct
 ideas of justice so deeply ingrained that they would be 
dissatisfied with any other course than the right one. 


JUSTICE IN THE CHUECH 

Since justice is the foundation of God's throne, so his 
church is build upon the same principle. The individual members
 may yield their own rights, but they cannot transgress 
upon the rights of others. They should be as just as they 
can, and as loving and as attentive to the rights of others 
as to their own rights. They are under the new commandment
: "Love one another. '' Love ignores many of its own 
rights. Our Lord's entire earthly life was a sacrifice of his 
rights as a human being. 

While we are to deal justly with others to the best of 
our ability, yet we are not necessarily to look for justice 
from others. We should be very glad to see others act justly 
toward us, but we are not to insist upon having our rights. 
Rather we are to use good judgment in the doing of the will of 
God, rather than in the doing of evil or of seeking to take advantage
 of others. As we follow this course, we shall be cultivating
 the spirit of justice in ourselves. Love gains the 
victory over our sense of justice, not by violating this fundamental
 principle, but by inducing us to sacrifice or give up 
our just rights. So it is for every consecrated child of God 
to sacrifice himself in the interests of the Lord, the truth and 
the brethren. By so doing we are really conserving our own 
best interests; and thus we shall grow in grace, in knowledge
 and in character likeness to our heavenly Father, and be 
fitted for the inheritance of the saints in light, the kingdom 
which he has for hi3 elect church. 

If we do not learn how to appreciate justice now, we could 
not be fit to be associated with our Lord Jesus Christ and 
with the God of justice, power, love and wisdom. We must 
cultivate both justice and love, in order to be qualified to 
occupy the positions of power and influence in which we shall 
be able to bless all the families of the earth. 

OUB LOED'S STANDARD OF LIVING 

The Golden Rule Avas the rod by which our dear Redeemer 
measured his every act, the law which governed his conduct 
toward others while he was laying down his life on behalf 
of the world of mankind. Therefore it is the standard incumbent
 upon all who would be his disciples. All who hope to become
 his joint-heirs in the Messianic Kingdom are required to 
walk in his steps as he set us an example. (1 Peter 2:21) 
God has foreordained to have an elect church to be joint-heirs 
with his Son in the kingdom which he is to set up on this 
earth, and for which all Christian people pray: "Thy kingdom 
come; thy will be done on tarth, even as it is done in heaven," 
But he has equally foreordained that no one shall be ultimately 
acceptable as members of that glorified church except such 
as shall during the present life become exact copies of his 
dear Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. 

To copy our Lord's example means to follow the Golden 
Rule; for it was his standard of living. It follows, therefore, 
that whoever expects to share with our Lord in his kingdom 
must give all diligence to the formation, of character, and 
that in the formation of the proper character the Golden Rule 
is necessary in order to develop in us not only the principles of 
justice, but also the spirit oi love, of unselfishly doing good 
to others. 

Since we are not all alike fallen, not all selfish in the 
same way. it follows that some walk much nearer to 
the spirit of the divine law, attain much closer to the measurement
 required by the Golden Rule, than do others. Yet 
no member of the fallen race can walk fully up to the requirements
 of that divine standard as long as he is handicapped 
by the various weaknesses of the flesh. Here it ia, however, 
that the grace of God makes up for our deficiencies. Those 
who are able to follow the pattern more closely are still far 
from following it perfectly, and consequently need to have 
the merit of the precious blood imputed to* them to make 
tip for their shortcomings. Those who are still more injured 
by the Adajnic fall, and who despite their best efforts are still 
further from measuring up to the grand standard of the 
Golden Rule, need thus much more of the grace of God to compensate
 for their deficiencies. 

Hence the Apostle Paul declares that where sin and imperfection
 abound the most, there the grace of God correspondingly
 abounds. Consequently those who are in Christ, and 
who" in their hearts are measuring themselves with the Golden 
Rule, seeking to the best of their ability to live up to its requirements
, may be succeeding variously in their endeavors, 
from the worldly viewpoint. But from the divine viewpoint all 
such are reckoned as having their blemishes fully covered with 
the merit of our dear Redeemer's sacrifice; and therefore the 
righteousness of the law — its true meaning, its spirit, and the 
true measure of the Golden Rule — is reckoned as fulfilled in 
them to divine acceptance, perfectly. — Romans 8:1-4. 

But it is not merely the reckoned fulfillment of this Golden 


T6369] 


(375 -377) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Rule in us for a day or a week or a year that constitutes us 
overcomers. We must walk closely in the Master's footsteps 
as we may be able, faithfully continuing to use his Golden 
Rule to the best of our ability, day by day, year by year, with 
continued and increasing zeal, until the Master, who is watching
 the progress of our development in character, shall say: 


''it is enough; the character is fixed, the love for righteousness
 is permanently and thoroughly developed; the spirit 
of love is indelibly marked; and although there still remains 
in the flesh some traces of selfishness, yet they are faint in 
comparison with the original mark, and give good evidence of 
victory won, not in the flesh, but in the heart, the will." 


GOING OUTSIDE THE CAMP 

[This article was a reprint of thit published in issue of May 1, 1910, which please sec. 


HOW A LIVING FAITH IS • DEMONSTRATED 


'7 will show thee my faith 

In the beginning of the church's history the believers were 
principally Jews, who had been under the Mosaic law, the law 
of works. Under that arrangement nothing could be a substitute
 for works. "He that doeth these things'* — "not he that 
believeth" — "shall live by them," was the declaration of God. — 
Romans 10:5; Leviticus 18:5. 

With the preaching of Christ and the conditions of acceptance
 as his disciples came a new line of procedure. According
 to this new teaching, God would not judge the church 
according to their works. His peopW had found that no human
 being could do perfectly; that no human being could gain 
the divine favor and everlasting life through any kind of 
works or through obedience to any law which Jehovah God 
might give. They had learned that because of the fall of 
man all humanity had come short of the glory of God. They 
saw that works were not sufficient to salvation, because no 
fallen being could do perfectly. 

The teaching of the Gospel was that Jesus had accomplished 
the- great works mentioned in the Law Covenant; that ne had 
kept the law of God perfectly, and thus had gained as his 
right the reward offered by the law; and that though perfect
, he had permitted his life to be taken from him; that he 
had laid down his life in sacrifice; and that this sacrifice of 
his life was to be made applicable for Adam and his race. 
Thus through the works of Jesus all might be exonerated 
from the penalty of the broken law, be justified and brought 
into a condition acceptable to God, notwithstanding the fact 
that all were unable to perform the works which the law had 
commanded. 

In our text and its context, however, the Apostle James 
is making clear that the Christian's salvation by faith does 
not mean that no works are to be required, but that works 
will not be the standard or basis upon which we shall be 
acceptable to God. The Apostle Paul says that "the righteousness
 of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh. 
but after the spirit." (Romans 8:4) "The righteousness of 
the law" is the real merit, the real meaning, the spirit of the 
law. This spirit is fulfilled in the hearts of the new creatures 
in Christ. These new creatures can keep this law because 
they have no bodies. The bodies they are using belong to the 
flesh; that is, they are fleshly in their nature, though they are 
controlled by the new creature. The flesh, being imperfect, 
cannot keep the law of God: but the new creature, represented 
now merely by the new will, mind and heart can keep that 
law; for it is perfect, having been begotten of God, and hence 
is required to keep it. Then this new creature brings the flesh 
into subjection, and as far as possible into harmony with the 
law of God. 

With such a change of doctrine from that of keeping 
the law, where works wore the ground for justification, to tlii^ 
new lino of teaching which the apostles set forth, there would 
necessarily at first be some conflict in the thoughts of Christians
, Some still clung, naturally, to the thought that they 
must be justified by works, by keeping the law, having a 
measure of faith in Jesus, yet* thinking that they must do 
everything which the law requires. 

The apostles seem to have had considerable difficulty in 
getting the matter so clearly stated that all mi^ht understand 
that in God's sight faith was to be the standard for judgment; 
that what we believe, what we determine in our hearts, is the 
basis of God's consideration of u*. not what we succeed in 
doing in the flesh: and yet that this faith was not to he a 
dead faith, a fruitless faith, hut must be accompanied hy 
works to the extent of ability, in order that thus the genuineness
 of our faith might be demonstrated. 


by my works." — James 2:18. 

No doubt at that Ume there were some who would fly to 
the opposite extreme and say: "According to our new line of 
thought, all that we are to do is to believe; and we shall have 
everlasting life." Hence their inclination would be to think: 
"Oh, it makes no difference now about our works ! It is what 
we believe, not what we do, that counts/' It would appear 
that this realization was in the mind of the Apostle James 
when he wrote these word«: "Show me thy faith without thy 
works, and I will show thee my faith by my works." — James 
2:18, 

Evidently the Apostle was setting forth the right principle
. We are not to think of having a faith, but of not permitting
 it to bring forth any works in our lives. True faith 
will operate to the measure of ability. It is a "faith which 
worketh by love." (Galatians 5:6) We recognize that we 
have limited ability, and that of ourselves we could never do 
perfect works, such as God would accept; and yet if our faith 
in Christ is supplemented by the best works we can do, our 
Father will accept these as if they were perfect ; for our Lord 
Jesus makes up our deficiency. 

Some claim to have great faith. But although they talk 
about what they believe, yet they show no works to correspond. 
The Apostle James Bays: (f You may know about my faith 
by the way you see me live. My works will be a demnonstration
 of the "faith I have." To make professions before the 
world far beyond what we are doing in their sight would be 
rather disadvantageous to both our influence and our usefulness
. The world is not willing to credit us with anything 
more than they can see. If they see that we have received 
a new faith, a different view of God, that we profess to have 
come into a new relationship with him, and if they can note 
some effect in our life, they will probably credit us .Accordingly, 
even if they do not find us perfect. Often they will say: "We 
can see a great change in him since he has taken up with this 
belief." 

Such Christians are attesting their faith by their works, 
as the Apostle indicated was the proper way. They are thus 
witnessing to their faith in the Lord, in his Word, in his 
promises. We quite agree with the thought which the 
Apostle gives, that if any one boasts about now much faith 
he has, but manifests no change in his daily life, his profession
 of religion does not amount to much. If it were true 
that he had such a faith, but had no works to corroborate his 
profession, he had better keep silent on the subject; for his 
statements would be discounted by those who hear his chums, 
and would do harm rather than good to the cause of Christ. 

The proper thought for us, then, is that we should have 
the faith and then manifest works to correspond, that as far 
as possible we are to bring our lives into accord with this 
faith which we have and profess, Perhaps we would be safer 
not to profess more faith than we can demonstrate to others 
by our daily living. No matter how much faith we may declare
 that we possess, people will neither understand nor 
appreciate it unless we believe it. However charitable our 
brethren might try to be in their judgment of us, it would 
be better for us to say nothing about our faith unless we can 
demonstrate to others to some extent its genuineness. Boastfulness
 is not especially a characteristic of mature Christians. 
Surely, then, it should not be manifest in the immature. 
Rather we all should exhibit a humility of mind and an earnest 
endeavor to do the things pleasing in the sight of God, as a result
 of our faith in him and in the exceeding great and precious
 promises of his Word. 


YEAR TEXT FOR 1919 


The Editorial Committee has chosen for the year text for 
1919 the beautiful and inspiring promise contained in Isaiah 
54:17: "No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; 

[6370] 


and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou 
shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the 
Lord, and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord." 


THE LOVE TO BE DESIRED 

"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that ye 

love one (mother with a pure heart fervently." — 1 Pet. 1:22. 

were accepted as new creatures in Christ; our souls were purified
; we were started in a new career. 

In our text the Apostle proceeds to say that, having had 
this glorious transformation of character, through the knowledge
 of and obedience to the spirit of the truth, we have 
learned to love the brethren with an "unfeigned love," a love 
that is genuine, without pretense — not merely an outward 
profession, to have a smile upon the face 4 or to* give a cordial 
grasp of the hand, but that through this spirit we have recognized
 that all who trust in the precious blood and are consecrated
 to the dear Redeemer, and are seeking to follow his 
leadings, are "brethren," regardless of race or color or education
 or poverty or homeliness. -We have reached the point 
where our hearts are so full of the spirit of the Master that 
we can truthfully say we love all the brethren with a love 
which is sincere and not at all feigned. We must not only 
regard them as brethren and give them "unfeigned love," but 
this should give us great sympathy and a desire to do everything
 we can to encourage them, to help them. 


t The word "Souls" in this text stands, as usual, for the 
being, and not merelv for the physical being, which is included. 
Tlie purifying, therefore, refers to a thorough cleansing of the 
heart (the mind, the will, the actuating intentions, or motives
), as the effect of such purifications will be manifest in 
the outward life and conduct. 

We purify our souls — that is, our souls are purified (have 
been purified if we are saints) — by obedience to the truth 
through the spirit; that is, to imply that it is necessary for 
us to know the truth; not necessarily that we know all truth, 
but necessary for us to know the great truth on this subject — 
the truth that God condemned sin; to know the truth that 
the whole world of mankind came under this condemnation; 
to know the truth that God has provided a way of escape 
from the condemnation that is upon the world; to know the 
truth that there is but one particular way in which any can 
avail themselves of this divine provision, namely, that of 
being justified by faith in Christ, and taking up the cross and 
following in his footsteps. When we presented ourselves in 
spirit and in truth, through faith, our sins were forgiven; we 


PHARAOH OPPRESSES ISRAEL 

[Paragraphs 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 of this article were reprinted from an article entitled, "Behind a Frowning Providence," published 
in issue of April 15, 1907. Paragraph 13 was reprinted from article entitled, "A Lesson on Divine Providence," published in issue
 of May 1, 1907. Paragraphs 14 to end were reprinted from article entitled, "God's Instruction in Preparation," published in 
issue of June 1, 1913. The balance, except the paragraph below, was reprinted from article entitled, "The Goodly Child*" 
published in issue of June 1, 1913. Please see articles named.] 
The statement that there arose in Egypt a new king, who 


knew not Joseph, doubtless applies to a period some time 
after the death of Joseph. Since he ruled Egyj)t for eighty 
years it is quite probable that during that period there had 
been more than one Pharaoh on the throne. The general supposition
 among scholars is that the new king belonged to a 
new dynasty — a change in the royal family through insurrection
 or otherwise. Possibly the very fact of the general peace 


and prosperity of Egypt during Joseph's term of office led 
to an abandonment of the affairs of state on the part of the 
royal family, and thus paved the way to rebellion and a 
change of dynasty, some ambitious family grasping the reins of 
power after Joseph's death, when probably matters were not 
running so smoothly in the affairs of Btate, by reason of the 
loss of the divinely guided prime minister. 


FAITH'S PRICELESS DOWER 


"Ye that have faith to look with fearless eyes 

Beyond the tragedy of a world of strife, 

And know that out of death and might shall rise 

The dawn of ampler life, 

Rejoice, whatever anguish rend the heart, 

That God has given you a priceless dower. 


To live in these great times and have a part 
In Freedom's crowning hour. 
That ye may tell your Bona who see the light 
High in the heavens — their heritage to take — 
*I saw the powers of Darkness put to flight, 
I saw the Morning break.' " 


MOSES THE LEADER OF ISRAEL 

[The first 19 paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Assuredly God Was With Him," published in 
issue of May 1, 1907. The balance was reprinted from article entitled, "The Childhood of Moses," published in issue of May 
15, 1894. Please see articles named.] 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


WHOM DOBS PHAHAOH TYPE? 

Question: On page 230, Z '18, Pharoah is said to be a 
type of God. Have we not hitherto understood that he typed 
Satan? Kindlv explain. 

Answer: The word Pharaoh is not a name, but a title by 
which the Scriptures designate the ancient kings of Egypt. 
The word is said to mean "The Great House," and corresponds 
to our "The Sublime Porte," or to "The Holy See." Bible 
scholars seem to agree that the Pharaoh of Joseph's day belonged
 to an altogether different dynasty from the Pharaoh 
of the oppression and the Pharaoh of the exodus. Speaking 
of Joseph as the type of Christ, The Watch To web of April 
15, 1894, says: "During the Millennial age Christ will give 
the bread of everlasting life (himself, his merit) to all who 
desire it; but all must give their all in exchange to Jehovah 
whom Pharaoh typified in this affair." The same thought is 
expressed in the Bible comments on Genesis 41 :41 1 45:16; and 
47:28. But the Pharaoh of the exodus was an altogether different
 character, and thus formed a type of Satan. On this 
type see Vol. 6, page 458. 

THE MERIT OP OHBIST 

Question: Wihat is meant by the expression, "Christ's imputed
 merit"? 

Answer: When speaking of the imputed merit of Christ 
we should keep distinctly in mind the fact that our Lord has 
a personal merit, a righteousness of his own, which he has 
never given away. He needs his own righteousness. In this 
sense of the word he could not give us his righteousness without
 being bereft of righteousness himself. The same would 
be true of his right to life. He has a right to life; but it is 


not that right to life which he imputes to us; for he needs it 
himself. He needs his own personal merit. 

Yet we believe that our Redeemer will give to mankind 
during the Millennial age, and impute to the church during 
the Gospel age, a right to life and a righteousness respectively. 
What we mean is this: Our Lord will give to mankind his 
right to life on the human plane, the merit that was his as 
the reward for his obedience as the Man Christ Jesus ; namely, 
the privilege or right to live as a human being. That right 
was secured to our Lord by his obedience to the Law. (Romans
 10:5; Galatians 3:12) Since his resurrection our Lord 
is highly exalted, a partaker of the divine nature, and no 
longer has need for his right to life on the human plane and 
for the righteousness which goes with that right. He is quite 
well satisfied and complete in his present condition. He has, 
therefore, at his disposal the right to perfect life on the human
 plane, and the righteousness which goes with that right, 
the merit of his earthly sacrifice. This he purposes to give 
to the world by and by. But during the Gospel age he has 
imputed this merit to the church, to make good for their imperfection
 and thus to enable them to offer an acceptable 
sacrifice unto Jehovah. 

MEANING OF THE EAST GATES OF THE TBMFLE 

Question: What is represented by the east gates in the 
Temple of Ezekiel's vision ? 

Answer: From the viewpoint of the Patriarchal and Jewish 
ages the outer east gate, as far in as the porch, represents 
the tentative justification of the ancient worthies. But from 
the viewpoint of the Gospel age the east gate, including the 

[6371] (377 381) 


C381) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


porch, symbolizes both the tentative and the vitalized justification
 of the little flock and the great company; and this 
same gate, up to the porch, represents the tentative justification
 of the remainder of the household of faith. The porch 
of -the outer east gate represents the vitalization of tentative 
justification. For the little flock and the great company this 
takes place at the instant of begetting to the divine nature in 
the Holy. The ancient worthies will receive the vitalization 
of their tentative justification at the beginning of the earthly 
phase of the kingdom* of heaven, in 1925 we believe; for during 
their first earthly lives they met all the conditions required of 
them. It is well to keep in mind that a porch represente vitalization
, resurrection, raising to the condition of the plane indicated
 by the court to which the porch belongs. 

The inner court represents the spirit plane. The Temple 
building thereon represents the divine plane, which is the 
highest phase, of spirit nature. The spirit- begetting of all 
those who are consecrated unto death during this Gospel age 
takes place in the porch of the Temple building. Those begotten
 to divinity find themselves in the Holy, having by the 
act of consecration unto death passed over the threshold, if 
the consecration was accepted of the Father, The faithful 
144,000 remain in the Holy until the death of the human 


organism in which the new creature has developed. Those 
who prove more or less unfaithful have been put out of the 
Holy by the millions, and have been put into the inner east 
gate, there to meet all the conditions necessary for their birth 
on the spirit plane. This birth is represented by their passing 
out of the inner east gate into the inner court. While originally
 begotten to the divine nature, in the Temple porch, the 
great company have either nourished themselves poorly or 
have failed to assimilate properly their spiritual food, the 
Word of God. Therefore their begettal not having resulted 
in divinity, birth to the divine plane, they must count themselves
 as having been in the porch of the inner east gate; for 
it results in birth to the spirit plane, but not to the divine 
stage of that plane. 

So clarify our clouded vision, Lord, 
So lift our thoughts and hearts to things above, 
That earthly woes shall have no power to vex, 
Nor separate us from thy grace and love. 
While still we toss on life's tempestuous sea, 
Shield from the rocks our tiny barques so frail ; 
Stand at the helm and guide us safely till 
We, too, are anchored safe "within the vail!" 


YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1919 

{The plan here proposed, according to a custom of years, we designate "GOOD HOPES" because nothing is actually promised 

— only your generous hopes expressed, based upon your future prospects as they now appear to you. The plan has 

proved not only so beneficial to* the cause of truth but also so blessed to the hopers, for some years past, that 

we again commend it to all as Scriptural and good. Those who desire to make use of this plan 

can fill out both of these memoranda. One should be kept for the refreshment of your 

memory; the other mail to us.] 


Watch Tower B. & T. Soc'y., 
Pittsburgh, Pa., 

Dear Fbtends: — I have read with interest of the great work 
contemplated by the Society during the year beginning, in connection
 with the output of the STumES and Tracts in foreign 
lands and here at homo. T need not tell you that I am deeply 
interested in the spread of the Glad Tidings of the lengths and 
breadths, the heights and depths of redeeming love expressed 
for us in God's great plan of the agres. 

I have been considering carefully, and praying to be instructed
, how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's 
glory and for the service of his people — those blinded by human 
tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering for "the good Word 
of God," and those also who are naked, not having on the wedding
 garment of Christ's imputed righteousness, the xinjustified, 
who stand, at best, in the filthy rags of their own righteousness. 
T have decided that so far as my (t money talent* goes, I will 
follow the rule so clearly laid down for us by the great Apostle 
Paul (1 Cor. 16:2), and lay aside on the first day of each 
week, according to my thankful appreciation of the Lord's 
blessings during the preceding week. Out of this fund I wish to 
contribute to the several parts of the Lord's work carried on by 
our Society. Of course, I cannot in advance judge or state 
particularly what the Lord's bounty may enable me to set apart 
weekly, and hence you will understand the sum indicated to be 
merely my conjecture or hope, based upon present prospects, T 
will endeavor to contribute more than I here specify: and 
should I not succeed in doing as well, the Lord will know my 
heart and you. also, will know of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance whad T hope to be 
able to do' irr this cause is to enable those in charge of the 
work of publishing and circulating the Tracts, etc., to form 


estimates, lay plans, make contracts, etc., with some idea of 
what i will at least try to do in the exercise of this, my 
highly appreciated privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for Home and Foreign Mission Work, 
to assist in circulating Scripture Studies in foreign languages, 
and in publishing the Bible Students Helps in various languages
, and in supplying these gratuitously to brethren who 
have the heart and opportunity to circulate them widely, and in 
meeting the expenses of brethren sent out as lecturers to 
preach the divine plan, and in general to be expended as the 

officers of the Society may deem best, the amount of 

per week. 

To comply w T ifch United States Postal Laws, all or any 
portion of my donation may be applied as subscription price 
for Watch Tower sent to "the Lord's poor or others, as the 
Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, T will endeavor to send you 
what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close of each 
quarter, by bank draft, express order or postal money order 
as may be convenient, and will address it to 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
310 Martin Bi.no.. N. S.. Pittsburgh, Pa. 

Name 

Post Office State 

Street and No 


'HOW LONG, OH LORD, HOW LONG?' 


How long, oh Lord, how long 
Shall weakness serve the strong? 
How long shall Might make right, 
And darkness hate the light? 

How long, oh Lord, how long, 
Till Truth shall crush the wrong, 
Till darkness turn to day, 
And sorrow flee away? 

How long till wars shall cease, 
This turmoil end in peace? 
How long the sin-cursed Earth 
Await her second birth ? 

How long, Lord, must T feel 
The proud oppressor's heel? 


I'm w r eary of the night. 
I long for morning light! 

T long to see Thy face, 
T long for Thine embrace — 
How long. Lord, till I come 
To my long-promised home? 

Not long, my child, not long; 
Be brave, be true, be strong! 
The Day-star doth appear, 
The Kingdom draweth near! 

ljook up, my child, look up, 
The last drop's in thy Cup! 
Trust where thou canst not see— 
T soon will call for thee! 


Gertrude W. Seibert. 


L6372] 



AND HEPALD OF CHRIST? PRESENCE 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY 1, 1919 

VIEW FROM THE TOWER 

"a faithful watchman" 


No. 1 


"Son of man, 1 Juive made thee a watchman unto the house of 

washing from me, 
In these words does the Lord appoint Ezekiel to be a 
watchman over Israel after the flesh; and Bible Students have 
learned that an ti typically these same words apply to that 
faithful man of God who for over forty years past has served 
aq watchman to spiritual Israel, "the Israel of God" — Charles 
Taze Russell. How few people, even of the pirofessedly religious
, realize that God always has hia special servants, 
whose work is to serve as watchman, to give special heed to 
the Lord's Word and to sound out the warnings as these are 
necessary. This is exactly the meaning of our text. Faithfulness
 is required on the part of all who would serve as the 
Lord's watchmen; for they must give an account of their 
stewardship. As the Apostle suggests: "Obey them that 
have the rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch 
for your souls, as they that must give an account, that they 
may do it with joy and not with grief." (Hebrews 13:17) 
But, alas I The Scriptural records reveal the fact that a 
majority of watchmen are unfaithful. 

It might be asked: "What should these watchmen be 
watching for?" The Prophet answers this question quite 
plainly in these words: "I will stand upon my watch, and 
set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he shall 
say unto me, and what I shall answer when I am disputed 
with." (Habakkuk 2:1) Their watching, then, consists in 
watching to see what the Lord will say and what answers 
they will give. If ever any man was faithful in this work 
it was Pastor Russell. We note again that every faithful 
Watcher has always been the object of envy and jealousy on 
the part of the unfaithful watchmen, leading on eventually 
to persecution and violence. 

WATCHMEN FAITHnXli AND UNFAITHFUL 
Prior to the time of Jesus, the faithful watchmen were 
Moses and the prophets. The unfaithful watchmen of the 
same period were tne Scribes, Pharisees and the doctors of 
the law, who persecuted the faithful watcners, and for a 
pretense made long prayers on the street corners, gave alms 
publicly to be seen of men, thanked God that they were not 
as other men, gave tithes regularly (and particularly of their 
mint and cummin ) , but at the same time devoured widows' 
houses. They constituted the class who our Lord declared 
were hypocrites, and to whom he said: "Ye blind guides, 
which strain at a gnat and swallow a camel!" Since our 
Lord's time the faithful watchmen have been the Apostles, 
John Wycliffe, Martin Luther, Pastor Russell and others. The 
unfaithful watchmen have been the money-loving, pleasureloving
, Honor-seeking clergy class, who instead of listening 
to the Lord's words and declaring his message, have been 
preaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Speaking
 of the faithful watchmen the Prophet said: "Thy watchmen
 shall lift up the voice; with the voice together shall they 
sing; for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord returns 
to Zion." But of the unfaithful watchmen he said: "His 
watchmen are blind; they are all ignorant; they are all dumb 
dogs; they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber
. Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough ; 
and they are shepherds that cannot understand; they all look 
to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter." — 
Isaiah 52:8; 56:10, 11. 

How ardently this latter class hated Pastor Russell! How 
much they threatened and persecuted! How diligently they 
tried to stop the message, and how signally they failed! Hear 
the Word of the Lord on this point: "But the house of 
Israel [nominal spiritual Israel] will not hearken unto thee; 
for they will not hearken unto me; for all the house of Israel 
are impudent and hard-hearted. Behold, I have made thy 
face strong against their faces, and thy forehead strong 
against their foreheads. A-s an adamant harder than flint, have 
I made thy forehead; fear them not, neither be dismayed at 
their looks; for they are a rebellious house." — Ezekiel 3:7-9. 


Israel; therefore hear the xcord at my ynouth, and give them 
."—Ezekiel 3:17. 

PASTOR RUSSELL'S MISSION 
Pastor Russell was commissioned of the Lord to warn the 
wicked that they should surely die. If the watchman would 
faithfully give this warning, he would deliver his soul; but 
if he were not faithful in this respect, God would require the 
blood of the wicked at his hands. (Ezekiel 3:13, 19) The 
unfaithful watchmen, on the contrary, told the wicked that 
they would not surely die, but they they would live on forever
 in fiery torment. See also Genesis 2:*17; 3:3-5. 

Furthermore, Pastor Russell forewarned that we are living 
in the end of the Gospel age, that a new age is about to be 
ushered in, that the end of the age would be accompanied 
with a great time of trouble, distress and perplexity. He 
foretold that Christ's kingdom would be established by force 
during this troublous period — the force of the Iron Rule. Years 
ago he foretold the federation of churches and a tacit union 
between Protestants and Catholics, and pointed out that each 
would hate the other even while co-operating one with the 
other. He also foretold the return of the Jews to their own 
land. Moreover, he warned the people that all these events 
were but incidental to the overthrow of Satan's kingdom and 
the establishment of the kingdom of Christ. He forewarned 
the religious systems, both Catholic and Protestant, of their 
final and complete overthrow unless they repented of their 
sins and changed their course. But his message went unheeded
, except that many scoffed and ridiculed the ideas which 
he presented, seemingly unawares that even their scoffing had 
been foretold. — 2 Pet. 3:3, 4. 

True to the teachings of the Scriptures and to the word 
of God^s faithful watchman, a federation of Protestant 
churches and a closer affiliation of Protestants and Catholics 
began to take place a few years ago. Gradually the two ends 
of the ecclesiastical heavens (Catholic and Protestant) have 
been drawing together, until less than a year ago it would 
seem that the affiliation was complete, and that the two great 
religious bodies — federated Protestantism and federated 
Catholicism — had rolled together as a scroll. (A scroll rolls 
togelher from both ends) For years this affiliation with each 
other had been sought; and negotiations to this end had been 
secretly carried on by those high in authority in both sides. 
So secretly was this work done that the great majority of 
the members of the Protestant sects did not know, and have 
not yet found out, that they have been delivered over to the 
Papacy by their religious leaders. But the Papacy understood 
the situation well; for the whole scheme had been concocted 
by her. 

Many of God's prophets, writing from two thousand to 
four thousand years ago, had foretold just such a union, and 
had warned of the consequences. (Genesis 3:15: Isaiah 8:12- 
15; 34:4) The Apostle Peter, as the Lord's mouthpiece, very 
clearly pointed out that when the union was complete the 
symbolical heavens would come to an end. (2 Peter 3:9-12) 
Still another prophet had foretold that these two ends of the 
religious heavens, while outwardly affiliating and co-operating, 
would hate one another, each a thorn in the other's side. 
(Nahum 1:101 During the past few years the tendency 
toward affiliation and co-operation has been very manifest, 
and seemingly the ancient hatred was forgotten. But this 
was merely how the matter appeared, and really was a deception
. The word of the prophet Jeremiah, written over two 
thousand years ago, was true. The old hatred still existed; 
they were indeed "folded together as thorns." 

GETTING THEIB, EYES OPEN TO FACTS 
Recent events are revealing these ancient foes as enemies 
still; and Protestants are just awakening to the knowledge 
that they have been duped again. Hie editors of various 
denominational journals are gnashing their teeth with rage at 
Papacy; and it now looks as if she has passed the zenith of 
her power, and that the doom foretold by the Apostle nineteen 

[6373] (3-0 


(4~S) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh j Pa. 


hundred years ago is about to be fulfilled upon her. (Revelation
 17:16) Meantime, Papacy keeps on uttering her "great, 
swelling words" and making her boastful claims. — Daniel 7:9, 
11, 20. 

The matter was brought to a head during the great warchest
 drive beginning November 11, in which seven organizations
 participated. It was then that these editors awoke to 
find that Papacy had herself on the list for $30,000,000, and 
that all Protestant bodies were excluded. What a howl went 
up from the Protestant press, even though the Protestant 
clergy had assisted Papacy into this very position of prominence
! We quote: 

"There is, of course, widespread dissatisfaction with the 
arrangement—most especially because the Catholic War Council
, which includes the Knights of Columbus, will receive 
$30,000,000. The position is taken by those who object to the 
united -budget that the Knights of Columbus, as an organization
, has no more right to cantonment and trench privileges 
than have other secret societies, and that the Catholic church 
should have no privileges in the camps and on the field that 
are not extended to other religious bodies. With this objection 
we agree. Why should either the Catholic church, the Jewish 
church or the Salvation Army be elevated above the Methodist, 
Baptist or any other church? If it is the privilege of one religious
 body to look after the welfare of soldiers of its own 
faith, or to do general humane and religious work in the army, 
why should it not be the privilege of all ? 

(( When the war is over, and people buckle dawn to sane 
thinking, irregularities, indiscretions and political plans and 
acta upon the part of many will be held up in the limelight 
and looked at in a way which will clear the atmosphere and 
start far-reaching and valuable reforms. The Catholic church, 
in particular, will stand out in the open as a political organization
 which, during the entire length of the war, left no 
stone unturned to advance papal interests. The sentiment 
against the Roman hierarchy, checked by the war, will come 
forth anew, and with greater vigor than ever before in our 
country's history. And among. the charges to be preferred 
against the Catholic church after the war will be her peculiar 
participation in cantonment and trench privileges, and the 
mandatory method by which she secured, a place in the war 
chest." The Apostolic Review. Nov. 19, 1918. 

PROTESTANTS IK AN E&B ABE AS SING POSITION 
The Christian Index, organ of the Baptists of Georgia, in 
the issue of September 1?, says: 

"Many Baptists will either have to walk over their own 
consciences or not contribute at all in the November [war 
chest 1 drive. They want to give liberally to the Y. M. C. A,, 
because they believe in the work it is doing, but they do not 
want to give a penny for the support of Roman Catholic work 
among the soldiers, especially when they are deprived of 
doing work among the soldiers as Baptists, even at their own 
expense. The Unionists or Roman Catholics, or both, are 
responsible for putting the Baptists in this embarrassing 
situation." 

Under the caption, "Protestants Awake," The American 
Protestant, a southern Presbyterian journal, says: 

"The writer has just learned of a shrewd form of Romish 
propaganda among our Protestant young men at the army 
cantonments in this country, and probably abroad. Rome 
ever exhibits the proverbial wisdom of the serpent in her 
efforts to proselyte among Protestants, and is willing to serve 
in the most humble capacity if thereby a pervert can be 
secured for her idolatrous system. She blows no trumpets, 
makes no proclamations, offers no resolutions, nor appears to 
be engaged in gathering converts, but quietly and unobtrusively
 she makes impressions by her works, which, to those 
ignorant of Romish practise, history and doctrine, give her 
the appearance of an angel of light. In this instance she is 
engaged in a form of good works, which Protestants seem to 
ignore, and having a monopoly of this kind of service for our 
troops, she is reaping a rich reward." 

A SCATHING CRITICISM 
Perhaps the severest criticism is found in The Christian 
Leader of November 5. It cites the percentage of denominational
 increase for the past ten years, as follows: Baptists, 
28 per cent; Methodists, 24.8 per cent; Disciples, 25 per cent; 
Episcopalians, 24 per cent; Presbyterians, 23 per cent; Congregationalista
 12.8 per cent; Lutherans, 12 per cent; and 
Catholics, 10.8 per cent. Then it calls attention to the fact 
that there are 15,700,000 Catholics as against 81,000,000 Protestants
 and their adherents (U. S. religious census for 1916), 
and adds : 

"The Roman Catholics claimed membership increased in 
the ten years covered 1,531.000 or 10.08 per cent. In the 
same period the eight larger evangelical bodies made a combined
 increase of 24.1 per cent. In other words, the evangelical
 bodies are growing more than twice as fast as the 
Romanists. The hold of the hierarchy upon the press enables 
them to get themselves advertised much. But the danger of 
Romanism is not in its numbers, but it is in its manipulation 
of politics in the interest of a foreign autocratic sovereign. 
This indicates strikingly that Roman Catholicism can not 
flourish in this republic as an indigenous religion. This is 
well. It does not deserve to flourish, for it has cursed every 
country in which it has come into dominance, and is even 
now making itself despicable in America to every patriotic 
citizen who has hi3 eyes open. 

"How do the priests figure it out that they have 40 per 
cent of the soldiers in the armies of the country? The direct 
and adequate answer is that they do not so figure it. They 
claim it, but they must know that it is untrue. It is absolutely
 clear that the ratio of Catholic soldiers to evangelicals 
is approximately one out of six. How could it be otherwise? 
It took the assurance of Romanism to make that claim. 

"We have come to a dangerous pass in America when 
these priestly adherents to and sponsors for a foreign 
hierarchy, which arrogantly claims sovereignty over its members
 in civil as well as in spiritual matters, can so browbeat 
and frighten the newspaper press of this free country that 
they can use their columns freely to flaunt before the public 
eye the most absurd and ridiculous claims. These papers get 
and must get the large majority of their support from people 
whose religious faith is misrepresented, and whose sense of 
justice is outraged by the insolent and untrue emanations of 
Rome. 

"The palpably misleading and boastful claims of the 
Roman hierarchy as to its relative membership in America 
seem to have been adopted by our Government in the allotment
 of chaplains. While the five times more numerous evangelicals
 are allowed two-thirds, Rome's proportionate population
 would give her one chaplain in six. She got one in 
three, 

"With the few notable exceptions, the American secular 
press, except country weeklies, is blind, deaf and dumb to the 
most palpable outrages against common justice, if Rome is 
the instigator. The simple truth is that the available evidence 
indicates that the priests have nearly all the daily papers 
muzzled. This speaks well for Rome's political acumen, but 
is unspeakably vicious as a matter of principle or policy in 
this American republic. Not even in the South, where the 
papists are hardly more than two per cent, of the population, 
can evangelical religion get a square deal in most of these 
papers. It is a shame. 

"There is little danger in Catholicism, so far as its ability 
is concerned to win the people in an atmosphere of free and 
unhindered Americanism, but it is dangerous because it is 
subtle and unscrupulous; because with it the end justifies the 
means, if the end is the exaltation of the hierarchy; because 
it is in politics and gives fealty to a foreign potentate, who 
claims spiritual as well as civil sovereignty. We do 
not object to the Catholic having a spiritual sovereignty at 
Rome, if that is what he wants, but we do object to his mischievous
 and selfish political activity, in which, led by his 
priests, he engages in the service of a spiritual lord," who 
claims the right to dominate governments and nations. 

"Thank God, Romanism is having a rough time trying to 
grow in America, for all its boastful claims. May evangelical 
religious bodies grow in power and grace, leading America 
forward in the freedom which is in Christ. We are not 
giving our sons to bleed and die in Europe with the idea of 
allowing freedom of America's soul and political life to be 
ensnared by the servants of a spiritual autocracy which claims 
also political sovereignty. We are not scotching the writhing 
snake of Hun autocracy in Europe with the idea of giving our 
nation up to be 'dominantly Catholic* after the war. 

"Let Rome see to it. When this war is over there is 
going to be a close scrutiny of influences in America which 
are not one hundred per cent, loyal and American. Often as 
the autocrat of the Tiber has through his servants insolently 
sought to break down Americans without receiving effective 
rebuke, he will face and ought to face a new and aroused 
American patriotism after the war is over, and not all the 
subtlety and astute diplomacy of the Vatican will be able to 
save him from the demand to accept American principles or 
olse get out of America." — Journal and Messenger. 
A WELL KNOWH PACT 
It is a well known fact that the papal sympathy in the 
recent great war was secretly with the Central Powers, until 
she saw which way the wind was blowing; and that then she 
openly espoused the cause of the Allies in order that she 
might be on the winning side, might claim the glory of the 


[6374] 


January 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(< 6) 


victory and have a voice in the final settlement, hoping thereby 
to save herself from destruction. It is amusing now to see 
her charging the war to the Protestants and arrogating to 
herself the credit for the victory. The subjoined quotations 
are interesting; 

"London, Nov. 25, '17. — The Vatican is accused in an 
editorial in the Morning Post of being implicated in the 
propaganda which the newspaper says was largely responsible 
for the recent Italian reverses. Reviewing what it describes 
as Vatican machinations, the Post declares that its political 
activities during the war 'can by no sophistry be regarded as 
consistent with the principles of neutrality/ " 

The Gaelic American of April 8, 1916, a Catholic journal, 
says : 

'The smashing of wholly Catholic Austria and of partly 
Catholic Germany — between them the largest aggregation of 
Catholics in the whole world — would be a great misfortune 
for the Church. [The Roman Catholic, of course] And as the 
(•rushing of the Central Powers would be disastrous to the 
Catholic church, so the defeat otf the Anglo-French-Russian 
Alliance would in the same degree be jbeneficial." 

Commenting on the above the Apostolic Review of July 
23, 1918, under the caption, "The Allies' Victory— the Pope's 
Calamity" says: 

"The preceding was written a year before America entered 
the war, but if the smashing of the Central Empires was not 
then desired by the papacy it stands to reason they are yet 
of the same mind, and are doing what they can to avert their 
overthrow. The Russian situation is about what the papists 
desired. As we know, the Russians profess a religion (the 
Greek orthodox) that opposes the pope, and papists desire 
to see it overthrown. What I cannot understand is that 
knowing that the papacy is really in favor of Germany and 
Austria, our officials will persist in appointing to high responsible
 positions subjects of the pope! It is a fact that many 
of our high officials are either Roman Catholic or at least 
favor them greatly. Wake up, sleepy Protestants!" 
A SEBIOTJS BEEAOH OF ETIQUETTE 
Protestants are also waking up to the fact that the sinister 
power of Papacy was manifested in the order sent out a few 
months ago excluding Methodists, Baptists, Presbyterians and 
Episcopalians from army cantonments, while admitting Catholics
, Jews and Mormons. The Richmond (Va.) Times-Dispatch
 of Sept. 9 contains protests from seven different Baptist 
ministers in both South and North. We quote a few criticisms
 : 

"Some time ago a committee was appointed, but not by the 
churches, composed of six men, to arrange religious affairs 
in the camps. This committee of six had one Jewish rabbi 
(Rev. Cutler), one Roman Catholic priest (Father Burke), 
and Drs. Brown and Perry, of the Federal Council, with Dr. 
John R. Mott representing the Y, M. C. A. I am certain that 
this committee does not officially represent the Protestant 
denominations of this great country. The above order was 
issued upon the recommendation of this committee. 

"I respectfully submit that this order is entirely out of 
order in this 'land of the free and home of the brave.' It is 
in essence the very same sort of pernicious thing we are fighting
 on the 'other side/ It is almost unbelievable that such an 
un-American species could be trotted out upon our free soil. 
"2. It is hardly fair to permit the Roman Catholic church 
to denominationally safeguard its .boys in the army as well as 
have a free hand in the propagation of its doctrine in the 
camp through its own distinct organization and at the same 
time shut out all other religious bodies from a like privilege. 
"3. I hold it as a serious breach of etiquette, to say the 
least, for a committee, one-third of which is made up of 
Jewish and Roman Catholic members, to administer affairs for 
our government concerning the method in which the Protestant
 religions shall be conducted in relation to the hundreds 
of thousands of Protestant boys in our camps." 

The New York Evening World of Nov. 30, 1918, says the 
Pope desires to attend the peace conference in order that he 
may gain some "temporal power," and adds that the Vatican 
is seeking to establish a private telegraph office in the Vatican 
with private wires to all governments, so as not to have to use 
the Italian telegraph lines. 

BOMAK CATHOUO VIEWS 
Now listen to Papacy as she charges Protestantism with 
the great world war, and appropriates to herself the glory of 
the victory. The following excerpts are from the Catholic 
Truth for Nov. 1, 1918: 

"Only a few years ago non-Catholic writers were claiming 
that 'the most progressive nations in the world today, foremost
 in civilization, are the Protestant nations.' Up to September
, 1914, Germany was admitted by Protestant writers to 
be the most Protestant country on earth. The 'home of 
Protestantism* and 'the birthplace of Protestantism' Carlyle 
called Germany. Prussia (where the world war was hatched, 
and where another important event was hatched in the sixteenth
 century) stands out in front, Number One, in the 
Protestant world. It is amusing now to read some of the 
books and speeches written and delivered by English and 
American Protestant controversialists prior to the fatal year 
of 1914. In most of them you will find Germany pointed out 
as leading in civilization because she was Protestant, and held 
up as an example to the Catholic countries of Europe. 

"Go through the files of non-Catholic newspapers and magazines
 published in 1870 and 1871, and read of the delirium of 
insolent joy in anti-Catholic circles when the news of France's 
humiliation was published. Protestant publications in the 
United States hailed the 'good' news as a victory for Protestantism
. 

"We wonder if the anti-Catholic forces to whom 'Valerian' 
refers realize that Marshal Foch is a fervent Catholic, and a 
brother of one of the most distinguished Jesuit priests in 
Europe. Do they know that on his shoulders now rest our 
fate and that of civilization? He commands the largest army 
the world has ever known, at least 10,000,000 soldiers, twothirds
 of whom are Catholics. Is it not sickening to know 
that while the German legions are once more reeling under 
the blows of this great Catholic soldier, wretched 'patriots' in 
Alabama, Florida and other states are endeavoring to persecute
 his coreligionists? Is it not an outrage that in these 
trying times an ti -Catholic bigots are asking our soldiers seeking
 promotion, and even applicants for responsible positions in 
certain munition plants the cowardly question : 'What is your 
religion ?' 

"Elsewhere in 'Truth' we publish . . . Luther did more 
than any other one man to enslave religion, to make it subservient
 to politicians, to weld the Church into an instrument 
which might be used for tyranny in the hands of a Bismarck 
or a William II. When Luther revolted against the authority 
of his superiors at Rome, he appealed to the German electors 
to support him. It was an appeal to national prejudices. He 
skillfully played upon the fact that Rome was foreign, and 
the electors, seeing their opportunity, eagerly availed themselves
 of the opening. Today we can see that the Church in 
Germany simply changed masters. She gave up the comparatively
 mild rule of Rome in exchange for the blood and iron 
of Prussia. If we go back far enough into the roots of history 
to trace the causes of this war, we shall place the responsibility
 upon Luther. He was not an apostle of liberty, but he 
has really made necessary this awful struggle of democracy 
against autocracy. 

"And so far from freeing religion Luther enslaved it. 
Luther made it subject to the whims and passions and 
intrigues of petty German princes until the Hohenzollerns succeeded
 in dominating the whole Teutonic group of peoples. It 
had been .better for the world if Luther had never been born. 
It had been better for the world if Luther had died before his 
revolt. What was the freedom he gave religion ? The freedom 
of Prussian tyranny. What was the freedom he gave the 
world? The freedom of a violated Belgium, of a crushed 
Roumania, of a ruined Serbia, of a desolated Montenegro. 
What were the triumphs of civilization we owe to Luther? 
The sinking of a thousand men and women and children in 
the Lusitania, a warfare orf f rightfulness on sea and land, 
submarines, poison gas, liquid fire, ruin, havoc, rapine, spread 
systematically over the whole continent/' 

FORBIDDEN PUBLICATIONS 
The same issue (Nov. 1, 1918) of the same Catholic journal
 (The Truth) contains the following clipping, which explains
 why Catholic prelates have forbidden their people to 
read the Bible; namely, because it is "dangerous to faith and 
morals." We quote: 

"It is noted that the War Department has listed books 
which are considered dangerous for the soldiers to read at this 
time; these books are excluded from the camp libraries. 
Among them we find the book entitled 'Ireland's Case,* written
 by Seumas MacManus. The only reason we can see for 
placing this work on the list is that it might lessen the esteem 
of our soldiers for our co-belligerent, Great Britain. It might 
do this, of course, because it tells the truth. There are time^ 
when it is deemed the part of wisdom to withhold the truth 
from the youthful mind, for a while. 

"In placing the ban upon certain books that *re considered 
dangerous reading for the men of our army at the present 
time, the War Department of our Government is following the 
example of the Holy See, which forbids the reading, by Catholics
 in general, of books dangerous to faith and morals. The 


[6375] 


(6-10) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


'Index Expurgatorius' ia the name by which the Church's list 
of forbidden publications has been known for centuries, and 
the wisdom of the Holy See in prohibiting certain books has 
furnished one of the stock arguments of enemies of 'Rome,' 
who say that our Church is tyrannical and seeks to obstruct 
education and enlightenment. Every wise and loving parent ia 
a 'tyrant* and prevents the 'enlightenment' of his child when 
he excludes from the family library and reading table books 


and other literature that are dangerous for the child's immature
 mind." 

We remember a tract put out by Pastor Russell over 
twenty-five years ago, entitled "Protestants Awake." It called 
attention to the encroachment of Papacy, aa outlined above. 
Bible Students will do well to read again pages 358-361, Vol. 
2, studies ix the scbiptubes, written twenty-eight years* ago, 
and dealing with this very subject. 


THE INNER SANCTUARY 


There is a calm, a hallowed spot 
Deep, deep my heart within, 

A refuge from the tempter's art 
And from myself and sin. 

blissful haven of my soul! 

presence pure and sweet! 
No shadow there can follow me, 

A calm and sure retreat. 

No enemy can enter in; 

No evil thing defile. 
While hidden there, my spirit is 

A spirit without guile. 

Without a fault before the throne 

1 stand in light arrayed, 
Beneath Jehovah's searching eye 

Fearless and undismayed. 


This is the picture he hath drawn, 

Himself in his own Word, 
Of hi3 elect, his hidden saints, 

As in the sight of God. 

In the clear glass of that blest Word 

Behold thyself, my soul; 
See all thy being lost in him, 

In him made fair and whole. 

Then go thy way, forgetting not 

How he regardeth thee, 
But revelling in his light and love, 

Exultant, grateful, free. 

"Clothed with the sun," on high remain, 
"The moon beneath thy feet" ; 

Thy changing moods regarding not, 
In him always complete. 


WHO IS HE THAT CONDEMNETH? 

This article is a reprint of that published in issue of August 1, 19U2, which please see.] 


THE LIGHT OF LOVE 


Love will not discuss the weakness of another; 

Love will raise the estimation of a brother. 
Love will rest not on past labors of her hands; 

Love anticipates the pleasure from commands. 

Loving deeds to the unthankful count not loss; 
Think how Jesus bore the burden of his cross; 


Think how God disperses sunshine over all 

And let your light so shine, beloved, though 'tis small. 

God 13 Love. We shall be like him, Love divine! 

What a high and holy calling, yours and mine! 
God has called us to be copies of his Son ; 

So let us then in love and patience heavenward run. 


IN WHAT SENSE GOD RESTS FROM HIS WORK 

"And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he 

had made" — Genesis 2:2. 


God is not now judging the world. He judged the world 
more than six thousand years ago in father Adam. The result 
of that judgment was the sentence of death on Adam and all 
of his children. In due time God made preparation for the 
redemption of Adam and his race and sent forth his own Son 
Jesus, to be their Redeemer. In the divine plan, the death of 
Jesus was designed to be the offset for the sin of Adam; so 
that "as by one man [Adam] came death, by one man [Jesus] 
should come the resurrection from death." 

God has not yet finished the outworking of this plan 
through the Son. Its operation began more than eighteen 
hundred years ago, but has not yet progressed to the place 
where it is dealing with mankind. During this present age 
God's dealings have been only with the church; his dealings 
during the Jewish age were only with the Jews; and during 
the Millennial age, his dealings will be with the entire world 
of mankind, through the Jews. God's dealing with the church 
during the past eighteen hundred years has been to select 
Some from every nation, people, kindred and tongue to belong 
to the new nation, the spiritual seed of Abraham. This work 
has not yet been completed. This Gospel age, therefore, is not 
yet quite finished. When this work shall have been completed
, the present age will have ended. 

The completion of the church is the resurrection change; 
and then the church with Christ will constitute the great 
spiritual seed of Abraham, which God declares is to be "as 
the stars of heaven." (Genesis 22:18) This spiritual seed of 
Abraham will begin immediately to bless "all the families of 
the earth." As the blessing was to the Jew first in the opening
 of the Gospel age, so it will again be "to the Jew first" in 
the opening of the Millennial age; for the Bible assures us 
that to Israel will come the great blessing, favor with God, 
under Messiah's kingdom, and their eyes will be opened to see 
that God is again graciously dealing with them. The New 
Covenant is to be made with the Jews. They will have learned 
certain lessons from the cast-off condition in which they have 
been for nineteen centuries, and they will become the leading 


people of the world. Other nations will flock to them. 
(Isaiah 2:2, 3; Mica-h 4:1, 4) God's dealings from that time 
on will be with the whole world; no longer with the church; 
for these will be glorified. 

This matter is distinctly stated by the Apostle Paul, who 
declares that "God hath appointed a day in the which he will 
judge the world in righteousness." (Acts 17:31) God is not 
now judging the world, but is preparing the church to be 
sharers in the work; as the Apostle again says: "Know ye 
not that the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Corinthians 
0:2) The world's judgment is not yet begun. They are all 
still lying "in the W T icked One." (1 John 5:19> Although 
Christ has died for all men, he has not yet taken possession 
of them. They have not yet been turned over to him. They 
are still under condemnation. 

With the close of this age and the glorification of the 
church, will come the inauguration of the New Covenant which 
God promised through the Prophet Jeremiah, in these words: 
"The day cometh, saith the Lord, that I will make a New 
Covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of 
Judah," etc. (Jeremiah 31:31-31) This covenant is to go 
into effect as soon as the spiritual Israelites shall be complete, 
and the New Covenant will be with Israel and with Judah — 
"all the house of Israel" — and will extend through them to all 
the families of the earth, until the whole world shall have 
been blessed through Abraham and his seed — spiritual and 
natural. 

During the six thousand years since man was created, the 
nations of the world have been permitted to ao as they pleased 
with respect to criminals and others, except as they would 
have gone too far. If these should undertake to go too far in 
the work of criminality they would be restrained, as in the 
case of the Canaanites. We remember that the Lord declared 
to Abraham that before he would bring the children of Israel 
into the land of Canaan there was to be a certain delay, 
because the Amorites had not yet come to the full of their 
wickedness (Genesis 15:12-16), indicating that there was a 


[6376] 


January 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(10-15) 


limitation toward which they were going rapidly; but that 
God would not cut them off, or permit them to be especially 
cut off, under his supervision, until their iniquity had reached 
a certain degree of fulness. See also 1 Kings 21:25, 26. 

Now with the world in general, nations have risen which 
indeed have been very wise. God permits them to do largely 
as they please. Only when their plans interfere with his does 
he limit them. Thus far shall they go and not further. And 
so they put people to death, sometimes righteously and sometimes
 unrighteously, sometimes justly and sometimes unjustly, 
under one pretext or another. The manner of their death 
makes no matter, so far aa God is concerned; for all these 
people are under the sentence of death and have been since 
they were born. Sentence was passed upon them in Adam. 
Whether they are killed in one manner or another does not 
matter at all so far as the divine sentence is concerned. God 
does not interfere. lie rests the matter for the present. 

The Apostle Paul says that God is resting from his works. 
Ke lias rested in the sense that he has not been taking an 
active pnrt in any of these affairs of the earth. He rested 
after he had made man perfect; and he is now permitting 


man to work out his own schemes as he may please and to 
learn certain great lessons and have many wonderful experiences
 under the reign of sin and death. However, God does 
not purpose that this shall be the everlasting condition. He is 
resting; for he has committed all this matter to his Son, the 
great Mediator of the New Covenant, the antitype of Moses. 
The Messianic kingdom is to be set up, and the world' is to be 
judged in righteousness by this kingdom, blessing all those 
who seek to do the right and punishing all those who take the 
wrong course, thus giving them instruction and judgment. 
The incorrigible will be destroyed in the second death. 

At the end of that reign, the Bible says, Jesus the great 
Mediator, the antitype of Moses, will deliver up the kingdom 
to God, even the Father — after he shall have put down all sin, 
all insubordination and anarchy, The whole w T orld, thus 
delivered over to the Father, will be perfect, and ready for 
their final test. So, then, the Father rests for seven thousand 
years; six thousand years under which sin and death have 
prevailed, and then another thousand, the Messianic reign for 
the uplifting of mankind, the Father operating through our 
Lord Jesus for that thousand years. 


THE PASSOVER 


[With the exception of the paragraphs below, this article was reprinted from article entitled, "Some Plagued—Some Passed 

Over/* published in issue of May 15, 1907, which please see.] 
One after another ten great plagues came upon the nate. Rather we are to understand that among the various 


Egyptians in order to compel them to let the Israelites go. 
We can readily see that God could have made the matter 
much easier for the Egyptians even in their wrong condition 
of heart. He could have raised up to the throne a man of 
weaker character, one who would have readily yielded; but on 
the contrary the Scriptures inform us that God raised to the 
throne a man of that particular character which would be 
strong in resistance. Of Pharaoh we read: -For this very 
purpose have I raised thee up, that thou might show forth my 
power." By this we do not understand that God had effected 
in Pharaoh a bad character, had compelled him to be obstiheirs
 to the Egyptian throne God so ordered, through the 
death of some of the intervening members of the royal family, 
that this particular Pharaoh should come to the throne 
because he had such an obstinate character that his tight 
against God and Israel would justly call for the plagues. 
These plagues had been foreordained of God not only as a 
mark of his favor toward Israel, but also as in some measure 
a foreshadowing, an illustration of the plagues with which 
this Gospel age will end — the first three and "tne seven last 
plagues" — K.'velation 8:13; 15: 1. 


ISRAEL CROSSING THE RED SEA 

[In this article, paragraph 6 was a reprint from article, "Crossing the Krd Sea," published in issue of July 15, 1913. Paragraphs
 5, 7, 13 and 14 were reprinted from article entitled. "Crossing the Pied Sea," published in issue of December 1, 1901. The 
remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "The Salvation of the Lord/* published in issue of May 15, 1907. Please see 
the articles named,] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


A REMARKABLE CONFIRMATION 

Dear Brethren : 

In a recent magazine article concerning the overthrow of 
the ancient Babylonian empire I note a very interesting fact 
which confirms the length of the "times of the Gentiles" aa 
given in -Studies in the Scriptures, Volume 2. The writer 
explains that the four words which appeared in letters of fire 
upon the palace walls at Belshazzar's feast; viz., "MeNE, 
Mene, Tekel, Upiiarsin," are Chaldaic terms taken from the 
Babylonian table of weights, and being translated from the 
ancient cuneiform in which they were written, would read: 
A mina, a mina, a shekel, a half-mina. The table of weights 
is a3 follows: 

20 gerah = 1 shekel. 
50 shekels =: 1 mina. 

A mina, therefore, equals 1000 gerahs. Hence, "a mina, a 
mina, a shekel and a half-mina," or two and a half minas 
plus a shekel, reduced to gerahs, yields the number 2520. 
Thus, when Daniel pointed to this handwriting on the wall 
and said unto the Gentile monarch, "God hath numbered thy 
kingdom and finished it; thou art weighed in the balance and 
art found wanting; thy kingdom is divided and given to the 
Medes and Persians," we know he alluded not alone to the 
literal kingdom of Babylon* nor to the literal Medo-Persian 
empire, which succeeded it Rather, he was prophetically declaring
, "After 2520 years of supremacy the Gentile lease' of 
power will expire, and the rulership of earth will then be 
divided and broken up and given to a two-fold empire" — the 
heavenly and the earthly phase of the Messianic kingdom. 
Gentile supremacy began, as we all know, with the overthrow 
of Israel's last king, in 606 B. C. Just 2520 years later, or in 
1914 A. D., the process of dividing began, in exact accordance 
with "the handwriting on the wall." 

It is further observed that this number 2520 is distinctive 
in that it is the least common multiple of all the digits in 
our system of numbers; that is, it is the least possible number
 into which 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 may each and all be 
divided. Thus in a special sense it is an all-comprehensive 


number. No other number could bo more appropriate for 
spanning the whole period of Gentile lease of power; and it is, 
at the same time, exactly seven symbolic years in duration. 
Who indeed could doubt but that our chronology is correct! 
And do not present world events corroborate it in every sense? 
We now behold the dividing of earth's kingdoms. It began 
exactly on time. The Messianic kingdom i* the next thing in 
order after the present dividing work is complete, Let us be 
patient a little while longer, and soon we shall see the salvation
 of the Lord. 

Yours in the bonds of the Gospel, W. F. II.— N. Y. 


STAND BY THE SHIP, WHATEVER COMES 

My Dear Brethren: 

Since we are all "men of like passions" and susceptible to 
the same besetments and experiences that come to all of us, 
a word or two of sympathy and appreciation from an interested
 one may be proper. It is not a displeasure to have 
The Watch Tower coming to us again from Pittsburgh; it 
seems according to the fitness of things. I first saw the 
Tower in 1884, and straightway became a subscriber. We 
have not parted company since then; and, please God, may our 
friendship last to the end, the very end! 

Meanwhile we have had our trials; we are having them 
now; we expect to have them to the end of the way. But 
through it all the Lord has led me and has helped me. He 
has supplied me with his Word, the Bible. He has supplied 
me with his key to his Word — the Watch Tower publications. 
Thus equipped, it is enjoined upon me to "prove all things 
and to hold fast to that which is good." Thus the Lord's last 
message has been flowing to me through this channel. I need 
no other; I use no other. 

We cannot, dear Brethren, express in words our deep appreciation
 of your sacrificing, enduring efforts to serve faithfully
 and loyally The Watch Tower and its Society. Your 
progressive conservatism, or conservative progress, is assuring, 
so in keeping with the fitness of things. Your "View from 


[6377] 


(15-23) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


the Tower," for Nov. 1, 1918, is solid ground. I have read it 
twice. Here are my heart and my hand, trusting that we shall 
all stay in the ship, storm or no storm, until we reach harbor. 
H13 hand is on the helm. His voice is speaking peace to the 
warring elements. How very good to have him with us, to be 
with him, to be his, his forever! 

In a general way the Lord's family, while yet in the flesh, 
resemble a natural family in some things. We manage by 
the grace of God to hang together. It takes much grace. So 
to speak, we hug and scratch, we kiss and make faces; but we 
are trying to be good. I believe that the dear Master loves us 
dearly; for his grace hides our imperfections. We do not 
always do so, and it hurts. But the sea is rough; the ship 
rolls and is tossed; the passengers are jostled. But it is safe 
to stay on board. 

Your brother by his grace, J. P. M. — Ohio. 


AN EXPRESSION OF LOVE AND CONFIDENCE 

Deably Beloved Brethren in Christ: 

At a convention of Associated Bible Students assembled in 
East Palestine, Ohio, on Dec. 1, a motion was made, which 
carried without a dissenting vote, to send you an expressionof
 our love and confidence. The resolution follows: 

Resolved, That we, Associated Bible Students here assembled
, hereby renew our pledge of loyalty and support to our 
brethren in charge of the work at the offices of the Watch 
Tower Bible & Tract Society. We believe The Watch Tower 
is being used of the Lord today as much as at any time in 
the past. It is indeed "meat in due season" to all who abide 
in the "Holy." Be assured, dear brethren, of our continued 
prayers that the Lord will direct and uphold you in the work 
he has placed in your hands. God bless our Society and All 
the faithful co- laborers ! Committee. 


let a little pride and deeire for honor shut us out from our 
eternity of honor and glory! 

W T ith sincere love to all, we beg to remain 
By his kind favor, Brother and Sister J. G. T. — Ohio. 

APPBEOIATINa THE LOED'S PEO VISIONS 
Dear Brethren: 

I wish to express my appreciation for the meat iri due 
season and things new and old provided by our Lord through 
The Watch Tower for the household cf faith. My earnest 
prayer is that God may fill you with his holy Spirit anxl overrule
 and direct your actions to his praise and glory forever. 
Surely our faith should multiply and we should put forth 
double effort in overcoming the world, the flesh and our 
adversary, and in perfecting holiness as we see the unmistakable
 signs of the end of the age and the inauguration of 
the kingdom of Jesus Christ. May love abound in the bonds 
of peace, and may we be filled with the joy that no man 
taketh from us. Your fellow- laborer, C. F. — Md. 


A FEW WORDS OF KINDLY OEEE TINGS 

Dear Brethren: 

Just a line to greet you at the new offices of the Society, 
and to assure you of my warm Christian love for you all and 
of my hope and trust to continue faithful to our Lord, the 
truth and the brethren, not only in great matters, but also in 
the little things of life. We still continue to remember you 
all in our daily prayers. With warm Christian love, I remain 
Sincerely your brother in the Lord, G. B. — Ont. 


GLAD TO SEE HARMONY 

Dear Brethren: 

Loving greetings to all the dear ones at the Watch Tower 
Office. We appreciate more and more the loving service of 
the dear ones whom the Lord is using to give us the food. I 
was so glad for the little visit to Pittsburgh and glad to see 
the harmony there. May the dear Lord keep you all humble 
servants, worthy of a place in the kingdom. How foolish to 


THANKFUL FOR INCREASED LIGHT 
Dear Brethren: 

While our Society, like its Lord and Head, is moving about 
doing good, we are joyous to know that we are absolutely in 
harmony with its management, its movements, its sayings and 
its doiagB. We are indeed happy to know that those who represent
 the Society in the true sense of the word know, backed 
by Scriptural evidence, what the mark of the beast is. So 
beautifully was this matter explained in connection with a 
discourse delivered by our dear Brother Thorn on last Sunday, 
that many of the dear brethren who heard it acknowledged to 
him their mistaken ideas re this matter. Thank God for the 
increased light now shining! 

Your brother and fellow servant, R. H. J. — Texas. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., JANUARY 15, 1919 


No. 2 


LORD, TEACH US TO PRAY 

[Paragraphs 12 and 13 were reprinted from article entitled, "Pray Without Ceasing," published in issue of April 15, 1904. 
The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Lord Teach Us to Pray," published in issue of July 1, 1906. Please see 
the articles named.] 

THE LORD WILL DIRECT THE ISSUE 


It is as important as ever to keep before our minds the 
thought of our Lord's personal relationship to every feature 
of his work. If the early church were to remember his words, 
"Lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the age," the 
thought of the Lord's personal presence now in the harvest 
should be still more impressive to us. If he kept a supervision 
or control of all the affairs of his people throughout the age, 
does not the thought of his second coming and still more intimate
 association with every little detail of what is planned 
make us rejoice to be more caieful, more zealous? To the extent
 that we are able to keep this clearly before our minds, 
it will make us happy in respect to right fighting and rigtit 
doing. For instance, nhnuld the adversary make suggestions 
to us of discontent or dissatisfaction with the manner in 
which things pertaining to the Lord's people have been progressing
, \ot us answer him that we know he is mistaken, for 
the Lord himself is present and is supervising his work. If 


at Any time matters seem to be going contrary to our hopes or 
expectations, let us not think the Lord has neglected the supervision
 of his work and is allowing the Adversary to dash 
it to pieces. On the contrary, let us establish our hearts in 
the fact that the Lord is too wise to err and is as able as he 
is willing to make all things work together for good to us, and 
to all the called ones, according to his purpose. If tempted to 
intermeddle with matters that the Lord has put into the hands 
of another, let this thought restrain us and counsel us to give 
closer attention to that which the Master has committed to 
our care," and to remember that "to his own Master each servant
 stands or falls" and that it is for him to approve or disapprove
. It is not, therefore, for us to grasp management 
or control or in any degree to force our views upon others, 
but rather to do our part as faithfully as, possible and to leave 
the results to the Lord. — Z. '09, p. 5. 


ANNUAL MEETING OF SHAREHOLDERS 


In view of events which have taken place during the past 
year, the dear friends everywhere have taken the keenest 
interest in the annual meeting of shareholders of the Watch 
Tower Bible & Tbact Society, which was held in the Soldiers' 
Memorial Hall in Pittsburgh, Pa., on Saturday, January 4th, 
1919. With eagerness has every Bible Student the world over 
looked forward to the events which would transpire there, and 
countless prayers have ascended to the throne of heavenly 
grace that the will of the Lord might be clearly manifested 
at this meeting. We are sure these prayers were answered; 


and the unanimity with which the results were received by all 
present seems unmistakable evidence that the same Mighty 
One who has directed the affairs of his church throughout the 
centuries still stands guard over the interests of his little ones, 
and that no weapon formed against them shall prosper, for this 
id the heritage of all the servants of righteousness. (Isaiali 
54:17) How comforting and reassuring is our year text for 
1919 in this regard! 

FOTTB DAYS OF SWEET FELLOWSHIP 
Preliminary to the shareholders' annual meeting of Sat- 


[6378] 


January 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


{2$ 24) 


urday, January 4th, the thousand or more friends who had 
gathered from all parts of the United States and Canada 
were privileged to enjoy a two days' feast of spiritual good 
things spread by our present Lord and served to us faithfully 
by various Pilgrim brethren. This program was also continued 
on Sunday following the business sessions. It was indeed good 
to be there; and the sweet spirit of the friends, especially 
manifest on the last day of the gathering, was an inspiration 
and a stimulus to each and all, and has proved a great source 
of encouragement to every member of the Watch Tower office 
force in particular. Many bitter trials have been the portion 
of the church during the year just past, and these seem to 
have whetted the appetites of the dear friends to participate 
more fully in the spiritual food which the Lord has so graciously
 provided us. The discourses of the Pilgrim brethren 
throughout the convention were timely and helpful, and the 
need for greater scrutiny of our footsteps during the remainder 
of our journey to the kingdom was vividly brought to our attention
. The zest with which the friends participated in the 
Prayer, Praise and Testimony meetings showed that it was the 
determination of all of them to please the Lord above all 
things else, and to press forward for the great prize that 
awaits the faithful. 

Friends from all parts of the United States and Canada 
brought to the convention the same encouraging message of 
love and zeal for the cause so dear to our hearts; and the 
sweet spirit of loving devotion to our Master was never more 
manifest than at this convention. 

THE ANNUAL MEETING 
The shareholders' meeting, convened at 10:30 o'clock on the 
morning of January 4th, opened by song and prayer. VicePresident
 C. H. Anderson addressed the assembly briefly, calling
 attention especially to the peculiar situation existing by 
reason of the incarceration of our president and seven other 
officers and members, whose case is shortly to be argued in the 
Appellate Court. The following resolution was unanimously 
passed by the shareholders assembled, and was also enthusiastically
 participated in by the hundreds of spectators in the rear 
of the auditorium and in the galleries, without a dissenting 
voice being heard. The resolution reads: 

WHEREAS, seven of the principal officers and leaders of 
this Society, to- wit: J. F, Rutherford, President; W. E. Van 
Amburgh, Secretary-Treasurer; A. H. Macmillan, R. J, Martin
, F. H. Robison, G. H. Fisher and C. J. Woodworth, were 
sentenced on June 21st, 1918, to a term of twenty years in the 
Federal Prison at Atlanta, Ga., for alleged violation of the Espionage
 Act; and G. De Cecca, a clerk, sentenced to ten years 
in the same institution on the same charge; where they are 
now confined without being admitted to bail; and 

WHEREAS, it appears from the assignments of error, upwards
 of one hundred in number, appearing in the records of 
the court, that the judgment of conviction will likely be reversed
 upon appeal; and 

WHEREAS, there was no evidence that any of these defendants
 was moved by any intent or purpose to injure the 
government in the prosecution of the war or otherwise; and it 
was a fact, conceded by counsel for the government that he 
could point to no vindictive spirit against the government existing
 in the minds of these brethren ; 

BE IT THEREFORE RESOLVED: That we, the shareholders
 of the Watch Tower Jbible and Tract* Society, in general
 annual convention assembled this 4th day of January, A. 
D. 1919, hereby express unanimously our confidence in the integrity
 of these eight defendants and in their loyalty to the 
government and people of these United States, as well as their 
loyalty to the Lord, and our utmost confidence that judgment 
will be reversed, and that they will he completely vindicated 
when all the facts are fully and impartially reviewed by the 
Appellate Court. 

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That we recognize the 
imprisonment of these our brethren to have been permitted 
by divine providence for an all-wise purpose in the outworking 
of his designs in connection with the church in this evil day; 
and that they are our exemplars in Buffering for Christ's sake 
— a sweet savor unto God. We also express our confidence that 
their incarceration and. future release may result in a worldwide
 witness for the Truth on a hitherto unprecedented scale 
when all facts connected therewith are made publicly known; 
and we pledge ourselves as a body to co-operate in all lawful 
ways to aid in their release from bonds to the end that this 
witness migrht result. 

BOARD OF DIBECTORS ELECTED 

The legal aspect of the situation created by the absence of 

the Society's President and Secretary-Treasurer was discussed 

in detail, it being the thought of some that new officers should 

be elected to all positions, but that this may in no way be understood
 to be a reflection upon our imprisoned brethren in any 
sense. Others were of the opinion that such action on the 
part of the shareholders might be misconstrued in some way 
by the public generally as being a repudiation of these brethren
. All seemed desirous of doing only the Lord's will; and 
every speaker expressed the fullest confidence in the loyalty 
of the imprisoned ones, and believed they would be completely 
vindicated when all the facts in their case are reviewed. After 
a prolonged discussion, therefore, as to the advantages and 
disadvantages of postponing the election pending the decision 
in the Appellate Court, it was considered proper to proceed 
with the election of officers and directors in the regular way. 

The Society's Charter requires that at first a Board of Directors
 of seven members be elected, and that from the seven 
elected the officers of the Society shall be chosen. As soon as 
the motion for postponement of the election was withdrawn, 
Brother E. D. Sexton, who had been appointed by the VicePresident
 as chairman of a nominating committee, took the 
platform and placed in nomination for directorship the following
 seven brethren: 

Brother J. F. Rutherford Brother C. H. Anderson 

Brother C, A. Wise Brother W. F. Hudgings 

Brother W. E. Van Amburgh Brother E. J. Coward 
Brother R. H. Barber 

Other nominations were then presented by various shareholders
 as follows: 

Brother W. E. Spill Brother G. F. Kendall 

Brother E. H. Thomson Brother H. H. Riemer 

Brother J. F. Stephenson Brother E. F. Crist 

It was then moved and seconded that the nominations be 
closed, and that the ballot be taken. Seven brethren were appointed
 by the chair as inspectors of election, each of whom 
took and subscribed to the required oath to perform their duties 
as judges and inspectors with fidelity. It required about four 
hours to check up all the proxies and certificates and to count 
the votes. At about 8:30 p.m. the result of the ballot was 
announced, as follows: 

J. F. Rutherford 112,000 C H. Anderson 70,113 

C. A. Wise 111,712 E. J. Coward 50,917 

R. H. Barber 07,828 H. H. Riemer 53,134 

W. E. Van Amburgh . . 88,307 J. F. Stephenson 52,081 

W. E. Spill 84,148 E. H. Thomson 48,410 

VV. F. Hudgings 75,942 G. F. Kendall 1.769 

The seven who received the highest number of votes cast and 
who were declared by the judges of election as having been 
duly elected members of the Board of Directors of the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society for the ensuing year, were : 
J. F. Rutherford W. E. Van Amburgh 

C. A. Wise W. E. Spill 

R. H. Barber W. F. Hudgings 

C. H. Anderson 

ELECTION OF OFFICERS 
The next order of business was the election of a President, a 
Vice President and a Secretary-Treasurer. The chairman of 
the nominating committee then placed before the assembly the 
names of the following brethren: 

For President — J. F. Rutherford 
For Vice President — C. A, Wise 
For Secretary-Treasurer — W. E. Van Amburgh 
There being- no further nominations, the shareholders byunanimous
 rising vote directed the chairman of the judges of 
election to cast all the ballots for the above mentioned persons 
as officers of the Society for the ensuing year. Thereupon the 
chairman declared the three brethren mentioned to have been 
elected by unanimous vote to the positions named. 

When the announcement of the election of officers was 
made, Brother C. H. Anderson, the retiring Acting President, 
called Brother C A. Wise to the platform and introduced him 
to the assembly as his successor. Brother Wise was received 
with applause and then spoke briefly, expressing his thanks for 
the confidence shown and his belief that he would have unanimous
 support from the members of the Society throughout the 
world, as well as the Lord'e blessing upon our united efforts to 
serve him to the best of our ability in these trying times. 
CLOSE OF THE CONVENTION 
The annual business meeting was then closed by prayer. 
Many were the expressions of gratitude and love one to another
 as the dear friends acknowledged the overruling providence
 of the Lord as manifested in the outcome of this annual 
election. There was not an expression of dissatisfaction to be 
heard on the part of any shareholder present; and it was manifest
 that all were determined to work shoulder to shoulder 
during the months that are before us in carrying forward the 


[6379] 


J 8-26) 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


great work which we believe the Lord in his providence has for 
his church to do ere their exaltation to heavenly glories beyond
 the vail of death. The outstanding thought entertained 
by the brethren throughout the convention, and particularly 
at its close, seemed to be that the Society's work in the future 
will be blessed to the spreading of the truth on a hitherto 
unprecedented scale, and that the numerous thousands of sleeping
 Christians, "foolish virgins," shall he aroused from their 
slumbers to a recognition of the presence of the Lord and the 
establishment of his kingdom upon the ruins of the existing 
order. 

As always, those present said that it had been the best convention
 they had ever attended, and that never had they seen 
the spirit of unanimity more manifest than at the close of this 
annual meeting. This is, of course, what should be expected 
when we realize the fact that we are standing upon the very 
threshold of the Messianic Kingdom, and that soon the Lord 
shall be pleased to take us home, if we have developed his 
spirit and proven faithful to him and to his cause through 
all circumstances and conditions. With calmness and sobriety 
let us press forward, doing the work that the Lord has for his 
people to do, and above all showing hie loving spirit toward 
one another ; and we shall shortly have the blessed privilege of 
being ushered into the eternal glories of immortality. 


MARAH AND ELIM 


Today *tia Elim, with its palms and wells 
And happy shade for desert weariness; 
Twas Marah yesterday, all rock and sand, 
Unshaded solitude and bitterness. 

The same desert holds them both; the same 
Soft breezes wander o'er the lonely ground, 
The same low stretch of valley shelter both, 
And the game mountains compass them around. 

So is it with us here on earth ; and so 
I do remember it has ever been ; 
The bitter and the sweet, the grief and joy, 
Lie near together, but a day between. 


Sometimes God turns our bitter into sweet; 
Sometimes he gives us pleasant watersprings ; 
Sometimes he shades us with his pillar-cloud, 
And sometimes to a blessed palm -shade brings. 

What matters it? The time will not be long; 
Marah and Elim will alike be past; 
Our desert-wells and palms will soon be done ; 
We reach the city of our God at last. 

O happy land! beyond these lonely hills, 
Where gush in joy the everlasting springs! 
O holy Paradise! above these heavens, 
Where we shall end our desert-wanderings! 


OBTAINING MONEY UNDER FALSE PRETENSES 


letters are coming into the office indicating that the friends 
everywhere are being imposed upon by professed brethren who 
are soliciting money upon various pretenses. Several times in 
the past we nave warned the friends of the unwisdom of giving 
money to those who solicit it, working on the sympathy of the 


friends by using as an argument their connection with the Society
 or the record of past service. 

We suggest that all letters soliciting money be submitted 
either to the home class of the one asking assistance or to the 
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. 


THE LAW OF DEVELOPMENT 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue Of December 15, 1895, which please see. 


"LOVE AS BRETHREN, BE PITIFUL, BE COURTEOUS" 


"JV'e then that are strong ought to boor the infirmities 
It would appear that in the original Greek this text has 
the thought of bearing with, sympathizing with, being merciful
 toward the infirmities, imperfections of the weak, especially
 the weak among the Lord's people. Some who come to 
Christ are very weak according to the flesh, and others are 
strong. Some of God's people are stronger spiritually in that 
they have been longer in the good way or have made more 
rapid development than have others. But the fact that God 
has accepted any as his children is sufficient indication that 
we should accept them as brethren ; and if they are brethren 
we should act accordingly; that is, in a brotherly way — sympathetically
. 

If we see that certain ones are weak in some respects, we 
arc not to be harsh, unsympathetic, not to hold them in contempt
. "Take heed that ye despise not one of these little 
ones." (Matthew 18:10) We might be naturally inclined to 
draw away from these and to say to ourselves: "I will not 
associate with those people. I prefer those who are stronger, 
better looking or better educated, etc., for my associates, my 
friends." We might feel an impulse hardly ever to speak to 
the others, or if at all, in a patronizing way. This would not 
be bearing with the infirmities of the weak, but pleasing ourselves
, our flesh, doing the things that naturally we would 
prefer to do, keeping company that naturally we would prefer 
to keep, separating ourselves from the weaker, the humbler, 
etc. — living for self. 

The Apostle points out that this is not the proper course. 
Even if we are stronger than some others of the members of 
the body, the fact that they are real brethren in the Lord, accepted
 into our Father's family, is an all-sufficient reason why 
we should recognize them, why we should sympathize with 
them, be helpful, bear with their infirmities. Those who are deficient
 in various wars realize that they have an infirmity in 


of the iceak, and not to please ourselves" — Horn. 15:1. 
these respects; and those who are naturally fastidious have 
an opportunity of demonstrating how much of the Master's 
spirit they possess. These have an opportunity of bearing 
something in this connection, in that they will speak to the 
others, fellowship with them as brethren in Christ, when they 
are not very popular,, not very influential, when to be known 
as their friends would seem to be rather a compromise in 
standard from a natural viewpoint. For "there is neither 
Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female; for ye are 
all one in Christ Jesus." — Gal. 3:28. 

This does not mean, necessarily, that we are to forsake all 
the most highly intellectual friends of the truth, all the educated
, or all the comely in appearance, and associate only with 
those who are lacking in these respects. But it does mean 
that we should bear with the infirmities of the weak ones, that 
we should be sympathetic, merciful and kind-spirited, should 
love them as brethren. We are to love all who are Christ's, 
loving them in proportion to their manifestation of the spirit 
of the Master, and not to think merely of what would be most 
pleasing to ourselves in a natural way. Our Father in heaven, 
who searches the heart, esimates each of us according to our 
development of the precious fruits of the holy Spirit, and not 
according to social standing or color of skin or outward comeliness
; and we are to follow his example to the extent of 
ability* 

God has left open before us various doors of opportunity 
for service to the brethren ; and the degree of our love for 
them is measured in his sight by the zeal with which we endeavor
 to use in that service the talents in our control. Therefore
 let this thought nerve us to greater energy and faithfulness
 in the joyful service of the Lord; for our love, zeal and 
devotion for the brethren testify to the Master the degree of 
our love and zeal for himself. 


THE GIVING OF THE MANNA 

[The first paragraph of this article was a reprint from article entitled, "Give Us Thi<; Day Our Daily Bread," published in 
issue of July 1, 1902. The remainder was a reprint from article, "Led By a Way That They Know Not," published in issue 
of June 15, 1907. Please see articles named.] 

[6380] 


"PARTAKERS OF THE HEAVENLY CALLING" 


Holy brethren, chosen by the sovereign Voice of Might, 
See your high and holy calling out of darkness into light! 
Called according to his purpose and the riches of his love, 
Won to listen by the leadings of the gentle heavenly dove! 

Called to suffer with our Master, patiently to run his race; 
Called a blessing to inherit, called to holiness and grace, 


Called to fellowship with Jesus by the ever faithful One, 
Called to his eternal glory, to the kingdom of God's Son. 

Whom he calleth he preserve th ; and his glory they shall see. 
He is faithful who hath called you ; he will do it, fear not ye ! 
Then, holy brethren, onward! Thus make your calling sure; 
For the prize of the high calling bravely to the end endure. 


JETHRO'S COUNSEL 

TThe last three paragraphs of this article were reprinted from Chapter III, Volume 1 of Scripture Studio*. The first two 
paragraphs were reprinted from article entitled, "God's Covenant at Sinai/* published in issue of August I, 191 3. The remainder
 was reprinted from article, "God First — in the Decalogue," published in issue of July 1, 1902. Please see articles 
named. J 


'BE THOU FAITHFUL UNTO DEATH" 


Faithful when with tears thine eyes are dim, 
Faithful when Joy's cup o'erflows its brim ; 
Faithful when God seems to veil his face, 
Faithful when he crowns thy work with grace. 
Faithful, though thy loved ones turn aside, 


Lips that praised thee once, with harshness chide; 
Faithful though success enwreathe thy brow, 
Faithful should the world before thee bow. 
Faithful till hath fled life's fleeting breath, 
Eager hands lie folded still m death. 


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS 


[Paragraphs 4 to 7 of thi* article were reprinted from article entitled, "God's Ten Commandments," published in issue of 
August 1, 1913. Paragraph ft was reprinted from an irtude entitled, '"Who Is My Neighbor,"* published in issue of t-ame date. 
The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "This Doth God Require," published in issue of June 15, J907. Please see 
articles named.l 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


A MESSAGE OF GRATITUDE 
T() THE DEAR FRIENDS EVERYWHERE: — 

Grace, mercy and peace be multiplied unto you! 

Am taking advantage of an opportunity to dictate this note 
to extend to all the dear friends throughout the United States 
and Canada my heartfelt thanks for the great love bestowed 
upon us and manifested in the numerous Christmas presents 
which I and my associates have received, as well as cards, 
letters and messages of love. May the Lord bless you one 
and all! 

I am unable to write you personally, and so am asking that 
this general message be given you. I am overwhelmed by 
your expressions of love, dear brethren. May the Lord reward
 you richly! 

Your brother and servant by his grace, 

J. F. Rutherford. 

CONVINCED OF HIS MISTAKEN ACTION 

Dear Brethren: — 

It is with deep regret for my action taken about a week 
ago that I humbly write this letter, acknowledging that I 
have made a grievous mistake in supposing for one moment 
that The Watch Tower was no longer being guided of the 
Lord. I attended a meeting of opponents, at which were 
some hitherto prominent brethren. Their arguments were 
so convincing that upon my return I immediately sent the 
copy of the letter to you, without any meditation or without 
looking to the leading of the Lord in the matter. 

However, since thai time I have meditated very much over 
the matter, looking up various Scriptures. Now I am fully 
<*>nvinced of my mistake, and beg to apologize for being so 
hasty in such an important matter and for any inconvenience 
or trouble I may have caused there. Hoping that my name 
will again be placed among the readers of The Watch 
Tower, and also as a member of the International Bible Students
' Association, I remain 

Your brother in the service of the Lord, 

O. W. V. B.— ' Wash. 
otje pastor's words as true now as ever 
Dear Brethren in Chbist: — 

The Tower is certainly grand; and we believe the words 
of our dear Pastor are just as true now as they ever were 
(See F 658) and that The Watch Tower will be used of 
the Lord in the future as well as in the past. (Luke 12:37; 
Revelation 8:3; 14:18) The "Mizpah" of Jeremiah seems 
to teach the same thing, Mizpah meaning "watchtower." 

We ask an interest in your prayers that we may stand ever 
faithful, and assure you of ours in harmony with the Vow. 

Yours in the one hope, Bro. and Sr. K. F. B, — Ohio. 
THE FATHER'S BOUNTIFUL TABLE 
Dear Brethren: — 

We just want to tell you something about our appreciation 
of the last two issues of The Watch Tower. We feel sure 
we have never enjoyed a Tower as we have that of Nov. 1st, 

VII— 36 


particularly the first article and the reproduction from one 
of the old" Towers — "Divine Providences." We have read 
and re-read these articles, and it seems to us they are just 
about the finest we have ever had the good fortune to see, 
and we are grateful to our heavenly Father for his abundant 
and delicious spread. Every article in the Tower of Nov. 
1st is a gem; and the issue of Nov. 15th is also fine as far 
as we have read, particularly the firat article. The dear 
Father is certainly setting a most wonderful and bountiful 
table before us, and it seems that the food gets better as the 
end of the way draws nearer. 

Be assured that it is our daily prayer that our heavenly 
Father will guide and direct you in the work you are doing; 
and we ask also that you remember us in your petitions. 

Your brother by his grace, P. A. G. — Term. 

COULD NOT MAKE DEAF EARS HEAR 

Dear Brethren: — 

How may 1 become a member of the ChuTch of Present 
Truth? I was converted to the belief last winter when a 
copy of one of your publications was placed in my hands; 
and I believe that it was by divine providence that I received 
the volume. I had long struggled with and argued against 
theories on the Bible as expounded by the Sunday School 
journals of various churches, until at times I was ashamed of 
myself, and thought that perhaps the devil was inspiring me 
to argue against God's Word. But now I see that I was 
blindly struggling for truth and light. 

At the time when I got the volume I was teacher of the 
men's Bible class in the First Methodist Church here. I 
realized that it taught me to leave the erring church; but I 
was so desirous of bringing the light to those whom I had 
learned to love that I continued to teach the class, discarded 
theories of the journals and substituted as much present 
truth as I knew. I was the president of the Gospel Team; 
and I gave it to them there and tried to lead them to the real 
truth. But this was all in vain. In a little while I despaired 
and quit. So at last I have given up all hope of making a 
deaf ear hear. I am "done." Have you any advice for me? 

Sincerely yours, A. E. J. — Kans. 

GRATEFUL APPRECIATION OF THE TOWER 

Brethren Beloved in the Lord: — 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you! Many times have 
I had in mind to write to you to tell you of my deep love 
for you, and of how much I appreciate what you are doing for 
me in the way of strengthening my faith and increasing my 
joys in the Lord through The Watch Tower; but I have refrained
 from so doing because I know that you are all quite 
busy. But when I read the last Tower (Dec. l«t issue) I 
could refrain no longer, as it contained just the subjects that 
I have been considering for the past three months, using the 
same references — the back numbers of the Tower. From the 
Toweb of 1911, pages 180-182, the article on "The Rewards 

[6381] (28-31) 


(18 .15) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa 


of Sacrifice," together with the subject, "The Two Parts of 
the Harvest," I am fully assured, dear brethren, that the Lord 
is using the same channel in giving the necessary food for 
the upbuilding of his people. Our prayers have been, and 
are yet, on your behalf that the dear Lord may continue to 
guide and direct your work and labors of love to the praise 


of the God of all grace. In the Nov. 15th issue the article 
on "Self-Denial" — in fact, all the articles are excellent; and 
we feel that we could not do without the "meat in due season," 
"things new and old," from the storehouse. 

With love to all at the Watch Tower office, I remain 
Your brother in Christ, J. 0., — Ohio. 


BAIL DENIED— APPEAL PENDING 

Application for bail in the case of Brother Rutherford and circumstances by reason of the near date of argument. The 
associates was denied by the Circuit Court of Appeals on De- case is expected to be reviewed in the Appellate Court within 
cember 3rd last, probably without a full review of the facts and thirty days, and an early decision is anticipated. 


NEWSPAPER CLIPPINGS REQUESTED 

The Society would be pleased to receive newspaper clip- of J. F. Rutherford et al. Please mark the name and date 
pings bearing upon the subject of general Amnesty for political 
prisoners, and particularly anything in reference to the case of the paper from which the clipping is taken. 


RESOLUTIONS OF LOVE AND LOYALTY 


So many resolutions of loyalty to the Society and pledges 
of co-operation have been received from -classes within the past 
few days that it is impossible to publish them all. We ask that 
the dear friends accept this as acknowledgment of any such 


resolution and pledges, with the assurance of our deepest appreciation
 therefor. Publication of as many as possible will 
be made from time to time in The Watch Tower columns. 


A CORRECTION 

An unfortunate reference to "a Brooklyn sister/* whose curate; and so far as we are aware no Brooklyn sister is reS
5 KSMS "e^S ^CiV^Se,^ <P™™- *» «- «■»* - *•«*»*. *. are glad, ther, 
of Bee. 12th. W T e now learn that our information waB inac- fore, to make this correction at this time. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY 1, 1919 


No. 3 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Now that the great war has come to an end and the 
definite conclusion of peace seems to be a near reality, the 
year 1919 appears big with possibilities from practically every 
viewpoint. Men who have been grappling with momentous, 
problems, and who have often been on the verge of complete 
despair during the four years' struggle just ended now take 
new courage as they emerge from the world chaos and look 
out into the immediate future. Notwithstanding this happy 
aspect, however, serious-minded statesmen of all nations seem 
conscious of the fact that the greatest precautions must be 
taken in the manipulation of the world's affairs at this 
juncture, lest there arise international jealousies, suspicions 
and misunderstandings, and a general discontent on the part 
of the masses that may lead to grave difficulties in all lands. 
Bolshevism is a terror to every conservative statesman the 
world over. Particular concern is being expressed in the 
public press of England and also of America that delay in 
dealing liberally with political prisoners now being held in 
penitentiaries and disciplinary barracks beyond the period of 
hostilities abroad may breed such wide-spread dissatisfaction 
as would prove detrimental to the best interests of the 
state. 

We quote from The New Republic <N. Y.) of Jan. 11, 
1919, as follows: 

"In England there is already on ftfot a movement for the 
release of all persons held in prison for conscientious refusal 
to do military service. It is not a radical movement. Nor 
is it a sentimental movement. Among the signers of the petitions
 for amnesty we find such names as those of Viscount 
Bryce, Viscount Morley, Sir John Simon, Lord Buckmaster, 
etc. These men have been wholehearted supporters of the war 
and of the measures necessary to render England's war policies 
effective. They would be among the last to urge any action 
that would be prejudicial to the good order of the state. 
They recognize that no civil purpose is advanced in the least 
by further penalties inflicted upon conscientious objectors. 
Therefore why not set them free? 

"No free state can possibly make a crime out of refusal to 
serve in war when such refusal is actuated by Bincere conscientious
 motives. We may consider such an attitude 
illogical, absurd. . . . But we have passed beyond the point 
of barbarism. To attempt by threats and penalties to force 
such a man into military service would be tyranny as hideous 
as that of the Roman proconsul who slew the seven brothers 
and their mother because they refused to eat swine's flesh. 

"The conscientious objectors in disciplinary barracks or in 
jails represent nothing but a part of our machinery of conscription
. That was a hideous bit of machinery to* use, but 
we were at war and did not stick at means. But now the 


war is over, and we have scrapped the rest of our machinery 
of conscription, is there the slightest reason why we should 
keep this least defensible part of our machinery in motion? 
Is there the least ground for subjecting to further privations 
and tortures the men who have committed no crime against 
the state? 

"No crime? But how does it come that they are serving 
penitentiary terms of ten, twenty and twenty-five yearB ? That 
is a result of the infinite Btupidity of our war policy, which 
we ought not to seek to justify, but for which we ought to 
make amends. 

"Men have been manacled, confined for outrageous periods 
in solitary confinement, thrust into a dangerous condition of 
physical debility, driven insane. To what end, in God's name? 
In order to strike terror into the hearts of draft evaders outside
: that was the only plausible reason. But then, why were 
not these tortures conducted in the open, where they might 
have exerted their supposed salutary effect? Why did not 
Mr. Baker's War Department bulletins run something like 
this: The Department reports with satisfaction that C. 0. 
John Smith has been so successfully harried that he is now a 
raving maniac, and the chances are excellent that he will 
never recover'? 

"Let us forget it, grant amnesty to ourselves for it; we 
were only stupid, not depraved. . . . Let us not leave it to 
the radicals, the sentimentalists, the sympathizers with doctrinary
 pacificism, to make the first move in the matter. 
This is not a radical issue, but an issue as old and as 
respectable as political liberty." 

From the same publication, under date of Jan. 4, 1919, we 
quote the following: 

"The fighting is over. America is asking the nations to 
consent to a peace resting upon justice. With what possible 
grace can we appear before the conference table. as a champion
 of liberty when some 300 conscientious objectors and 
more than 1,000 prisoners under the Espionage Act are confined
 in abominable prisons under sentences of five, ten, 
twenty or thirty years for no other crime than loyalty to conviction
? Surely when Americans know the truth they will 
demand an amnesty as the only possible proof of our sincerity
 in waging a war for the right of men everywhere 'to 
choose their way of life and obedience.' " 

Thus while statesmen and journalists are discussing these 
matters from the standpoint of expediency as well as of 
justice, the Lord's people are in a position to view matters 
from an additional angle. We are able to see that the present 
crisis of history is exactly that which was foretold by the 
prophets of Israel centuries ago. The war and its attendant 
sufferings have been depicted in the Old Testament writings, 


[6382] 


Fpbruaky 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(36-37) 


and Bible Students have been apprised of these facts for the 
past forty years through the writings of Pastor Russell. Even 
the discontent which would follow the war, and the numerous 
complications in world politics, have been pictured by the 
holy prophets, as well as the glorious kingdom of Messiah, 
which is to be established on the ruins of the present order. 

Incident to the great time of trouble in which we find ourselves
 at the present moment, the Lord's people are called 
upon to undergo special trials and tests along with the rest 
of the world. But while the worldly-minded ones chafe under 
their experiences, the Lord's people have the blessed assurance 
that all things shall work together for their good, and that 
no weapon formed against them (as new creatures) shall 
prosper; for this is their heritage as servants of the Lord. — 
Isaiah 54:17. 

Among the numerous conscientious objectors and political 
prisoners now in confinement will he found many members of 
the International Biblk Students Association. They have 
consecrated their all upon the altar of sacrifice, and are 
accepting the cup which the Father hath poured for them in 
the true spirit of the Master. 

In considering the various articles now appearing in the 
newspapers and magazines on the subject of Amnesty for 
political prisoners, and its possible effect upon the release of 
our own brethren in bonds, we are reminded of the experiences
 of Jeremiah in the days of Israel's last king. He was 
imprisoned for his convictions and teachings, and was later 
released through the agitation caused by the radical element 
of that time. He was lifted from the dungeon by means of 
rags. Whether all the features connected therewith are 
typical we would not venture to say; but there are many 
things involved which make the general circumstances pictorially
 interesting. Who knows but that it may be through 
the newspaper agitation of the country that the release of all 
political prisoners may be shortly brought about, and particularly
 those of the Lord's people who have been incarcerated 
for <?onscience's sake? 

We quote from The Sorwntonum of Scranton, Pa., under 
date of December 15, as follows: — 

"TIME TO PARDON 'THE FINISHED MYSTERY' 
EDITORS 

"A New Jersey paper of recent date has the following, that 
is worthy of the consideration of every man who believes in 
justice: 

"TIME TO PAEDON 'THE FINISHED MYSTERY' EDITORS 

" 'About one of the first things that President Wilson should 
do is to pardon the followers of the late Pastor Russell, who 
were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment for alleged violation
 of the Espionage Act. Some people think these men 
are more sinned against than sinning.' 

"That the administration will seriously consider this hint 
if the matter is properly presented at Washington there can 
be no doubt. It seems to conservative people that the imprisonment
 of the Russellites was a mistake that bordered on 
injustice. It will be remembered that a number of men, two 
of them from this city, engaged in the work of completing a 
book that was being written by Pastor Russell at the time of 
his death. Certain passages in the book, which in the main 
is a jumble of references to the Bible, denounced war on general
 principles, 

"When the attention of the editors was called to what 
seemed disloyal utterances they quickly withdrew the 'Finished
 Mysteby' from circulation and offered, to re-write it, 
or suppress it entirely until the end of the war with Germany. 
They declared that they had no thought of committing a disloyal
 act. 

"When the Russellites were sentenced several months ago 
it would have been useless for any one to attempt to secure 


modification of their punishment. Public sentiment was too 
warm against anything that looked like an attempt to hamper 
the Washington government. But it is different today. And 
it seems time to make reparation for the error of classing 
these honest and loyal men, who might perhaps be religious 
fanatics, with red-handed criminals who for money secured 
from the German government stood ready to stir up dissension
, burn buildings and commit murdier in the interest of their 
employers. 

""The 8crantonian has no interest in the Beet formed by the 
late Pastor Russell and cares nothing for the teachings of the 
late Bible exponent. We have no afffiliation with the cult, or 
whatever it may be called. But The Scrantonian believes in 
fair play, and conservative people everywhere who are conversant
 with the proceedings beginning with the arrest of the 
'Finished Mysteby' editors and followed by their trial, conviction
 and sentence, must admit that the alleged offense did 
not call for any such punishment as was meted out." 
ROME IN POLITICS 
Bible Students are familiar with the teachings of the* 
Scriptures which indicate that the Catholic Church would 
figure very largely in the political affairs of the world. For 
a brief period at the end of this age, the Revelator, referring,, 
we believe, to the Papal system as a world power, says: "And 
when he cometh he must continue a short space." (Revelation' 
17:10) Students of prophecy are therefore interested to learn 
with accuracy the views of the Pope on the coming "League 
of Nations." The habitual interest of Papacy in the politics. 
of the country is well expressed in the following extract from 
The Christian Leader of January 7, 1919: 

"It is no new thing that the Church of Rome seeks to control
 the political movements of any country in which it if 
strong enough to make it worth while to try. In the early 
history of our country, Rome was too weak to make itself 
felt, except in a small way in two or three of the states. But. 
of late it thinks of itself somewhat as Germany has been doing
 — able to control the governmeni and derive its ow T n nourishment
 from the life of the nation. Usually it proceeds very 
slyly, and rarely publishes its purpose to the world ; but occasionally
 it forgets discretion and allows its inward thoughts 
to escape. One of our contemporaries has lighted upon an 
article credited to The National Catholic Register, which lets 
fall statements of fact* and purposes which may well open the 
eyes of our people. The paper referred to congratulates itself 
and its readers in such paragraphs as the following: 

" 'It is God's plan that the Holy Father of Rome should 
be the temporal and spiritual head of His Kingdom on earth. 
It is the same today as in the time of the first pope. The 
best way to accomplish this is through political power, through 
religious education and service. God has doubly blessed the 
Catholic Church of America by placing one of its most faithful
 sons at the right hand of President Wilson. Next to the 
President, Hon. Joseph Tumulty, a Knight of Columbus of the 
33rd degree, wields the greatest political power of any man 
in America ; and as a true Catholic he is exercising the greatest
 trust which God has given into his hands for the glory of 
the holy church. Through his tact and holy zeal he has created
 a warm friendship between the Catholic Church and President
 Wilson. This is the first time in the history of the 
country when the President and a great political party have 
openly sought an equal and honest alliance with the Cfatholie 
Church. Through the efforts of Hon. Joseph Tumulty, President
 Wilson has praetieally granted that education in the; 
Philippines shall be under control of the Catholic Church; andl 
that religious activity in the great American army shall tie? 
under the direction of the Knights of Columbus. This meamw 
the addition to the church of one million of the country's best 
and bravest young men, or at least their strong preference and 
sympathy for the Catholic Church.' " 


SATAN'S SNARES AND DELUSIONS 


"Surely he shall deliver thee from the 
Throughout the Bible Satan is pictured as a great fowler 
setting snares for the feet of the unwary; and in this work he 
has the co-operation of a host of unseen spirit beings, all actuated
 by one common purpose, namely, that of hindering the 
Lord's people from making their calling and election sure. 
These evilly inclined beings are variously referred to in the 
Scriptures " as "devils," "unclean spirits," "wicked spirits," 
"lying spirits," "seducing spirits," "the angels that sinned." 
(Deuteronomy 32:17; Matthew 8:28; 12:45; Mark 1:23; 2 
Peter 2:4) They obsess or possess human beings, using the 
tongues and the voices of these unfortunate persons to utter 
their own lying deceptions. (Matthew 4:24; Luke 8:2) Satan 
is repeatedly declared to be their "prince" or leader. The Bible 


snare of the fowler. 7 ' — Psalm 91:3. 

further declares them to be the author of many of the false 
doctrines extant, and asserts that by believing and teaching 
these false doctrines the Lord's people may be unwittingly 
fellowshiping with these devils. This fact alone should be a 
sufficient reason why the Lord's people should be on their 
guard against such fellowship. — Matthew 6:24; Ephesians 
2:2; 1 Timothy 4:1 j Revelation 16:14; 1 Corinthians 10: 
20, 21. 

The only successful way to resist these evil spirits is to be 
armed with the truth on all doctrinal points. (Ephesians 6: 
11-13) The Scriptures still further teach clearly that these 
evil spirits approach the human mind by using cunning, crafty 
suggestions couched in Biblical language, often quoting Scrip- 


[6383] 


(37-38) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Fa. 


ture itself, professing great piety and much love and sympathy
, and claiming to be representatives of the Lord. (2 
Corinthians 11:13-15) Sometimes these messages are spoken 
in the ear, so that no other person can hear them. At other 
times they are given by a series of impressions or suggestions 
made on the mind, either directly or through another person. 
VARIOUS TRAPS TO ENSNARE THE UNWARY 
A successful fowler must conceal his Bnares; and so Satan, 
hides his deceptions under a cloak of piety. We remember 
well the record of his attempt to deceive our Lord by suggesting
 to Jesus' mind certain Scriptures and at the same time 
giving also a distorted interpretation of these texts. But our 
Lord was so thoroughly armed with the truth that he could 
easily discern the deceptive arguments, and thus was able to 
answer with another text that bared the false interpretation, 
suggested by Satan. 

For the ignorant and curious, Satan and his associates 
use the cruder forms of deception, through rappings, table tipping
, hypnotism, mesmerism, spiritism, clairaudience, clairvoyunce
, jugglery, black art, the planchette and the ouija board. 
Tor those of more esthetic tastes and more religiously inclined, 
he has a still more subtle snare in Christian Science, Theosophy
, New Thought, faith cures and divine healing. The 
bait is physical healing, and the snare lies in the deception 
that the healing comes from the Lord. These appeal to a class 
who crave occult power over others. It gratifies this ambition
 and appeals to their vanity. Conscious of this supernatural
 power, persuaded that it must be God-given, they are not 
aware that the Bible explicitly declares that Satan will be 
permitted to cast out Satan — that is, Satan will have power to 
heal his own sick. Ignorant of the Bible teaching on this 
point, they are not prepared to see that Satan and his min 
isters will appear as "an angel of light," bringing blessings 
of health and prosperity. 

When the truth on this subject is brought to the attention 
of this class, they are so completely ensnared in the error that 
they "resist the truth," "reprobate concerning the faith." (2 
Timothy 3:8) They may not be reprobate in morals, however. 
Many of our best moral citizens are thus ensnared. This device
 of Satan is especially designed for a class who hold to a 
high standard of morals. Hence we find among its votaries, 
scholars, professors, teachers, the refined, the educated and the 
aristocratic. This snare is so cunningly hidden that it is very 
difficult to discern. Extremely few are willing to admit that 
Satan can be the author of any good work. This erroneous 
idea helps to conceal the snare. 

GIFT OF HEALING IN THE EARLY CHURCH 
Then, too, there are some Scriptures that lend plausibility 
to the thought of '"divine" healing. It is argued that Jesus 
and the apostles healed the sick. But the deluded ones fail 
to note that these healings were instantaneous and complete, 
and that the healer always spurned the proffered reward . 
Again, they fail to note that the gifts bestowed upon the early 
church were not alike to all. Some could heal; some could 
speak with tongues, etc. (1 Corinthians 12:8-10, 28-30) They 
also fail to note that our Lord and the apostles never healed 
one of the disciples, but always one of the multitude; and that 
they did not heal all of the multitudes; for Jesus passed by 
the pool of Bethesda, where there was a multitude of impotent 
folk. But the Master healed just one and then went his way. 
—John 5:li9. 

The special gifts bestowed upon the early church served a 
good purpose at that time. The New Testament had not yet 
been written, and the disciples needed some credentials; else 
the public would not listen to their message. And so, the 
Apostle tells us, theac gifts were for a "sign to the unbelievers
/' They were not intended for a sigpi to the believer, the 
Christian. Notice how positively this is stated. Prophesying 
(teaching) is the method used and intended to instruct and 
ronvinee; and teaching is expressly declared to be of more importance
 than arc gift*.. — 1 Corinthians 14:5. 22-24. 
THE CHURCH TO DO "GREATER WORKS" 
Another thing which lends color to these deceptions, and 
which is nearly always quoted as "proof," is the text found 
in Mark 16:17, 18. "And these signs shall follow them that 
believe: In my name shall they cast out devils; they shall 
speak with new tongues; they shall take up serpents; and if 
they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them; they shall 
lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." This is supposed
 to be incontrovertible evidence that the Bible is authority 
for "divine healing." But the argument falls flat when it is 
known that all of the last chapter of Mark from verse 9 to 
verse 20 is spurious, added by some priest or monk, long after 
the Bible was completed and after Mark's death. Nevertheless
, those ensnared in this doctrine of divine hen ling are so 
thoroughly rooted and grounded in the error that they will not 


investigate when this matter is brought to their attention and 
when investigation can be made with little effort. On the contrary
, it is quite generally thought that the possession of these 
powers of healing evidences a very close relationship with 
God. 

We notice that our Lord told his followers that they would 
Ho greater works than lie did. (John 14:12) Jesus healed the 
sick and performed many wonderful works. We might therefore
 ask: "What could be a greater work than these? 51 The 
Bible gives the answer. Opening the eyes of those who are 
blind to the truth, unstopping the ears of those who are deaf 
to the truth, healing soul sickness and satisfying heart hunger 
— these are the "greater works" which the church is privileged
 to do. It is a far grander and more notable work to 
perform spiritual healing than to heal physically. The latter 
is at most only a temporary matter, affording temporary bles*- 
ing. The former affects the eternal, future welfare. 

Satan's snare is to get people so infatuated with the idea 
of physical healing that they will spend their time and their 
money to this end — a selfish one— rather than in study, meditation
 and prayer. While the bait of physical healing is quite 
effective, and is ensnaring more people than is any other bait 
that Satan is using, yet he has other varieties also. None of 
the snares above mentioned would catch the Lord's people, the 
truth people. Satan could not use this bait with them. Therefore
 he must needs use a different kind, some error more subtle 
than any we have heretofore described, He is a wily fowler, 
never at a loss to know just what to do. Besides, he has a 
great advantage in that he knows not only our thoughts, but 
our weaknesses also, yea, better than we know them ourselves
. He is well aware that the truth people cannot be 
caught in any of the ordinary snares mentioned above. Therefore
 he has designed something still more subtle and deceptive 
for them. This is a great scheme, and it works to an amazing 
extent among those who are not on guard. 

TWO METHODS OF ATTACK 

There are two methods of attack, both of which appeal to 
fleshly weakness. Kither of these methods seems to be successful
 with some who could not be ensnared in any less subtle 
way, They are: 

( 1 ) Satan suggests to the mind something which will 
flatter the vanity or will bring his victim into the limelight 
of popularity. This is the easiest way to catch the unwary, 
for the reason that the majority of people have the organ of 
approbativenebs or that of self-esteem very largely developed, 
and therefore vanity or ambition or pride makes them an easy 
prey. 

(2) Another very successful method of attack is to suggest
 to the mind something in the nature of an appeal to sentiment
, sympathy — passion. This snare is always the more 
dangerous if the sentiment relates to someone who is especially
 dear to us by ties of blood or of friendship. The sympathy
 or emotion being aroused, the victim will not listen to 
reason, but is led to believe that there is a "principle" at stake, 
when really he is actuated purely by passion — sentiment, in 
other words, Satan sets before the mind a false standard, and 
hoodwinks us into believing that it is a principle. This i^ a 
very common snare which Satan sets among the people of God. 
The snare consists in the fact that we find ourselves fighting 
for principle when there is no principle at stake; and the bait 
is sympathy for one whom we love. 

It is always those less developed in character and spiritual 
attainments who are most liable to attack and w T ho are most 
liable to fall. Vet these are a class who credit themselves, and 
who are credited by others, with possessing a larger degree of 
spirituality and character development than the average. 
Those who have natural graces of mind and body, who are 
better born, who have inherited more of Adamic perfection. 
are most liable to fall into this snare, because less on guard 
along these lines. They, and others, are apt to mistake the 
natural graces of kindness, gentleness, benevolence, etc., for 
the fruits of the holy Spirit, and thus credit themselves with 
a greater spiritual development than they really possess. 
THE PHILOSOPHY OP THE MATTES 

This well illustrates the Scriptural teaching that "man 
looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on 
the heart. 5 * (I Samuel 16:7) It also explains why those who 
fall are usually those who we felt quite sure would stand. 
Those who are susceptible to these more subtle temptations of 
the adversary are, from the standpoint of fleshly desires, usually
 very sensitive, easily offended, and become indignant if 
the truth on this subject is brought to their attention, ever 
ready to disfellowship or to withdraw with little provocation. 
They fail to perceive that what they consider the strongest 
element of their character is really the weakest. They are 
only "babes in Christ." At times it is a source of astonish - 


[6384] 


FrBRUARY 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(38-40) 


ment to see some who seemingly have loved and served the 
truth for years fall under such trials. 

The Bible indicates that these subtle delusions of the adversary
 will be especially strong in the end of the Gospel age. 
•'Even him whose coming is according to the energy of the adversary
, with all power and signs and wonders of falsehood, 
and with every deception of iniquity to those who are perishing
, because they admitted not the love of the truth in order 
that they might be saved. And on this account God will send 
to them an. energy of delusion, to their believing the falsehood
; in order that all those mdy be judged who believed not 
the truth, but approved the iniquity." (2 Thessalonians 2: 
9-12, Diaglott) In view of this fact Brother Russell wrote the 
fourth paragraph of the Vow: 

"I vow to thee that I will be on the alert to resist everything
 akin to spiritism and occultism; and that, remembering 
that there are but the two masters, I will resist these snares 
in all reasonable ways, as being of the adversary." 

"Everything akin to spiritism and occultism'*; that is, 
everything related to either of these subjects, everything that 
savors of either. To be able to detect quickly and Purely that 
which borders on spiritism and occultism requires a large degree
 of spiritual development, as well as an accurate knowledge
 of the operations, of evil spirits. It is always possible 
for the Lord's people to be informed as to the methods followed
 by Satan and his cohort of fallen spirits; for, as the 
Apostle says, "We are not ignorant of his devices." If Satan 
nfpear as an angel of light, mercy, truth, what*marvel that 
his ministers or agents, whether human or angelic, will also 
thus appear! 

Again, we are told that the special mission of Satan and 
his assistants is to "blind the minds." Those who have the 
largest measure of the holy Spirit are of "quick understanding
," that is, quick to perceive these snares of the adversary. 
Such do not find it necessary to judge after the sight of the 
eyes nor the hearing of the ears; for they have a far better 
way of judging, and their accurate knowledge of the methods 
used by the demons is an aid in the judgment. Others can 
judge only by what they see and hear. (Isaiah 11:3) Should 
any one try to point out to the ensnared one the danger to 
which he is exposed, his efforts are almost always misunderstood
, and will almost invariably bring down on his devoted 
head the wrath of the one thus controlled by the demons. 
SOME PRACTICAL ILLUSTRATIONS 

That we may all be more on guard against "everything 
akin to spiritism and occultism," we wish to give some practical
 illustrations which have come under our notice. We 
have come into contact with several friends who seemed to be 
obsessed with the idea that God was especially indicating to 
them that they should go into their closet and pray for some 
brother or sister far away, who was in special danger. The 
thought would flash through the mind, and they would take 
it as from God. To them the thought of being especially 
chosen to pray for another in danger would be pleasing; for 
it would flatter the vanity and magnify their own importance. 
Some have become so ensnared in this error that it has been 
impossible to get thean to see that God is not thus dealing with 
his saints now, but that he gives them his message through 
his Word of truth. He does not use mental telepathy to transmit
 his messages. He does not send them by wireless'. Wte 
still must do as our Lord Jesus did. "In the volume of the 
book it is written of me." This error is something "akin to 
spiritism and occultism." 

Our observation is that as a rule those who are thus enBnared
 are not favorably inclined toward that paragraph in 
the Vow, and that they seem also to have an antipathy to the 
exposition of the seventh chapter of the Revelation. Since 
that exposition has appeared in print, some of these deluded 
brethren are in antagonism to it. Such are nearly always very 
sensitive on this subject. This very fact of touchiness and resentment
 is one of the best evidences that they are getting 
their information from a wrong source. We note that such 
friends act on their own impulses. The question, "Is this in 
harmony with the teachings of God's Word?" seems never to 
occur to them. They are ruled solely by passion, feeling, emotion
. This class need to examine carefully the distinction between
 passion and principle as set forth in The Watch Tower 
for 1917, page 176, col. 1, par. 3. 

OTHER ILLUSTRATIONS OP SPIRITUAL PRIDE 

The great adversary is wily, and at all times is quick to 
appeal to passion. He persuades some that they must take 
a radical stand against some secular work or activity, and to 
proceed at once to disfellowship others who cannot conscientiously
 take this same stand. Somehow they seem to think 
that their radical stand entitles them in a very special sense to 
divine favor and blessing. This attitude leads them to violate 


principle in various ways : ( 1 ) By judging and condemning 
others who do not see as they do; (2) By refusing to fellowship
 those who still believe in the ransom, the restitution, the 
high calling. In other words, they make this special work or 
activity in which they cannot engage a test of fellowship. This 
class seems to be afflicted with a kind of spiritual pride and 
somehow to imagine that they are superior to others. They 
need to be more "on the alert to resist everything akin to spiritism
" and demonism. A few of this class have persuaded 
themselves of their superiority to such an extent that they 
can no longer fellowship the Society nor endure the visits of 
The Watch Tower, even though it still holds and teaches all 
the fundamentals exactly as Brother Russell has done. 

Another perverted view which we believe to be of demon 
origin is held by seme who seemingly think that their prayers 
are more effective than those of others, that they are in closer 
touch with the Lord than are others. This conceit leads them 
to hold themselves up as examples in this matter. This condition
 is the result of spiritual pride. Often when another 
brother is asked to lead in public prayer, this pride prompts 
its possessors to whisper a little private petition of their own, 
the thought seemingly being either that their own prayer is 
more efficacious than that of the brother who had been asked 
to lead in prayer or else that God will hear their petition in 
preference to the brother's. The proper thought should be that 
the brother asked to offer prayer is the representative of all, 
and that for others to interrupt at such a time with a personal
 prayer would, to our mind, indicate a lack of reverence 
and an over-abundance of self-esteem. 

Usually those ensnared in this manner are unapproachable 
on the subject of which we are speaking; for their spiritual 
pride prejudices them against reason. Here again we sound 
the warning in the words "akin to spiritism." 

VIOLATION OP PRINCIPLE OF JUSTICE 

Spiritual pride manifests itself in still another way. Some 
brother in whom we have had great confidence and whom we 
especially love, will tell something detrimental to another 
brother or to the Society. If we accept this story as true 
without giving the accused person or persons an opportunity 
to explain or to correct the matter, we thereby demonstrate 
that our minds are closed to reason, that we are prejudiced. 

To illustrate: Prominent brethren have persistently circulated
 the story that the Society has invested in Liberty 
bonds $10,000 of money donated to the tract fund. This story 
is not true. The Society would have no right to use for bonds 
money which had been donated for another purpose. A very 
few of those who have heard this story have assumed that it is 
true, that the executives have betrayed a trust; and they have 
written to us asking that their names be removed from the 
Tower list. Their love ior some brother leads them to violate 
the Scriptural principle of justice which reads: "If thy brother 
trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between thee 
and him alone." (Matthew 18:15-17) No one should believe 
an injurious or a scandalous story except on the word of two 
or three witnesses. No one should condemn another without 
giving the accused person an opportunity to defend himself. 
After one has taken a stand and has condemned another unheard
, all future explanations and denials* are usually of no 
avail, lie is permitted to believe the lie. 

NECESSITY OF A PROPER CONSECRATION 

When will the Lord's people learn the lesson that to believe 
a story detrimental to another brother or to the Society without
 proper proof and without permitting the accused to defend 
himself is a violation of principle, is forbidden by the Word 
of God? Yet we know of harmful statements and letters which 
have been scattered broad-cast, and of some who have had the 
truth for years sitting down gleefully to type these falsehoods 
and to scatter the poison still further. How successfully the 
demons have blinded the minds of such to the simplest of Bible 
truths — common justice ! 

Some dear friends were very loyal to the truth, to the 
Society and to Brother Russell as long as he lived ; but as soon 
as he had gone to his reward they deserted the Society and demanded
 the return of all the money which they had put into 
the work. This class was also controlled by passion. Their 
consecration was to Brother Russell. They loved the man, not 
the work; and the demons had persuaded them that their love 
for the man was "principle." Any consecration which will 
serve only as long as the one whom we especially love is carrying
 on the work is an improper one. 

We have heard some of the friends make statements like 
this: "I go to the Thursday night meeting because I like 
Brother So-and-so, who leads it; but I do *ot especially care 
for the other elders." Such a motive for attendance at meetings
 is purely selfish. Such a consecration cannot be pleasing 
to the Lord. Such a person is controlled purely by passion, 


[63851 


(40-4 J) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


and not by principle. Here is a fertile field for demoniacal 
suggestion. The unseen adversaries persuade others of the 
Lord's people that they can get just as much spiritual benefit 
by reading the volumes at home as they can get in class study. 
This is another appeal to the flesh, spiritual pride, self-esteem. 
By following this course such disobey positive and plain teachings
 of the Word of God; and yet their conceit leads them to 
think that they have the divine approval. 

FOUR IMPORTANT POINTS 

Sometimes the demons suggest to one elder that he ignore 
the wishes of the other elders or of the class and override these, 
making him believe that he is standing for principle .when no 
principle 13 involved except his own conceit. When any one 
person in an ecclesia attempts to disregard the will of a majority
, such a person has cast aside all true principle and is 
controlled solely by his own passion, sentiment; and when 
passion controls, common sense and reason, as well as the 
Bible teaching on the subject, get Bcant recognition. Such 
conduct brings unnecessary trials on the classes and causes 
division. Those who do these things are like a horse that takes 
the bit in his teeth and runs away. There is sure to be a 
wreck soon. 

Our Lord describes this condition of mind in Matthew 13: 
13-15: "They seeing see not; and hearing hear not, neither do 

they understand For this people's heart is waxed gross, 

and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they 
closed." Satan and his agents have succeeded in fast closing 
their minds. Elsewhere the Bible says, "Blinded their minds." 
(2 Corinthians 4:4) This same class is evidently referred to 
by our Lord in the parable of the sower: "Those by the wayside
 are they that near; then cometh the devil, and taketh 
away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and 
be saved." 

The various anarchistic movements among the truth people 
indicate that the demons are more energetically active now 
than ever before; and experience teaches that it is impossible 
to reason with those who have come under their influence. 
This class seem determined to "believe the lie" and to prefer to 
do so. Alas! We fear that some are not heeding the Apostle
's injunction: "I would not that ye should have fellowship 
with devils." (1 Corinthians 10:20) We fellowship devite 
when we believe and teach their doctrines, when we have and 
manifest their spirit or when we join with them in opposing 
the Lord's people or the Lord's work; and it does not take 


long to reach the point where we justify ourselves in doing 
these things. 

We could wish that we had a million tongues and were so 
able to sound out the warning that all of the Lord's people 
could hear it. Never before have the demons been so active. 
Never before have so subtle temptations been put forth. Never 
before have they been so successful as now. And what about 
the future? The Bible suggests that the future holds still 
greater tests along these lines. Consequently we are to expect
 the demons to be increasingly active, and along new and 
still more subtle lines. How can we be on guard against these 
dangers ? There is only one way ; and the Apostle suggests it 
in these words: "Put on the whole armor of God." This is 
the divine method of delivering us from the snare of the 
fowler. 

Let us keep four thoughts in mind : ( 1 ) That there are only 
two masters, and that every unscriptural suggestion comes 
from demon sources; (2) That the Bible foretells that at the 
end of this age the demons will be granted special power to 
deceive (2, Thessalonians 2:9-11; Revelation 7:1-3; Jude 6); 
(3) That the saints are the special objects of attack (Matthew
 24:24; Bphesians 6:10-13}; (4) That the mind is the 
battle ground. — Romans 1:28; 2 Corinthians 4:4; Volume 5, 
page 189. CONCLUDING SUGGESTIONS 

Let us con over and over again these words: "I vow to thee 
that I will be on the alert to resist everything akin to spiritism
 and occultism; and remembering that there are but the 
two masters^ I will resist these snares in all reasonable ways 
as being of the adversary." 

Fr6m the experiences of the past thirty years we are convinced
 that those who refuse to join with the adversary in 
any of his assaults on the Society and its work are thereby 
to a large extent safe-guarded; and that those who are ready 
to believe reports which are detrimental to the Society and its 
work have not yet "put on the whole armor of God," and as a 
consequence are in great danger. The Word of God teaches us 
that we have no right to believe slanders against the Society, 
or against any individual saint, without the confirmatory evidence
 of two or three witnesses; and these witnesses must be 
those who have a positive knowledge of the facts in the case. 
To do otherwise would be to fall into Satan's snare. 

Finally, let us remember the Apostle's words: "I write 
not these things to shame you; but as my beloved sons I warn 
you."— 1 Corinthians 4:14, 


"HE KNOWS, HE 

How sweet to feel that God doth always know 
About the things that wound my poor heart so ; 
That he hath planned each path my feet must trpxe, 
And will supply his all-sufficient grace! 

How strange that he should heed my faintest cry, 
And keep me as the apple of his eye; 
That he should love me as he loves his Son, 
The altogether lovely, perfect One! 


LOVES, HE CARES" 

How precious is the thought he still doth care 
When clouds hang heavy, as when skies are fair; 
That he will never let me lose my way, 
Nor from his tender watch-care ever stray! 

"He knows, he loves, he cares," is always near 
To bless and keep. Ah, then, why should I feart 

And oh, the glorious hope! I soon shall rest 
My weary head upon his loving breast. 


"THE MABK OF THE BEAST' 

Question. — What is the "mark of the beast"? 

Answer. — A clear understanding of what constitutes the 
beast is necessary to a correct answer. In Bible symbology 
the word beast often refers to civil governments. (Daniel 7: 
3-6) But in connection with the "mark of the beast" of Revelation
 it refers not to a civil government, but to a religious 
system: viz., Papacy. Brother Russell so interprets it in all 
of the following instances: Revelation 13:4, 12, 14, 15; 15:2; 
16:2, 10; 19:20. — Comments. 

Brother Russell interprets the "mark of the beast" as follows
: In Revelation 16:2, "characteristics"; that is, characteristic
 teachings of Papacy, such as eternal torment, trinity
, immortality, incarnation, clergy, lordship, etc. (Comments
) In Revelation 13:17 he refers to this mark as the 
"orthodox stamp of approval." It should be noted that it is 
non-Catholics who are marked. Some accept the mark through 
"fear" of loss of name, fame, wealth or influence; others accept
 the mark because they are in "sympathy" with these 
teachings. Some actively support these doctrines with their 
influence and means. Such are said to receive the mark in 
their right hand. Others mentally endorse or publicly profess
, without actively supporting. Such are said to receive 
the mark in their foreheads. (Comments, Revelation 13:16) 
The majority of Protestants are thus marked. Indeed, ever 
since the Protestant Reformation began in the sixteenth century
 all Protestants who have believed And tauerht these doctrines
 have been thus marked. Volume 1 of Scripture Studies, 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


published in 1886, is referred to in Revelation 16:2 as a vial 
poured out on the earth. This verse tells us that there worn 
some "men" (clergymen and others), who were marked at that 
time. This conclusively proves that the mark does not consist
 in participation in certain governmental activities, as some 
have inferred. 

Revelation 13:14-17 points to a future period, when the 
"image of the beast" (Protestant federation) will attempt to 
mark or stamp or brand everybody not already marked. Doubtless
 laws will be enacted to make the matter compulsory. At 
this time it seems that the "beast" and the "image' 1 will be 
related to civil governments, as Herod, Herodias and Salome. 
—Mark 6:17-26. 

"Should this prove to be a type by its fulfillment in antitype
, the fulfillment will probably be on something like the 
following lines: (1) There will be a partial re-union of church 
and state. (2) Then it would become the duty of the true 
church to reprove the civil powers, as well as the nominal 
church systems, and to declare their union unlawful — contrary
 to the Word of God. (3) The effect of this would 
pretty surely be to awaken the animosity of both civil and religious
 powers; hut it would draw out especially the animosity 
and venom of the latter. (4) The church nominal in her false 
position would be anxious to stifle the reproofs to destroy the 
reprovers, and the effect would be that the civil powers would 
be induced to pass such legislation as would restrain the liberty
 of the faithful ones, and hinder them from public utterances
—as John was hindered by imprisonment. Herodias' 


[6386] 


February 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(36-47) 


(laughter (united Protestantism) will become the tool for the 
destruction of the most loyal servants of God.*' — Z *98-95. 

"So popular will federated churchianity become that to even 
criticize it will be a crime worthy of crucifixion in some form 
— socially and financially, if not physically. Politicians will 
quickly realize that their bread is buttered on that side, and 
be ready to enact legislation of any kind desired by the federation
."— Z '06-6. 

"None may be recognized as having any right to teach or 
preach or baptize or administer the emblems of our Lord's 
death, except those licensed by some orthodox member of the 
image."— Z '80-1, 2. 

UNIVERSAL REDEMPTION VS. UNIVERSAL SALVATION 

Question. — Do the Scriptures teach universal redemption 
or universal salvation or both? 

Our Lord Jesus has become the Redeemer of the Adamic 
race, having provided for their purchase by laying down his 
life on Calvary. He has not yet accomplished the work 
of purchase fully, however; for the application of the merit 
of his sacrifice is to follow his second advent, when the church 
shall have been completed. As soon as this purchase shall 
have been effected, the cancellation of the sin of the whole 
world will be made. Then the world will be turned over to 
Christ, freed from the penalty of original sin; and thereafter 
for a thousand years each individual member of the Adamic 
race will have a full opportunity, or trial, or judgment, to 
determine his real character, his real intention, his real attitude
 toward right and wrong, toward righteousness and sin, 
toward God and Satan. This will affect the living nations 
first; and then gradually those individuals in the tomb, as they 
shall come forth. (John 5:28, 29} This is universal redemption
, or deliverance, from the Adamic death penalty, universal 


purchase from death. But it is not- universal deliverance to 
life everlasting, which will be conditional. — Acts 3:19-23. 

In speaking of this great trial day, this judgment day for 
the world, the Apostle Paul says: "God hath appointed a day 
[future] in the which he will judge the world in righteousness
 by that man whom he hath ordained." (Acts 17:31) 
The word "man" in this case is evidently used in a figurative 
way to represent JeBus the^ Head of the Christ, and the church 
the body, who for a thousand years are to constitute the great 
Mediator between God and men, for the purpose of giving all 
mankind a full release from the Adamic penalty and a full 
opportunity to return to God. Then, "whosoever will" may have 
that opportunity, and by improving it may be found worthy 
of life everlasting. By the end of one thousand years he may 
demonstrate that he is both able and willing to keep the divine 
law, able because then he will be perfect, willing because he 
will have right heart intentions. All who reach this condition
 will be granted life everlasting by the Father. 

Adam was on trial in Eden for this life everlasting; but 
although perfect he failed at the very outstart of this trial. 
The world of mankind will enter upon their individual trial 
in a different way, however. They will start imperfect; but 
under the covering of Christ's work — not granted as an individual
 imputation, but through the operation of the mediatorial
 reign — they will be permitted to rise up, up, up out of 
sin and death conditions. Meantime, while having this privilege
, they will be permitted to demonstrate their Teal character
 — whether their will is determined for good or for evil. 
All who shall demonstrate that they love righteousness and 
hate iniquity shall receive life everlasting. But all who evidence
 that they prefer iniquity to righteousness shall be cut 
off in the second death. 


BEAR THOU ME UP 


Bear thou my burden, thou who bear'st my sin; 

Both are too heavy, Lord, for me to bear. 
Oh, take them, call them thine — yes, thine though mine — 

And give me calm repose in hours of fear and care! 

Let me not fret because of evil men; 

Smooth thou each angry ripple of my soul; 
Reviled, oh, let me not revile again, 

And ever let thy hand my rising warmth control. 

Let not my peace be broken when the wrong 
Conquers the right; but let me still wait on; 

The day of right is coming late, but long — 

Long right beneath the sway of the all-righteous One. 


When truth is overborne and error reigns, 

When clamor lords it over patient love, 
Give the brave calmness which from wrath refrains, 

Yet from the steadfast course declines one foot to move. 

When love no refuge finds but silent faith, 

When meekness fain would hide its heavy head, 

When trustful truth, shunning the words of wrath, 
Wiaits for the day of right, so long, so long delayed ; 

Beneath the load of crosses and of cares, 

Of thwarted plans, of rude- and Bpiteful words, 

Oh, bear me up, when this weak flesh despairs, 

And the one arm which faith can lean on is the Lord's! 


MOSES PRAYING FOR ISRAEL 

[The first fourteen paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Worshipping the Golden Calf," published
 in issue of July 15, 1902. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Keep Yourselves From Idols," published 
in issue of July 1, 1907. Please see the articles named.] 


THE REPORT OF THE SPIES 

[The first eight paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Guided in a Long Journey," published 
in issue of August 1, 1907. Paragraphs 9-11 were reprinted from article entitled, "Reporting from Two View-Points," published
 in issue of August 15, 1907. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "We are Well Able to Overcome It," 
published in issue of August 15, 1902. Please see the articles named.] 


JOSHUA, PATRIOT AND LEADER 


[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Be Strong and of Good Courage/ 1 
which please see.] 


published in issue of September 15, 1907, 


ENCOURAGING LETTERS FROM BRETHREN 


CAREFUL STUDY REVEALS HEW BEAUTY 

Dear Brethren: 

In the name of him who loved us and gave his only Son 
that we might have the privilege of coming into close relationship
 with him through that Son, our Redeemer. It is now 
some months since I sent my answers to the V. D. M. Questions
 for your consideration; and after a time I received a 
letter from you telling me that you had examined them but 
were withholding your decision until I had considered the last 
volume of the series, as you would like to hear my views 
upon it. 

It is now some time since I received that letter ; but I trust 
that you will excuse me for not answering more quickly. 


Circumstances have so arranged themselves that I have been, 
compelled to take up another occupation. The work has 
filled the time, and the adversary has placed numerous obstacles
 in the way. But we have Tead carefully and prayerfully
, and have studied it, thankful to the heavenly Father 
for the wonderful provision made foT his children. We had 
read the books of Revelation and Ezekiel before, but never 
with the same understanding that we now have. The more 
we study this volume, the more we see the beauty of the contents
 and the more we thank the heavenly Father for the 
great, grand privilege which is ours. Trusting that this will 
prove satisfactory to you, I humbly remain 

Yours by his grace, T, M. — England. 


[6387] 


(47-36) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


OPPOSITION A PART OF THE SUFFEBIHOS OF OHEIST 
Dear Brethren : 

Last week at our praise, prayer and testimony meeting, 
after having received The Watch Toweb for Dec. 1, the church 
here voted as a whole that the Secretary write you, expressing 
our continued love for each one of the Society's office force, 
and assuring you of our full harmony with you and our full 
confidence in their loyalty to the Master and to the work given 
them to do, and also telling you that we experience no difficulty
 whatever in still recognizing the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society as the channel through which the dear Lord is 
pleased to feed us with "meat" as it is due and needed by the 
church. Although opposition may arise from various quarters 
and the purity of your motives be much called into question, 
yet we trust that you will all experience that the Master is 
well able to make up in peace and quietness more than enough 
to offset all the attacks of the Evil One. As a help in this 
direction, remember that this is but a part of the sufferings 
whereunto ye were called. As ever, 

Your brethren in Christ, 

E. S. L. Ecclesia — VI. 
"HOT IGNOEANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES" 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: 

May grace abundant be yours at this special time; for the 
adversary is especially active now. But let us never forget 
that the Lord is guiding and keeping his people; and that as 
long as they remain his people, trusting him daily — yea, hourly 
—for promised grace and strength, he will not permit the 
tf stronge delusion" to have power over them. Satan is now 
posing as an angel (messenger) of light and mercy; and late 
developments indicate that he U endeavoring to deceive if possible
 the very elect through a system of imitation. 

Praying that the Spirit of the Lord may dwell in you richly, 
and that the coming election may rebound in his honor, glory 
and praise, and that we may soon roach "home," that convention
 of conventions, "the general assembly of the first-born" 
ones, I am 

Yours in the Master's service, 

G. L. E.— W. Va. 
PRESENT SUFFERINGS VS. FUTURE GLORY 
Dear Brethren in Christ: 

Loving greetings in our dear Redeemer's name. How we 
rejoice in the wonderful hope set before us; and what a privilege
 it is to walk in this narrow way, which leads not only to 
eternal life, but to immortality, as an heir of God and jointheir
 with his dear Son! T have been wonderfully blest through 
The Watcit Tower. Surely it contains sweet and comforting 
words from above! 

While we are striving to make our calling and election sure, 
and while we long to be in the presence of him with whom 
there is fulness of joy and pleasures for evermore, yet each 
di\y here grows sweeter and brighter because we are nearing 
homo. We look beyond the shadow of death, and rejoice to 
see not only ourselves blest, but all the families of the earth; 
for "the blessing of the Lord maketh rich, and he addeth no 
sorrow therewith." 

Dear Brethren, keep yourselves in the love of God, and 
remember the Apostle Paul's words that the sufferings at this 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall 
be revealed to us. May the Lord bless all who have made a 
covenant with him by sacrifice and all whose hearts love righteousness
, is the prayer of 

Your sister in Christ, M. G. — Pa. 
GRATEFUL TOR THE BLESSINGS OF THE TRUTH 
Dear Brethren: 

This being our first letter to the Society, I cannot refrain 
from just a word of gratitude for the wonderful blessirgs 


vouchsafed us. Through acquaintance with a good brother 
I can see something of the light which is now shining for us 
more and more toward the perfect day. I am humbly thankful
 for the grace bestowed, more especially because my wife 
and two others of the household are also now rejoicing in the 
truth — all within the past year. I thank the Good Father on 
behalf of Brother Russell, whom I have not met; and I pray 
always for the welfare of those active in "the channel." Mayall
 our loves abound to the praise of the Lord! 

Your brother by his favor, C. E. C. — Ohio. 
APPRECIATES THE TABLE OF THE LORD 
Dear Brethren: 

At this time I would like to express my appreciation and 
gratitude to my heavenly Father for the rich blessings which 
have come to us through his channel. I do not believe that 
the truth has ever been so precious to me as it is now. Surely 
the bounties which have come from our Father's table have 
been both invigorating and strengthening. How many times 
have we been lifted up almost into his very presence ! 

We would like to say that we know that the Society is still 
the official channel through which the Lord is dispensing his 
truth; and that it is our determination to remain faithful to 
this channel as we would remain faithful to him. We remember
 you daily before our Father's throne, and ask an interest 
in your petitions. 

Your brother in the one hope, F. M. — Ohio. 
THE LORD WILL PROVIDE 
Dear Brethren: 

Greetings in the name of God our Father and of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. The Wausau church has unanimously voted to 
send their Christian love to you at this time of special trial. 
It is our prayer that those in direct charge of the work continue
 to exercise the spirit of a sound mind at all times, and 
that they may be guided by the unerring council of the Lord 
in the breaking of the bread of life to the household of faith. 
W T e remember his promise that he will never leave us nor 
forsake us. 

The church here have decided to "abide in the ship," remembering
 that the Lord is able to make full provision for 
all those who are true to him, and that he will do so. Our 
Wausau Ecclesia, seven members, was reorganized a few weeks 
ago. All of these appreciate The Watch Tower very, very 
much. It is requested that Pilgrims be sent us whenever they 
are routed this way. 

Yours in his service, B. F. Q. — Wine. 

LEARNING TO NOTE DIVINE PROVIDENCES 
Dear Brethren : 

When I was a Methodist T prayed more than I watched; 
and hence the providences of God and the possible answers 
were practically lost to me. But immediately upon coming 
into the truth I began to notice God's providences throwing 
into my hands such articles as wo\ild answer my questions 
or make clearer a subject of particular interest, both in Towers 
and Manna, as well as in Studies. Moreover, I was surprised 
to find that others had similar experiences. 

Now for the last four months I have been reading four 
years of old Towers published before my time; and I am almost
 startled to see how every new issue of the Tower recently 
sums up and emphasizes those points of most prominence and 
interest which I have culled from the old Towers. 

We also find the same experience in class. The very subject
 that comes up for discussion the following Tower will 
read as if it had taken notes of the discussion. Indeed, the 
Lord is using the Tower, and the spiritually hungry can not 
mistake it. For this we are truly thankful. 

Yours in the Lord, Sister J. H. N. — Texas. 


THE WATCH TOWER EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 


This journal is published under the supervision of an 
Editorial Committee, at least three of whom have read and 
approved as truth each and every article appearing in these 
columns. The names of the Editorial Committee are: J. F. 
Rxxtherfobd, W. E. Van Ambubgh, F. H. Robison, Geo. H. 
Fisheb, W. E. Page. 


During the absence of the four members first named, and 
at their request, the following are serving as substitutes; 
namely, C A. Wise, W. F. Hudgings, J. Hutchinson and 
H. H. Rtemer. 

[This was the first appearance of this paragraph in this 
form.] 


THE NAME OF THE SOCIETY 


Many inquiries have recently been received in respect to 
what name the Society shall continue to use. Some of the 
ecclesias are using the names of Associated Bible Students, 
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society and International 


Bible Students Association. We would advise that the 
name which the Lord has been blessing the Society under so 
effectually in the past years be continued; namely, International
 Bible Students Association. 


[6388] 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., FEBRUARY 15, 1919 


No. 4 


VIEWS FROM THE 

With the great Peace Conference actually in progress and 
■with the League of Nations a virtual reality, Bible Students 
are in a position to see more in these two world-events than 
mere evolution of human thought and action. They are but 
the strides of divine Providence in this "great day of Jehovah." 
Blind indeed are all who cannot appreciate that this is the day 
of preparation for Messiah's kingdom, in which a perfect 
League of Nations will exist, yea, a binding together in common
 interest of all kindreds and peoples, and in which the 
Golden Rule will be the law supreme. While the Lord's 
people are tremendously interested in the outcome of the present
 Peace Congress and in the League of Nations which may 
there be born, nevertheless we look with still greater longing 
to the time foretold by the prophets of Israel when the kindreds
 of earth shall say one to another: "Let ua go up to the 
mountain of the Lord, "to the house of the God of Jacob; and 
he will teach us of his wnys, and we will walk in his paths," 
at which time "nation shall not lift up sword against nation, 
neither shall they learn war any more. 3 ' — Isaiah 2:2-4; Mi 
cah 4:1-4. 

We cannot but admire the high principles embodied in the 
proposed League of Nations, formulated undoubtedly by those 
who have no knowledge of the great plan of God. This fact 
makes all the more wonderful the ideals which they express. 
For instance, it has been made plain by President Wilson and 
the advocates of his ideas that the proposed League of Nations
 is more than merely a league to enforce peace. They 
would not have us consider it too exclusively from the standpoint
 of politics or of military relations. It should be considered
 as fully from the economic and social points of view. 
The President's idea seems to be that the League of Nations 
which he proposes should stand for world service rather than 
mere world regulation in the military sense, and that the very 
smallest of nations shall be participants in its every arrangement
. In other words, his idea undoubtedly is that the league 
shall not be established merely for the purpose of promoting 
peace by threat or coercion ; but that its purpose, when put 
into operation, will be to make of all nations of earth one 
great family, working together for the common benefit in all 
the avenues of national life. Truly this is idealistic, and approximates
 in a small way that which God has foretold that 
he will bring about after this great time of trouble. 

"MEN'S HEARTS FAILING THEM FOE FEAR" 

Bible Students are not alone in their realization of impending
 events, although they certainly have a clearer insight into 
the future because of their knowledge of the "inore sure word 
of prophecy," which is as "a light that shineth in a dark place 
until the day dawn." (2 Peter 1:19) Nevertheless it is true 
that "men's hearts are failing them for fear and for looking
 after those things' which are coming on the earth,'* as the 
Master foretold. (Luke 21:26) We quote the words of a 
well-known newspaper editor, Henry Watterson, as published 
in a special dispatch which he sent to the New York Herald 
and the St. Louis Globe Democrat under date of January 18, 
1919. Under tbe caption, "Bolsheviki on the Way/* he said: 

"This is a world of sin, disease and death. Permanently 
nothing can change or correct it. Twice it has gone to the 
dogs. May it not be a third time on the way? Assuming that 
the life of nations is mortal, even as the life of man, has not 
our world reached the top of the acclivity; and, pausing for 
a moment, may it not be about to take the downward course 
into another abyss of collapse and oblivion? 

"Society and politics are jointly and equally at fault. Under
 the pretense of liberalizing' the Government, its organic 
matter is being sacrificed to whimsical experimentation. The 
folly of the man is recruited by the folly of the woman. Leaders
 of femininism would abolish sex. To what end?— -Civil 
war in America — universal hara-kiri; the dry rot of wealth 
wasting itself in self-indulgence. Then a thousand years of 
total eclipse. 

"But the whirl goes on; the yachts sweep out proudly to 
sea; the auto cars dash madly through the streets; more and 
darker and deeper do the contrasts of life show themselves. 
How long shall it be when the mudsill millions take the upper 
ten thousand by the throat and rend them as the furiosos of 
the terror in France did the aristocrats of the regime ancient? 
As the Bolsheviki are overrunning Russia and, presently, all 
Europe, the issue between capital and labor is full of generating
 heat and hate. It is, in truth, an irrepressible conflict. 
Who shall say that, broken loose in the crowded centers ot' 
population, it may not any day engulf us all?" 

A POSSIBLE POLITICAL STORM CENTER 

One of the leading subjects now being discussed in the newspapers
 and magazines of Europe and America is that of the 


WATCH TOWER 

status of political prisoners who are being held in prisons 
beyond the cessation of hostilities. Not merely is amnesty 
being urged by the radical press, but conservative papers have 
taken up the agitation. Indeed the constitutionality of the 
Espionage Law, under which the political prisoners in this 
country have usually been incarcerated, is being attacked in 
both the Senate and the House of Representatives; and there 
is clearly a division of sentiment in both houses of Congress 
as to whether that law should not be immediately repealed, 
now that the war is over. Others hold that unwarranted discontent
 on the part of the laboring classes will result because 
of the prolonged imprisonment of political prisoners, and that 
from tha standpoint of expediency alone immediate steps 
should be taken toward their release. This class reason, and 
we think their reasoning sound, that there are already sufficiently
 serious problems of state to be solved without the creation
 of new ones. 

The Scriptures show that the conflict of masses and classes 
will be irrepressible, and that every possible step should be 
taken to avoid the further widening of the breach. The prolonged
 imprisonment of such persons as may have been sentenced
 for what in peace times would have been called heterodoxy
 may in national opinion tend to make martyrs of idealists
, who thereby may become the centers of agitational activities
 such as would interfere with the handling of after-thewar
 problems. Moreover, many of these political prisoners 
now behind prison bars would "be a real contribution to the 
general welfare rf released. 

We quote from the magazine, The Mirror, of St. Louis, 
Mo., as follows: 

"The world cannot be made safe for democracy so long 
as freedom of speech is denied the people. No man can be 
free who has not freedom of thought; and freedom of thought 
is impossible without freedom to express thought. Yet here 
in this great exemplar democracy of ours we are keeping 
men and women in prison for exercising freedom of thought 
and expression. There can be no law under our Constitution 
denying freedom of speech. This means that in peace freedom 
of speech is restored automatically. The offense of the people 
sentenced under the Espionage Act under special conditions 
was political, not criminal. They were not disloyal. They 
stood on the principle of freedom of speech, a principle which 
every American endorses. The right is held to be a sacred 
one. It is an abomination that they should be penalized for 
exercising that right. They are being persecuted for opinion's 
sake. That is abhorrent to democracy, which is government 
by discussion. The punishment abolishes discussion. It denies
 democracy. That cannot be a crime which is in accord
 with the fundamental principle of our government. 
To be democratic cannot be treason in or to a democracy. 
Such being the case, punishment for free speeqh is punishment
 for non-existent offense. Such punishment is 
unlawful. Therefore the people who are being punished therefor
 should be set free. The President should issue a proclamation
 of amnesty to all such. 

"We are not going to wreak vengeance upon the foe we 
have defeated. Why should we wish to wreak vengeance toward
 those of our own household who did no more than exercise
 their freedom of speech? There is nothing Buch persons 
can do now to obstruct the government, if they should be absolved
 of their special wartime offenses. There would be 
something fitting, something in felicitous conformity with the 
ideals for which we entered war, in giving liberty to individuals
 who held out for individual self-determination of their 
principles. A general amnesty for such would comport well 
with the armistice and with the peace to which that armistice 
is but the preface." 

A SINGULAR PBOCEEDING 

Notable among the thousand or more political prisoners now 
being held in confinement in this country are officers and 
members of our own Society. During the trial of Brother 
J. F. Rutherford and the seven brethren indicted with him, 
the Government's counsel admitted that he could point to 
"no vindictive spirit" against the Government in the minds 
of any of these defendants. It is therefore indeed singular 
that these members of the International Bible Students 
Association have been denied bail pending the appeal of their 
case, notwithstanding the fact that others more seriously involved
, seemingly, in violation of the Espionage Act, leaders 
of movements of the most radical order, secured bail with 
ease. Being consecrated children of the Lord, they can rejoice
 in tribulation and can rest in the confident and blessed 
assurance that all things shall work together for their good because
 they love the Lord. But even St. Paul, when imprisoned. 


[6389] 


(51-52) 


(52-53) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


appealed unto Oaesar and declared his rights as a Roman citizen
. Likewise we wonder why such decisions as the following
 in the United States Supreme Court would not apply in 
a case of this kind: 

"In Hudson vs. Parker, 156 U. S. 277, the Supreme Court 
said: 

*' 'The Statutes of the United States have been framed upon 
the theory that a person accused of crime shall not, until he 
has been finally adjudged guilty in the court of last resort, 
be absolutely compelled to undergo imprisonment or punishment
, but may be admitted to bail, not only after arrest and 
before trial, but after conviction and pending a writ of error.* " 
NOTABLE FTJUrLIiMEWTS OF PROPHECY 

Careful Bible Students have no difficulty in recognizing the 
fact that the prophet Ezekiel types Pastor Russell. It has 
been suggested that the period of Ezekiel's dumbness, one year, 
five months and twenty-six days (Ezekiel 33:21, 22, Comments
), during which he could give no new message, might 
have an antitypical application beginning with Pastor Russell
's death, Oct. 31, 1916, and ending with April 27, 1918. 
Just as at the end of Ezekiel's dumbness a public proclamation
 was made to the effect that the city was smitten, so in the 
antitype Christendom would be smitten with the onslaught 
of revolution on April 27, 1918, and the tidings of the event 
would be flashed throughout the word at about that date. A 
brother sends us another confirmation of this thought. We 
herewith reprint his letter : 

"THE CITY IS SMITTEN" 

"I wonder how many have noticed Ezekiel 33:21, which 
relates to Christendom's being smitten by the onslaughts of 
revolution, and have realized that the word of the fulfillment 
of this prophecy might be expected to flash throughout the 
world on or about April 27, 1918, a date which is one year, 
five months and twenty- six days after the death of God'& 
great watchman? As Ezekiel 24:27, this would be a sign, an 
indication to Christendom of the truth of Pastor Russell's commission
 from the Almighty. 

"In April, 1918, I watched the papers closely for an indication
 of the fulfillment of this prophecy. Not until April 
29 did I read anything which seemed important. What I then 
saw was a dispatch reading as follows: 

HtJN PBISONEBS OF WAB IN BUSSIA FOB BE VOLUTION 

"'Moscow, April 27, 1918.— (By the Associated Press)— A 
congress of war prisoners, representing all nationalities of 
the Central Empires, has been in session here for the last 
few days. There are several hundred members, all internationalists
, whose aim is preparation for a social revolution 
in Western Europe and the establishment of a soviet republic
. 

"No reply has been made to the German government's demands
 sent by wireless to Foreign Minister Tchitcherin concerning
 the status of war prisoners. The German note said 
that information * had been received that war prisoners in 
Siberia were forming revolutionary committees and stripping 
their officers of rank, that prisoners' committees at Omsk had 
decided to seize the Trans-Siberian railway station to prevent 
the return of prisoners to Germany, and that similar measures
 would be undertaken by the congress of war prisoners at 
Moscow. 

"'Germany urgently demanded disarming of the Omsk 
prisoners, the placing of Russian troops in charge of the 
camp, the segregation of Germans and Austrians, measures 
to insure the free return of prisoners from Siberia, and action 
by the Russian government to prevent the meeting of the 
Moscow congress. The arrest of the prisoners' committee 
and an immediate report also are demanded.' 

"This was the beginning of the Bolshevik movement in an 
organized way; and true to their aim, as stated in the above 
dispatch, when the armistice was signed, November 11, 1918, 
between the Allies and Germany, the Bolshevik movement 
made its presence quickly felt in Austria and Germany, having
 already been propagated in several European countries, especially
 the two just named. At this date, as we all know, 
Bolshevism is spreading like a dark cloud over Europe; and 
the seriousness of impending consequences is being more and 
more impressed upon responsible statesmen. 

"An Associated Press dispatch from Stockholm, dated October
 23, 1918, said that verified stories of scenes at Moscow 
and Petrograd prisons eclipse descriptions of the barbarism 
of the middle ages, and make the cruelty of the French Revolution
 seem almost humane. Only such a revolution could fulfill
 the tribulation of Matthew 24:21, and certainly in the 
earthquake referred to in Revelation 8:5. 

"A later dispatch from Paris, dated December 14, 1918, said 
that Bolshevik troops, consisting of 11 infantry divisions and 


cavalry and artillery, were marching toward Central Europe 
on a front of 400 miles, from the Gulf of Finland to the 
Dneiper river, according to dispatches from Rome. The advance
 began November 11, the day the German armistice was 
signed. 

"At an official inquiry into the activities of the U. S. troops 
in Russia, in the U. S. Senate, January 9, 1919, Senator 
King, of Utah, asked Senator Borah if there was no obligation
 upon the Allies to act in Russia when the Bolaheviki were 
releasing and arming 300,000 German prisoners and endeavoring
 to capture the Czecho -Slovaks. This confirms the first dispatch
 above quoted. 

" Another dispatch from Berlin (Associated Press, January 
11, 1919) states that Bolsheviki are slaughtering the Germans
 in the sections of the Baltic provinces which have recently
 come under Bolshevik control according to Herr Winning
, the former German minister to those provinces. He reported
 last Thursday extremely bad conditions at Riga and 
other parts of Livonia and Courland now in Bolshevik hands 
witti the Baltic Germans the object of the attack, recalling 
the historic St. Bartholomew's night, on the part of the Bolsheviki
 and their local Russian supporters. 

"In the January, 1919, American Review of Reviews, 
Frank H. Simonds in 'Problems of Peace' is reported as follows
: 

" 'Meantime behind all the discussion rises the shadow of 
Bolshevism, which may yet dissolve the Congress of Versailles
 -as Napoleon's return from Elba ended the Congress 
of Vienna. If Europe east of the tthxne and north of the 
Alps and the Carpathians falls into anarchy and chaos, new 
military operations may become inevitable; and the first task 
of the League of Nations, if then constituted, may be to 
wrestle with the new enemy, whicn is daily gaining strength 
in Germany, while retaining a firm grip upon unhappy Russia. 
Therefore it is at least possible that the Congress of Versailles 
may be unable to restore peace in the world, however sincere 
its efforts; and it may well be that the failure will not be due 
to the rivalries of the nations represented, but to the consequences
 of the storm which Germany loosed four years and a 
half ago.' 

"All of the above confirms October, 1917, as the divinely 
appointed time for the war phase of the great time of trouble 
to merge into the revolution phase of that trouble. See Z 
1915, p. 254, col. 2, lines 11-14. Note also that Volume G is 
posthumous in a very special sense, as is so clearly proved by 
interpretations of Ezekiel commented in The Watcii Tower 
for December 15, 1917, pp. 378, 379." 

' 'PEACE, PEACE, WHEN THERE IS NO PEACE' ' 

A significant editorial appears in the New York AmeiHcan 
of January 9. 1919, from which we quote: 

"Every dispatch which comes from Europe emphasizes the 
perils and perplexities of the real situation. While the potentates
 and diplomats are wasting time in politics, three 
menacing and terrible figures are looming larger and larger 
upon the horizon of. events. Foremost of this trio go Hunger 
and Cold and behind them stalks Revolution, with the Red 
Flag held high in its defiant grasp. 

"Long ago The American predicted that revolution would 
be the certain result of a conflict prolonged beyond the endurance
 of Europe's masses. And here stands the prediction 
fulfilled to the letter. 

"The censorships still keep from Americans all the unpleasant
 facts that can possibly be suppressed, but in spite 
of them some inkling of the truth peeps out between the lines 
of correspondence intended to be published. While private information
 conveys to those who receive the news that the 
public does not get-^-and the consensus of all this information 
is that revolt and revolution are everywhere in evidence in 
Europe. It is the French Revolution all over again, upon a 
stupendously greater scale. The common peoples of Europe 
have become so weary of war, they have been subjected to 
such sufferings and such horrors, the burdens heaped upon 
their backs have been so intolerable, that they are everywhere 
in an ugly and mutinous temper. Also they everywhere know 
their own strength and how easily they can overthrow the 
pillars of the ancient edifice of -society. 

"The revolutionary feeling is running high at this very 
moment in France and in Italy; and if Germany goes the way 
of Bolshevism, there is a strong possibility of the Latin nations 
going the same road. There is a dangerously widespread 
sentiment of revolt in England, too, made very evident by the 
fear or inability of the Government to punish the mutinous 
troops who have defied orders at Dover, Folkestone and even 
in London during the past sev6n days. 

"It is quite within the possibilities that if the Peace Conferance
 puts off its meeting too long it may not not have any 


[6390] 


February IS, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(53-57) 


place in Europe to meet. We do not mean that as a pleasantry
, either. We mean it exactly as we say it — seriously and 
earnestly. 

"The last persons who perceive revolution are always the 
ruling classes and especially the leaders in political power. 
They chatter the same old* formulas and phases of a past 
that is as dead as Rameses, and make their bows and speak 
their declamations and repeat their copy-book moralities and 
platitudes for all the world like another Congress of Vienna, 
while beneath their feet and above their heads and all about 
them sound the mutterings of revolution's coming earthquakes 
and tempests. 

"The world is sick of war, sick of talk, sick of endless 
diplomatic fiddle-faddle. The world wants rest and peace. 
And unless the peoples get what they wa*nt soon, they will take 
things in their own. hands and get what they want in their 
own way." 

"JEBTJSALEM, THE CITY OF THE GREAT KIlfG" 

Many years ago Pastor Russell pointed out from Holy 
Writ that Jerusalem is to be the capital of the world, when, 
the new era is fully established, probably from the year 1925 
on; and that from that center the natural seed of Abraham 
would bless all mankind. 

How little people in general realize that "God moves in a 
mysterious way" in the affairs of men, overruling their affairs
, all unconsciously to men themselves, in order to accomplish
 his purposes! Recently the Foreign Affairs Committee 
of the French Chamber of Deputies suggested Versailles as the 
capital of the League of Nations. The New York American of 
recent date asks, "Why Not Jerusalem?" We quote from 
the same issue of The American; 


"At a great meeting of Protestants, Catholics, GreekChurch
 and Jews last Tuesday at the Metropolitan Opera 
House to celebrate 'Jerusalem Redeemed* from Turkish 
power, it was suggested that Jerusalem be made the capital 
of the League of Nations. 

"The associations of Jerusalem, or Zion, do indeed give it 
a prestige in the eyes of all Catholics, Protestants, GreekChurch
, Jews and Mohammedans. And it would be in har* 
mony with that movement now attracting attention, but so 
little understood by Jew and Gentile, called Zionism, a movement
 meant to mean the common weal of all peoples and the 
peace of the world. 

"Zionism, according to the Basle program of the founders 
of the modern movement which goes by that name, aims only 
at the establishment of a legal home for Jews in Palestine. 
But Zionism as proclaimed by the prophets of the Bible means 
Palestine, a 'homeland for the Jews, not at all only for their 
materialities, but as a means to promote the glory of God and 
the uplift of man — or, to quote the Bible words: 'In order 
that through -thee [Israeli shall all the nations of the earth 
be blessed.' 

"The establishment of a neutral zone, such as Palestine 
would be, around Jerusalem or Zion, as capital of the world's 
League of Nations, would thus help to solve the rising question
, 'Who shall have Palestine?' 

"The importance of having a city of holy associations as 
the capital of a League of Nations is evidenced by the fact 
that there can be no lasting League of Nations unless these 
are in league with God, i. e., Righteousness and Justice." 


PROGRESS OF THE WARFARE 


The winter night of the world is past; 
The day of humanity dawns at last; 
The vail is Tent from the soul's calm eyes, 
And prophets and heroes and seers arise; 

Their swords and their deeds like the thunder go. 

Can ye stifle their voices? They answer, "No!" 


It is God who speaks in their words of might! 
It is God who acts in their deeds of right! 
Lo! Eden waits, like a radiant bride; 
Humanity springeth elate to her side; 

Can ye sever the twain who to oneness flow! 

The voice of Divinity answers, "No.'* 


IN RE THE USE OF THE WORD "CHANNEL" 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "That Servant and Fellow-Servants," published in issue of October 1, 1909, 
which please see.] 


THE WORLD'S 

"Then cometh the end, when he shall have delivered 

Since the New Covenant is the antitype of the old Law 
Covenant, we look back to the old covenant to see the shadow 
of the new. ^When the Law Covenant was to be entered into 
at Mount Sinai, all the people of Israel were required to 
agree to its terms before the covenant would be mediated 
by Moses. (Exodus 19:1-8) Before the New Covenant can 
go into force, the church must first be glorified. Then the 
great Mediator between God and man — Jesus the Head, and 
the church his body — will begin the mediatorial work. 

The Christ will be called the Mediator because of the 
covenant then inaugurated and the office which he will hold 
as go-between. In their imperfect and sinful condition, mankind
 will not he able to approach God directly. Until they 
are perfected, they may come only to the great Mediator. God 
and men can have no direct communion until men shall have 
reattained the image of their Creator, lost in Adam. This will 
be at the close of the reign of Messiah. 

INDIVIDUAL BESPONSE NECESSARY 

The basis of this New Covenant to be made between God 
and Israel, later to include all the world, is already provided
 for by the death of Jesus. No one will make progress 
in the new dispensation, or even come upon the highway of 
holiness, until he shall accept the terms of the covenant by 
his own voluntary act. During the mediatorial reign, Christ 
will bring as many as will come into harmony with his arrangements
, to the condition where they will gain eternal life. 
As the great antitypical priest, he will have all the qualifications
 necessary to assist all who desire to come into relationship
 with God. ' The reign of a thousand years is for the purpose
 of helping mankind up to the place where they can keep 
God's holy law and where they may be given all the blessings
 to be bestowed under this wonderful covenant. 

But this covenant cannot go into effect until the Mediator 
shall have made full satisfaction to justice for Adamic sin. 
The application of the satisfaction price for the sins of the 
world will not* be done until the end of the Gospel age ; for 
the church, covered with the merit of Christ, must" finish 


FINAL TEST 

up the kingdom to God* 1 — 1 Corinthians 15:24. 
their course, that the merit thus be fully freed from all obligation
 before it will be available for the world. Thus we see 
the economy of God's plan. All the world will enter upon 
the new age, and be turned over to the Mediator with a clean 
slate — everything wiped out. But their depravities and imperfections
 still exist, and will form a barrier between them 
and God; hence the need of the mediatorial reign. 

Each individual of the world must cooperate in the matter 
of his own salvation ; else he will never be raised up out of his 
condition of degradation and sin. All needed helps will be 
provided, and every stumbling-block removed from his path. 
All that now allures, blinds and deceives will be gone; lor 
Satan will be bound, and every evil system and hindrance to 
righteousness will be banished. So those who* refuse to take 
advantage of the great blessings and uplifting influences then 
provided, and who turn their backs upon the light then shining
, will be left to their darkness and iniquity, and will, after 
a reasonable time, be destroyed in the second death — annihilation
. 

The obedience required will not be merely the act of saying
, "I accept Christ and accept his law"; but their faith in 
him will be tested and proven. Those who will really come 
into harmony with the new kingdom will seek to do God's 
will. While the outward blessings will be general — the change 
of conditions, allaying of storms, equalization of temperature, 
wonderful inventions, etc., and the lifting of the curse as a 
whole — yet the personal blessings will wait for the individual 
to manifest faith and obedience. These favors will come only 
through personal faith in Christ and conformity to his righteous
 rule. The long period of a thousand years will be 
granted to give every member of the race of Adam, himself 
included, a full, fair opportunity to come back into direct 
and personal relationship with his Maker. 

THE PATHEB TO TEST PERFECTED BAOE 

When our Lord shall have finished his millennial reign, 
the world will be turned over to the Father before their final 
testing. The mediatorial kingdom is to do a judging work 


[6391] 


(S7-58) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa, 


amongst mankind. Its work will be to instruct and uplift 
every willing soul, bringing all to the grand original perfection
 in which their first father, Adam, was created. Whosoever
 will not obey that Prophet-— the great Messiah, Head and 
body — "shall be destroyed, from amongst the people." 

After all the willing and obedient shall have been brought 
up to perfection, at the close of the thousand years, the kingdom
 will no longer remain in the hands of the Mediator. It 
will be delivered up to God. Satan will then be "loosed for 
a little season/' in order that men may be tested and 
proven. All being then perfect, those who have cultivated the 


proper condition of heart-loyalty to the Lord will be fully 
able to stand such a test. This trial at the end of the Millennium
 will not be a part of the thousand year's reign. The 
world will have no mediator at that time. They will need 
none. They will be directly in the hands of God. Therefore 
it is represented in Revelation that the penalty of utter destruction
 to come upon those who fall in the final teBt will be 
a direct judgment from the Father. Satan will be destroyed 
at the same time. This destruction will be the "everlasting 
fire prepared for the devil and his angels" — the second death. — 
Matthew 26 :4h 


JOYFUL IN TRIBULATION, PATIENT IN ADVERSITY 

[The following beautiful letter was written by our President, Brother J. F. Rutherford, on the night preceding the removal
 of our dear brethren to Atlanta. It was handed to a member of the Committee at the railroad station in New York 
City as they departed. Probably the Lord has held back its publication for a purpose. Recently, however, it has been sent 
in circular form to the various ecclesias. We also reproduce it in this issue of The Watch Tower in order to preserve it as 
a memorial of cheerful submission to the will of God.] 


TO THE DEAR SAINTS IN JESUS CHRIST:- — 

So many of you have written me and my companions in 
bonds words of love, sympathy and encouragement, and our 
opportunity for writing is so limited, that we ask all of you 
to take this as an acknowledgment of your sweet messages. 
I know that like Onesiphorus (2 Timothy 1:16) you are glad 
to "refresh us," and that yoti "are not ashamed of our chains." 
And we, Beloved, count it a great privilege to suffer with 
Christ Jesus, our blessed Head, our Lord. Looking back, I 
praise the Lord for all the sweet privileges I have had of serving
 you, and the sweet fellowship in Christ I have enjoyed with 
you. 

How wonderfully the Lord is fulfilling his precious promises 
to us! He bought us with the precious blood of his Beloved One. 
He guided us and orew us to Jesus, opened the' eyes of our 
understanding, justified us and begat us to the divine nature; 
and there we become prospective members of the body of Christ. 
Our dear Lord then made us his ambassadors to represent him 
in this unfriendly world, to proclaim the message of glad tidings
 to all who have the hearing ear. What joy has filled our 
hearts as we have gone forth, conscious of the fact that we 
were representing our great King! True, the world has not 
known us. even as it did not know our Master. He said to us: 
"It is enough for the servant to be as hi 3 Master"; and thankful
 indeed we are that we have had this privilege. Some have 
had the hearing ear; and some of you we have had the privilege
 of showing the pathway that leads to life. I am rejoicing 
to see you standing steadfast in the faith. 

GBATEFUL FOB PAST PRIVILEGES 

On June 2, 1907, one year after my consecration, I entered 
the Pilgrim service; and on June 2. 1018. I delivered my last 
discourse before our trial. It was eleven years of blessed service
; and how I thank the Lord for this privilege! And now, 
if I can only see and be with Jesus, how I shall delight to tell 
him of my deep gratitude to him and of my love for him for 
all these blessed privileges! I have seen you in distress and 
have wept with you. I have seen you in joy and have rejoiced 
with you. I have endeavored to be faithful to my Lord ; and 
because of my persistence in telling out the blessed message of 
the kingdom and the resurrection blessings coming to mankind 
I am called in question before the ecclesiastical and the civil 
powers of the world — another blessed favor the Lord has 
granted to me as his willing slave. 

Brother "Russell hnd promised the Seventh Volume. The 
Scriptures show that it must be published, When without selfpeeking
, but by the will of God, I was placed in the position 
of executive of the Society which the Lord had organized for 
his harvest work, I felt it my sacred duty and privilege from 
the Lord to see that the Seventh Volume was published. And 
when the Lord through two of his faithful servants (now my 
fellow prisoners) produced the manuscript, I felt that he had 
laid upon me the privilege and duty of seeing that this message
 went to his people. The book was published at a time of 
much opposition to the Society and its management. It was 
born in travail. The adversary has always opposed the progress
 of the work of the Lord. We were not at all surprised to 
find the storm raging about us at the time. Almost day and 
night we labored to get the book out and to you. Some of you 
had the opportunity of helping, and did so with gladness of 
heart. We give thanks to our Father and our Savior Christ 
Jesus for the privilege of having a part in publishing this, the 
last of the series of Studies in the Scriptures, which the 
people in the centuries to come will read with deep interest 
and profit and will give God the glory. 

Brother Russell's last expression concerning the harvest 
was that it would end in the spring of 1918. We believed this; 


and believing it, we felt that the Seventh Volume must go out 
before the harvest closed. My attention was directed to Jeremiah
 51:60-64. I understand it to mean that Volume Seven 
must go to the people; hence the organization to distribute 
it and the pushing of the work. You, beloved in the Lord, responded
 to the call and joyfully went forth as living stones tied 
to the hook, and oast it amongst the people — into the waters of 
the Euphrates; and it sank down and illustrated how Babylon 
shall fall. Ten million copies of "Fall of Babylon" you distributed
 with willing hands. The sole thought in the mind of 
each of us was to do the will of the Lord of the harvest and 
finish his work before the night should come on. There never 
was a thought in our minds of interfering with the Government
 or of violating any law. 

The spring of 1918 came; and the evidences began to increase
 that the harvest was closing; and the reapers were crying
 to each other : "Hasten the reaping, we pray," Forgetting 
your tired, sore feet you hurried on; and the Lord blessed you 
richly. Are you sorry now that you put forth such an effort ? 
I am persuaded from" the letters I have received that you are 
not sorry, hut glad. Rejoice now, Beloved; the work of harvesting
 the church is done. The dark night is coming rapidly 
on, and soon we shall be home. There may be a little more 
work for the faithful to do in calling the world's attention to 
the message and in aiding the Elisha class. Ask the Lord to 
give you wisdom and to direct you; and he will do it. 
FAITHFTJL SERVANTS OF OTO LORD 

More than twenty years ago Brother Russell told us what 
would happen, (See Z 1898, p. 0-5) True to what he then 
foreshadowed, Herodias, beinj? angry and long desiring to destroy
 us, seized the opportunity made possible by the distress 
of tne nations. Salome danced "before Herod. The demand was 
made and duly met. You are familiar with the story of how 
many of our dear faithful brethren have been arrested and 
thrown into prison. It was charged that we were in the employ
 of the German Government. Our books were seized and 
searched for evidence; hut none was found, because none ever 
existed. We were arrested and haled into prison, charged with 
conspiracy and sedition, the evidence being that we published 
The Finished Mystery and aided our brethren concerning the 
draft. We knew what would be the result. God had foretold 
it long ago. (Jeremiah 36, 37, 38} We knew that we were 
absolutely innocent. Not one of us ever had the thought of 
doing wrong. We were wholly absorbed in doing what we 
feel the Lord gave us to do; namely, to make known the message
 due to be published. Because of faithfulness to our duty 
I and my sik companions find ourselves in prison cells. Are 
we repining? No, dear Brethren; we are happy. We have 
clear consciences, faithfully serving our Master and King. We 
hope and expect soon to make report to him. His approval 
alone we desire and crave. We count not our lives dear unto 
us, only that we may be counted worthy to see the Lord. We 
feel that we have fought a good fight; and if our work is finished
, we await the judgment of our present Lord, whom we 
love and serve. 

A brief history of the trial we have written. We are advised
 that seven who opposed the Society and its work during 
the past year attended upon the trial and lent aid to our prosecutors
. We warn you, Beloved, against the subtle efforts of 
some of them to fawn upon you now in an attempt to get hold 
of the Society. Take heed to St. Paul's admonition in Romans 
16:17, 18. Be gentle and kind, yet firm, with all. We have 
come to the end of the way. Let us take heed to what we have 
been taught. 

MEEKLY SUBMISSIVE TO GOD'S WILL 

In all this trying experience the Lord ha* repeatedly shown 
us that he is hearing us up in his hand. He ha* permitted 


[6392] 


FfiBRl'ARY 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(58 59) 


seven of us to he sentenced together, for some reason known 
to him the eighth brother being left behind and not yet sentenced
. We spent seven days and nights in the dark cells of 
Raymond Street jail, Brooklyn. Then we were removed to 
Long Island City jail, and placed in seven adjoining cells on 
the corridor. Here for seven days we have had fellowship together
, being permitted to assemble in one cell every morning 
for our Kethel service. We have been treated very kindly here. 
And now on the seventh night in this prison we are informed 
that this is to be our last here, and that on the morrow we 
shall be taken to Atlanta. This journey will begin July 4, 
when all the allied nations are celebrating the birthday of the 
American nation. 

During our imprisonment the other prisoners have been 
respectful to us and have treated us with deference. The offii
'er> have been kind. We have expected to be governed by the 
prison rules, and have gladly obeyed them in letter and in 
spirit. Not a tear of regret or of bitterness has been shed by 
"lie of the seven. We have wept for you, Beloved; we have 
sorrowed because of our separation from you. We have prayed 
much for you, that the dear Lord will protect you from the 
wolves and will take you safely into his fold. We know that he 
loves you more than we can, and that he will care for you 
where we cannot. 

Sorrow not for us, dear Saints; for we are in the Lord's 
hands. Thus far he has led us, and he will lead us on. Your 
pathway may be fraught with many trying experiences; but 
remember his words, "Fear not them that can kill the body, 
hut fear Him who may destroy the soul [new creature]," "Fear 
not, little flock ; it is your Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom." I know that you are now counted by ecclesiasticism
 as the ofT-scourings of the earth; and that you are a 
gazingstock while you are companions of prisoners. But forget
 all these things. Remember that our Master made himself 
of no reputation, that he endured the cruel cross, despising the 
^hame, all that he might do the Father's will. What a blessed 
privilege, then, to be counted worthy of bearing some of the 
reproaches that fell upon him! God has favored you and us 
above the ancient worthies, who endured hardships, sufferings 
and persecutions far greater than we have endured. He has 
favored us above the angels of heaven, who desired to look into 
his plan, but were not permitted. He has favored us by calling
 us to the heavenly calling far above angels, powers and 
principalities, setting before us the greatest of all prizes. He 
tells us that we can have this prize only by passing through 
much tribulation, and that the feet members must have & 
goodly part of this persecution. Behold, then, the persectition 
and the prize; behold the cross and crown! We can have the 
latter only by gbidly taking the former. Shall we then falter 
or fall hack? 1 am persuaded of you, dear Brethren, that you 
will not falter; but that when the fiery chariot comes near, 
you will gladly take to it. It is the greatest privilege ever to 
get into that chariot. It means a nexme of glory; it means 
a crown of life; it means to see and be like Jesus; it means to 
behold the face of the great Jehovah. 

LONGING FOB THE DAY 

Poor blind world. It is mad. It is drunk w T ith the wine 
of Babylon. It is staggering now like a drunken man, and is 
about at its wit's end. (Psalm 107:27-20) Soon the Prince 
of Peace will speak to the raging waves of the surging masses, 
and then quietness and calmness will result. Then will follow 
the desire of all honest people of all nations. If we have withstood
 the storms and have been faithful to the Lord, we mav 


have a part in blessing those who have used us ill because they 
did not know us, even as the same class did not know our 
Master. 

The dark night is at hand; but remember that it is darkest 
just before dawn of the bright day, Soon the Son of Righteousness
 will fully arise with healing in his beams; and it we 
have proven faithful, we shall experience the sweet promise of 
our Lord, who said: "Then shall the righteous shine forth as 
the brightness of the sun in the kingdom of the Father/' {Matthew
 13:43} Then will the world know us, not as seditioniirts. 
but as true patriots, that we are not enemies but friends, anxious
 to do all for mankind. The Lord has promised that the 
world shall know who has been born in Zion. (Psalm 87:5) 
Will you be born there? I hope you will. I hope I shall s.ee 
you there. Then will be fully appreciated the words of our 
dear Brother St. Paul that "these light afflictions endure but 
a moment, and they are working out for us a far more exceeding
 and eternal weight of glor\," (2 Corinthians 4:17' >Now 
you are despised and hated of all nations; and now is the time 
to remember the words of our King: "In patience possess ye 
your souls"; "He that endureth to the end the same shall be 
saved." 

EXHOETATIOK TO LOYALTY 

We have heheld the degraded characters in these prisons. 
We walked by a prisoner who boasted that he had murdered 
his fellow man. He was sentenced to ten years. Seven men 
were there who had given their all to help mankind; and they 
were sentenced to twenty years of four counts, or eighty years 
each. We have beheld much sorrow and suffering. What joy 
awaits mankind when "the ransomed of the Lord shall return 
[from death and degradation] and come to Christ with songs 
of joy upon their heads!" What joy to have a part in returning
 and blessing them! 

Beloved in the Lord, the history of the ages is behind you; 
and a sad history it is. The glories of eternity are before you 
and its grandeurs are beyond the dreams of man. Long have 
we hoped and prayed for the coming of God's kingdom of right* 
eousness. We are standing at its very portals now. Let us 
hold fast a little while, and we shall enter into the presence 
of our King. Then by his grace we shall see him face to face. 
Oh, that will be glory for me and for you ! 

The guard has graciously granted me a candle in my cell, this 
being my last night here. It is past midnight; my candle is 
burning low; and I must close. Never have I loved you so 
much, and never have I desired so much to talk to you. 

And now tomorrow, as prisoners for the truth's sake, we 
go to Atlanta. We go in the strength of the Lord. We seven 
have learned, to love each other with an ever increasing love. 
We may not again see you in the flesh. We commend you 
to the gracious and loving arms of our Father and our Lord 
Jesus Christ. Oh, how my heart yearns to do something for 
you! But our dear Lord will do what T cannot. His grace, 
peace and love be multiplied unto you. Be faithful, be brave, 
be loyal, be true; and may the Father of mercies and God of 
all comfort bless, keep and comfort you. 

Your brother and bond-slave of our blessed King, 

J. F. Rutherford. 

P. S. — We, associate prisoners of our dear Brother Rutherford
, desire to express our hearty concurrence in the above 
message of love and admonition, 

W. E. Van Ambtjrgh, A. H. Macmiixan, Gf.o. II. Fi°her, 
Clayton J. Woodwobth, R. J. Martin, F. H. Robison. 

July 3, 1918. Long Island City, 1ST'. Y. 


CHRISTMAS JOY— OUR INCARCERATED BRETHREN 


Dear Bretjirkn Everywhere: 

Since our brethren in prison cannot write all the dear 
friends, in their behalf I wish to express the great gratitude 
they feel to each and every one of the dear brethren who sent 
them some remembrance Jor Christmas, and this without regard
 to intrinsic value of the gift. 

Many of their presents were packages of good, substantial 
and wholesome food. Since receiving it they have much improved
 physically. The oranges and grapefruit have been specially
 beneficial and probably have saved them from much 
sickness and suffering. The other foods have built them up 
physically, and each one is feeling much better. They are very 
grateful to the Lord for these temporal blessings and are very 
desirous of expressing their thankfulness and gratitude to the 
dear ones sending the gifts. Especially do they desire to express
 their thankfulness and appreciation of the great love that 
prompted the gifts. They were very much touched by the sweet 
messages accompanying the remembrances. One dear sister 
wrote, "Sugar was scarce, and we did without several days to 
save sugar to make some goodies for you." Of course the 


brethren had to shed some tears for such love; and all they 
could say was: "God bless them for their loving kindness!*' 
Never this side the veil, dear friends, will you know how much 
good you did and how much joy you brought to these ambassadors
 who are prisoners for Christ's sake. 

More than 150 prisoners in the Castle had nothing for 
Christmas, and so our brethren got a list of them from the 
officers, and out of their own abundance made up a little 
Christmas package for each of the unfortunates; and thus 
many were made happy. Even the officers were so pleased 
that they were heard to say, "Never was anything like that 
done at this place before." And so we can truly say, the Lord 
was in the prison that Christinas. I knew each of you would 
be glad to know these things, because each of you had a part. 

Our brethren wish me to say for them that they love you 
one and all very much — every one of the Lord's dear little 
ones — and if it be his will they greatly desire to come to you 
and serve you and make known their love unto you. 
Your sister by his grace, 

Harriet B. Fishes. — <?<r. 


[6393] 


THE CITIES OF REFUGE 

[Thia article was a reprint of that entitled, ''Fleeing for Refuge," published in issue of October 15, 1902, which please see.J 


ISRAEL WARNED AGAINST COMPROMISE 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "Choose You This Day Whom Ye Shall Serve," published in issue of October 15< 

1902, which please see.] 


GOD'S HAND IN A NATION'S LIFE 

{The first and last paragraphs of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "Israel Renewing the Covenant," published
 in issue of September 15, 1895. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "Choose You This Day Whom Ye 
WiU Serve," published in issue of October 15, 1902. Please see the articles named.] 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


ENCOURAGING LETTER FROM AUSTRALIA 
Deab Brethren: 

Greetings in the Lord. I am writing to inform you of the 
progress of the work since my arrival in Australia from South 
Africa. The brethren here were greatly pleased to see me after 
the long delay in my arrival, owing to the lack of shipping; 
and without loss of time we took hold of the situation. I am 
very grateful to God for smoothing out the pathway; and I 
feel sure that there is a great work yet to be accomplished in 
Australia. 

Since coming here, I have been trying to get into personal 
touch with the brethren as widely as possible. Landing at 
Sydney, I spent a few days with the dear brethren there. Coming
 on to Melbourne, I found a convention in progress and had 
the great privilege of tendering some word* of encouragement 
to the assembled brethren. Since then, I have been over to 
Adelaide, South Australia, where there is a real live class of 
over seventy members, and up north to Brisbane. Queensland, 
where I attended a local convention. We are having a general 
convention in Melbourne at the Christmas holidays; and (D. 
V.) I hope to visit New Zealand in January and West Australia
 in February or March. Of course these plans are subject 
to the work continuing and the door of opportunity remaining 
open. As long as we have strength and opportunity, so long 
will we continue to make the most of these glorious privileges 
of harvest service; and sooner or later — sooner, we believe, 
than later — we hope to hear the Master's "Well done!" 

The prayers of all the dear friends here ascend daily for 
you, dear brethren, and for the dear afflicted ones, that God 
may strengthen you for your heavy responsibilities and may 
comfort them in their trials of faith and patience. With rich 
love in the Lord I am 

Your brother in hi3 glad service, 

Wm. W. Johnston. — Melbourne. 
A WORD FROM SOUTH AFRICA 
Dear Brethren: 

Greetings in the name of our I*ord and Savior! In sending
 you herewith my financial statement for Nov. 1918, I am 
glad to be able to report that Cape Town is once more free 
from the pestilence which visited us in October and wrought 
•such havoc, although it is said that we may look for a return 
of the trouble in February. Meanwhile everything has become 
normal again. Our people are nearly all well, and our classes 
and lectures are very well attended. 

On Nov. 22 last, one of our moat beloved members, an elder 
of the Cape Town eeclesia and a student of some eight years 
standing, died of tuberculosis in the hospital here. His name 
was Geo. F. W. Gatton. He led a most saintly life; and we all 
feel that his fidelity has won for him the crown of life. I 
have to report iTonTDurban the death by a most painful accident
 of a dear brother who has been some years in the truth. 
His name was E. Borrison, a Scandinavian by birth, a man of 
deep religious convictions and a most devoted nature. We rejoice
 to think that he also is now with the Lord whom he loved 
so well. 

The sales have been a great deal affected by the advent of 
the pestilence, and to some degree also by the curtailment of 
the free literature. Ever remembering you before the heavenly 
Father's throne, I remain 

Your brother and servant in the Lord. 

Henry Ancketill. — South Africa. 
NO DOUBT A3 TO THE CHANNEL 
Dearly Beloved tn the Lord: — 

We, the members of the Batavia Eeclesia, wish to express 


our love and confidence in you, our fellow laborers, and especially
 to the new Board. We resolve that by the Lord's grace 
we will work in harmony with you throughout the coming year. 
We also wish to extend our deep appreciation and thanks to 
the dear brethren who have so faithfully served us for the last 
six months. The Watch Tower is without doubt the channel 
that the Lord is using to serve his people with "meat in due 
season"; and each issue is better than the one preceding, satisfying
 the hungry soul. Assuring you of our prayers ascending 
daily to the throne of grace, we are 

Yours in the Lord, 

Batavia Eccxesia. — A T . Y. 

GREAT BLESSING FEOM PRESENT TRUTH 

Dear Ones at The Watch Tower Office: 

Greetings and love in our Beloved. How glad I am that 
when the last volume came out I did not go to looking for 
mistakes! Perhaps if I had, I might have been out in the 
cold, empty world. Our dear Brother Howlett by God's grace 
assisted me in 1917, when I needed it. Praise the Lord for his 
assisting grace! His promises are most wonderful. Praise his 
name for ever and ever ! 

Since coming here over a year ago we have been privileged 
to have two lessons a week in that volume, one in the Revelation
 and one in Ezekiel; and oh! I cannot tell you the great 
blessings it has brought to us. 

I am in harmony with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract 
Society. Since 1901 The Watch Tower has been a welcome 
visitor to our humble home. I shall never forget the sweet 
words of that servant of God who showed me God's great love. 
I am trying to appreciate the sacrifices you all are making 
to cheer and comfort the remaining ones on this side of the 
vail. May God's great love and spirit be in and with you, and 
also with the dear ones in bonds and in prisons, yea, and with 
all who have given their hearts fully to the Lord, whether the 
years on this side be many or few. 

Your brother by his grace, 

A. H. Dooley. — Kans. 

EXHORTATION TO FAITHFULNESS 
Dearly Beloved Brethren : 

Grace and peace be with you increasingly! T want you to 
know the great blessings I have received from The Watch 
Tower, especially that of November 1. The article, "Man Proposes
, God Disposes," was especially good. Who cannot see 
that these precious truths cannot be had elsewhere? For years 
I held, and still maintain, that the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society is the only religious institution that God favors 
at this time. Truly it is well named. I shall ever pray for 
you. Be strong, be courageous, be steadfast, be faithful even 
unto death. With much love, 

Your brother in Christ, 

C. B. Wnxis. — Canal Zone. 
DAILY PRATING FOR THE SOCIETY 

Dear Brethren: 

I have been made to rejoice greatly over the Towers this 
year, and especially the one pertaining to "Joseph and His 
Brethren," Aug. 1, and subsequently. 1 am daily praying our 
Father's continued guidance and blessing upon you in this time 
of severe trial and testing. I am confidently looking forward 
to the time when we shall be permitted to engage in the work 
which has so rejoiced our hearts in times past. 
Your brother in the Lord, 

L. J. B,— Ala. 


(60-63) 


[6394] 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH 1, 1919 


No. 


STAND FAST— STRIVING TOGETHER 

"Stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the faith of the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your adversaries
; which ?s to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God. For 
unto you it is given in the behalf of Vhnst, not only to believe on him, but also to 
suffer for his sake.'' — Philippians 1:27-29. 
No text of Scripture is more applicable to the time in 


which we are now living than are the above words of St. Paul 
to the Philippian church. Perhaps also no other passage has 
been more comforting to the feet members of the body of Christ 
during their experiences of the past year than has this one. 
Surely all have been called upon to suffer much, and we may 
have further privileges along this line. Yet it is not the suffering
 that especially concerns the Lord'3 people, it being a 
"light affliction" compared with "the glory that shall follow," 
if we prove faithful. When we realize the great favor that 
has been bestowed upon us in our being appointed ambassadors 
of the great Messianic Kingdom, now being established upon 
the ruins of the old order, we count it indeed a privilege to 
endure hardship and trial in connection with this glorious message
. Such was the spirit of St. Paul, in the words of our 
text. He had been held up to ridicule and scorn, beaten almost
 to death, thrown into prison and his feet made fast in 
the stocks. Yet in it all he was able to sing praises to God 
for the privilege of suffering for Christ's sake, for the truth 
and for the brethren. 

THE MESSAGE OF THE HOUE 

The first statement in our text is especially important now. 
Not merely the admonition to "stand fast," but the manner in 
which we should stand is the thing of essential value. The 
admonition must be taken in its entirety. The Apostle would 
have us understand that to be pleasing to the Lord we must 
"stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for 
the faith of the Gospel. " We find some today who claim and 
probably think that they are standing fast; but instead they 
are turning aside and not striving together with their brethren 
in proclaiming the full message of the Gospel. Because of 
some difference of opinion respecting secular matters, they 
apparently feel it their duty to raise questions that cause division
 in the ranks of the Lord's people, and then start independent
 movements that tend to confuse the minds of the 
saints and to give rise to roots of bitterness. Let us, dear 
brethren, avoid any and every spirit that would hinder our 
striving together in the dissemination of the truth now due. 
Nothing would please the adversary more than to have the 
ambassadors of Christ's kingdom contend one with another on 
non-essentials, thereby to have their minds distracted and their 
efforts slackened regarding the real work to which they have 
devoted their lives; namely, the proclaiming of the message 
regarding the utter downfall of- Babylon and the overthrow of 
Satan's empire. 

The commission of the Christ, Head and body, is found 
in Isaiah 61:1-3; and the special message of the feet members
 is the proclamation of "the day of vengeance of our God." 
The evidence that this particular message would be given by 
the last members of the body of Christ on earth is emphasized 
by the fact that our Lord omitted this portion of the prophecy 
when he read from the book of Isaiah in the -synagogue at 
Nazareth (Luke 4:16-22), and then declared: "This day is 
this Scripture fulfilled in your ears." His thought manifestly
 was that only the portion of the prophecy which he 
had read to them was fulfilled at that time, and that the portion
 which he had failed to read would be fulfilled at a later 
time by his body members. It is therefore the duty, as well 
as the privilege, of the Lord's people at this time to "proclaim
 the day of vengeance of our God" ; and if they fail to 
do so, the very stones would cry out; for the prophet's words 
are inspired of God and must be fulfilled. — Luke 19:40; Zechariah
 9:9. 

"ONWARD, CHRISTIAN SOLDIEBS!" 

It is with sorrow that we see some retreating from the 
front ranks of the battle. It is not surprising to find some 
such excusing their action by claims of steadfastness and special
 courage. The faithful and triumphant in battle do not 
desert in the hour of need, however, but strive together with 
one spirit and one mind, as the Apostle enjoins. Those who 
are looking for pretexts to turn aside will surely find a motive
 satisfactory to themselves for their course, while those 
who are anxious to do the Lord's work will be looking for opportunities
 through which they may vigorously co-operate in 
the closing work of the church in the flesh. — Isaiah 52:7. 

A few in certain localities, under the influence of leading 
minds, have felt obliged to withdraw their support of the Society
 on most trivial and unbelievable grounds. Some have 
magnified and distorted certain statements in The Watch 


Toweb, and under the misconception thus developed have 
withdrawn from classes and have sought to draw away others 
after them. The more influential in the service any such has 
been, the more disturbance his course causes among the dear 
sheep when he thus deflects. Some have even found fault 
with the statement in the Towns of May 15, 1918, which said : 
"When the government asks to borrow his money, and gives 
its promise to pay in the nature of a bond, if he can consistently
 do so he should buy the bond." Reference to the article 
in question will disclose the fact that this is part of a statement
 given to the public press, and properly showed that our 
Society was not opposed to the methods used by the government
 in carrying on the war, and that its work is strictly a religious
 one. All such questions are matters of individual con 
science; and nobody can or should assume to regulate the 
conscience of another in such matters. This has ever been 
the policv of The Watch Tower, as our readers well know. 

Occasionally some one, not sufficiently appreciative of his 
privileges and apparently seeking to avoid Christian hardships, 
will write us respecting our dear brethren who are now 
suffering in a special manner for Christ's sake, and ask : 
"Could they not have avoided their experience?" We answer: 
Yes; they could have avoided it. So could Jesus have avoided 
his suffering. Likewise St. Paul, St. John and other faithful 
martyrs of the past nineteen centuries. All of them could 
have avoided much suffering had they failed to disseminate the 
truths then due. But why should we speak about avoiding 
such experiences when the Lord's Word clearly indicates that 
hereunto are we called, and that we shall be "joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, if so be that we suffer with him"? And whv 
did Jesus suffer? Because he held forth the message of trutii 
and reprobated the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, the 
clergy of his time; because he called them whited sepulchers; 
because near the end of his ministry he went into the Temple 
and drove out the ecclesiastical money changers; because* he 
went against the common thought of the day! Thus it was 
that he suffered. "If so be that ye suffer with him, ye shall 
be glorified together" with him. "Unto you it is given in the 
behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer 
for his sake." 

WHY WE WEBB ILLUMINATED 

Why did the Lord permit us, in the end of the age, to 
come to a clear conception of the divine plan? Why do we 
enjoy a better understanding of these things than did the 
early church? Is it merely for our own enjoyment that we 
are thus illuminated? We think not. If so, doubtless Go J, 
who is no respecter of persons, would have been pleased to 
give all the members of his church an equal knowledge of 
his plans and purposes throughout the age. We believe 
that our heavenly Father had a twofold object in giving 
us a clearer understanding of his great plan at this time: 
first, that we may have the broadest possible foundation for 
our faith in this "evil day," thus enabling us to stand; second, 
that by means of our knowledge of the immediate establishment
 of the kingdom and of the time of trouble incident 
thereto, we may be able to co-operate more intelligently in the 
great work which he has for his saints to do now, prior to 
their glorification. 

Seeing, therefore, that the commission of the feet members
 of the body of Christ is "to proclaim the day of vengeance 
of our God" (Isaiah 61:2), it behooves every one who aspires 
to membership in that body to take advantage of present opportunities
 for proclaiming this very message and the glad 
tidings of the kingdom which shall follow shortly. We are 
to tell the people that Babylon is tottering to its fall, and 
that on the ruins thereof Christ's true kingdom will be 
erected. We are to tell the great company of "foolish virgins,'* 
the majority of whom are still in darkness in the Babylonish 
systems, that the Lord has great things in store for them 
and for all humanity. We think that those are making a 
grave miscalculation who have folded their hands and coneluded
 that there is nothing more to do on this side of the 
vail in respect to proclaiming the kingdom message. Perhaps
 ere long the Lord will show us that instead of there 
being nothing to do, a mighty work is just before us — the 
bringing of the message of truth to the thousands upon thousands
 of "foolish virgins" who are still slumbering and sleeping
, so far as a knowledge of the divine plan is concerned. 

The Lord's people, the feet members, are the only ones 
[6395] (67-68) 


(68-69) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


on earth who now possess a knowledge of present truth. 
We stand upon the very threshold of the Messianic kingdom. 
Within a comparatively short time the Lord purposes to 
bring about the downfall of ecclesiasticism, acquaint the 
great company class with present truth, glorify the last members
 of the church, and then install into office beyond the vail 
that great multitude of servants of the bride, her companions
 who shall follow her. If this be the work of the 
immediate future, whom will the Lord use to bring the 
message of truth to the foolish virgins? Manifestly he would 
not use anybody as a teacher of the plan who did not himself
 understand the plan. Who in all the earth is equipped 
to carry this message to our brethren in darkness, unless it 
be the remaining members of the Christ on this side the vail ? 
Some have been disappointed to find that the church is not 
yet glorified. But undoubtedly the Lord, who knoweth the 
end from the beginning, has had a purpose in keeping us on 
this side the vail beyond the date of our earlier expectations. 
Surely great privileges of service are juat ahead. 

Just how the Lord may bring about the conditions for a 
world-wide witness for the truth ere Babylon's final downfall
 is accomplished is not for us to say. But we know that 
he is very resourceful. He has unlimited means of accomplishing
 his great designs. It is not at all improbable that the 
persecutions of the Lord's people, past, present and future, 
may be used of him in arousing such an interest in the 
truth as we have never before witnessed on earth. Already 
much interest is manifested in the ease of our brethren in 
bonds, and numerous questions are being raised as to why these 
brethren should be confined without even being admitted to 
bail pending a hearing of their case! The Lord in his own 
due time and way will fully answer these queetions. 
SEVEBAL PERTINENT FACTS 

It is a well known fact that our brethren now in bonds 
have given the best years of their lives to religious work, and 
to that exclusively. They were so busily engaged in it that 
they had not even taken notice that an espionage law had 
been passed by congress. It was called to their attention for 
the first time when objection was raised to "The Finished 
Mystery," and then the publication of that book was immediately
 stopped. The government counsel during the trial 
admitted that he could point to "no vindictive spirit" against 
the government existing in the minds of any of these brethren. 
In view of these facts it is not surprising that great interest 
is now being taken in the case by people who otherwise may 
not have known of the existence of the International Bible 
Students Ass'n. It is not strange that they should now be 
asking why these men should be held in prison without even 
the privilege of giving bail pending their appeal, kept away 
from their friends, away from the preaching of the Gospel 
of the kingdom of God, and from doing the great religious work 
to which they have devoted their lives, and have done so for 
years without financial remuneration. What is the purpose
 of keeping them in prison ? What good can be accomplished
 by compelling highly refined Christian gentlemen to 
daily associate with thieves, robbers and murderers regarding 
whose conviction there could be no doubt? These are questions
 which demand an answer. Newspapers are taking it up. 
Undoubtedly the Lord is working out some grand design, and 
it is for everyone who loves the truth to hold himself in readiness
 to co-operate with the Lord in whatsoever way hemay 
indicate. In this connection we quote from an article clipped 
from a Chicago magazine of recent date, under the caption 
"Persecution on account of "Religion": 

"We hope our readers have read and carefully noted the 


opinion pronounced by Judge H. B. Howe, of the U. S. District
 Court in Brooklyn, N. Y. } in the case of the "Russellites
," tried under the Espionage Act. Perhaps nothing 
more startling has come from the Federal bench since the 
I>red Scott decision. The condemned men are* sent to jail 
for twenty years not only for conscience's sake, but for preaching
, under a somewhat novel and perhaps despised name, a 
form of religion to which in substance many thousand people
 are devotedly attached, for which many would willingly 
die. Whether it should be called "Christian" or not, makes 
no difference. It appeals to the highest and most frequently 
published teachings to be found in the religious writings of 
the world. Whether the defendants in Judge Howe's court 
were too close literalists or not does not matter. Their form 
of religion, like that of the Society of Friends, does not de* 
pend upon the letter of any Scripture, so much as upon the 
spirit of many great teachers at their best. The only heresy 
of the believers in this religion is that they really believe 
and try to do what millions of people say, but neither do 
nor believe. 

"Take for instance that passage in the Sermon on the 
Mount in which man is bidden to let 'the light' in him, that 
is, good will, 'shine' like God's sunlight, at all times 'upon 
the evil and the good.' Suppose a man catches the spirit o* 
this remarkable teaching and finds that he is simply inhibited 
from going to war. Must we treat him, as the Roman government
 treated such people, as an enemy of the State? Suppose 
you have the ingenuity to explain away the passage above; 
suppose, as some do, you make, 'Blessed are the peace-makers' 
mean: 'Blessed are they who fight and punish their enemies'; 
nevertheless the sublime law of the good will, the one profoundly
 civilizing force in the universe, comes some day surging
 back upon your mind more incontrovertible than ever. 
What more substantial is every day of the war proving than 
the vast need of men to obey this vital law of our humanity? 

"And now we are told by a judge that men who try thus 
to obey are criminals! Whether this is good law or not 
makes no difference. The result is exactly what we abhor 
in Kaiserism, namely, persecution for conscience's sake. If 
this is necessary in the name of Liberty, we begin to wonder 
next, What is Liberty? What ought those men to do who, 
though loving their country with all their hearts, are bound 
by the mightiest of human forces — the inward vision and 
conviction; must they obey God or man? We had thought 
hitherto that we had an answer, preserved inviolate in the 
Constitution of the Republic. We had not thought that 
any judge, fallible and subject, like other men, to human passion
 and prejudice, could set the rights of men's conscience 
aside. We should suppose that the nation had better uses for 
men of moral courage, simply proclaiming what every man 
deep in his heart wishes that all other men might believe, than 
to shut them up in our vile jails. Bo we like to publish to 
the world that a hundred million of us are so afraid of the 
spread of religion of brotherhood as to discover a terrible national
 peril in the effort of a handful of men to persuade the 
rest of us to believe the greatest things in the Bible? 

"What now if this 'war to end war' proves, as history has 
often shown, that the despised people were nearer to practical
 wisdom than the statesmen and prime ministers! What 
if they are the humble forerunners of a new movement of 
humane and spiritual religion, which shall put an end to war. 
as the preachers of violence, compulsion ami punishment ha^ 1 
never been able to do with their superior mi^ht? Old Gamaliel 
was no enthusiast, hut he was the one wise man among the 
rulers of his people/' 


PUNISHING FELLOW MEMBERS 


Some of the dear brethren who are earnestly striving to 
conform their lives to the divine Word are noticing from the 
reading of Studies in the Scriptukes, Volume 6, more clearly 
than ever before the divine regulations respecting methods of 
procedure as set forth in Matthew 18:15-17. 'Of these, some 
need to be reminded that it is not necessary for them to follow
 out all the regulations therein set forth. If they choose 
to overlook the brother's fault, it is their privilege to do so. 
"But if they cannot overlook the fault, if it continues to injure 
them, they may not speak of the matter to others, but must 
follow the Lord's direction there given as the only method by 
which they can seek redress. 

Some inquire respecting the kind of punishment to be 
meted out to those who are contumacious, who will heed neither 
the private cry of the brother against impositions nor the 
counsel of two or three brothers nor even the voice of the 
church. "What punishment should be applied to these?" we 
are asked. Our reply is that we are not at liberty to punish 


our brother at all. The Lord purposes to do that himself. 
He tells us that at the present time we are not competent to 
judge the degree of each other's weakness according to the 
flesh, and consequently could not judge the degree of each 
other's responsibility as the Lord would justly measure it. It 
is our privilege to seek to stop the injury which is being done 
us; but we may not execute any penalty on account of things 
of the past. 

The whole lesson of our Lord's direction in Matthew 
18:15-17 is to the effect that we are to strive thus to regain 
our brother's love and to stop him from further injuring us. 
If we succeed in so doing, in the same measure we regain 
him as our brother, we recover him. It is not the thought, 
then, that the brother should be brought before the church 
to be punished ; but merely that as a last resort he be brought 
before the ecclesia for reproof, for correction, in order that he 
may see the error of his course and acknowledge it and ceast 1 
to do wrong. At every step the effort should be to turn the 


[63961 


March 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(69-71) 


brother to a right course, not to expose him, not to injure 
him, not to punish him; for the Lord has said: "Vengeance 
is mine; I will repay." — Romans 12:19-21. 

According to this Scripture the very moat that the church 
could do would be that, after having vainly endeavored to 
get the brother to repent and reform, it should withdraw 
special brotherly fellowship from him until such time as he 
would express willingness thereafter to do right. Then he 
should be received again into full fellowship. 


Even treating the brother for a time as "a heathen man 
and a publican" would not mean to do him injury, to castigate
 him, to pillory him, to expose him to shame or contempt 
before the world. We are not permitted to do any of these 
things to heathen men or to publicans. In the meantime the 
brother may merely be treated in the kindly, courteous way in 
whieh it would be proper for us to treat any publican or Gentile
, withholding the special rights or privileges of greetings 
or voting opportunities that belong to the church as a class. 


THE LAST TO WELCOME THE KING 

"And King David sent to Zadok <md to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak unto the elders of Judah, saying. Why are ye the 

last to bring the king back to his house?*' — 2 Samuel 19:10, 11. 


We stand today at a time in earth's affairs that is aptly 
illustrated in an incident of Israelitish history which occurred 
nearly thirty centuries ago. The kingdom of Israel had been 
thrown into a state of confusion through strife and war, rebellion
 and threatened anarchy. Through long years of deep 
scheming and subtlety the wicked Absalom had divided the 
sentiments of the people and had alienated their hearts from 
King David his father, and now had headed an open revolt 
which rent the realm from l>an to Beersheba. In fear of the 
consequences King David had left Jerusalem and had fled to 
the region beyond Jordan, accompanied by a few loyal, faithful
 subjects. When the battle took place between the opposing
 forces, the king's army was victorious. The rebellion was 
subdued; and Absalom the would-be usurper met a violent 
death. 

King David, however, did not thereupon attempt to repossess
 himself of the kingdom, which was rightfully his. On 
the contrary he waited for Israel to express a desire for his 
return. In consequence of their being left without an official 
head, conditions waxed worse and worse. The record says: 
"All the people were at strife throughout all the tribes of 
Israel." (2 Samuel 19:9) Finally the people in general began
 to deliberate upon the state of affairs; and they recalled 
that David had delivered them out of the hands of their 
enemies. Then they saw their mistake in joining the rebellion
, especially now that their leader Absalom was dead; 
and they began to clamor for King David's return. 

But the elders, the very ones who should have been the 
first to welcome the king back to Jerusalem and to see that 
order was restored, delayed to perform their solemn duty 
in behalf of the people. The people approached the elders 
and said: "Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing
 the kinff back?" Furthermore, King David himself sent 
word to Zadok and Abiathar the priests, asking them to inquire
 of the elders of Israel as to why they were the last to 
welcome him back to Jerusalem. 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE CLERGY TODAY 

The elders of Israel fitly correspond to that class which 
occupies the position of lords and reverends before the peoples 
of Christendom at this time; namely, the Catholic and the 
Protestant clergy. From the beginning it has been the natural 
order of things for mankind to look to their respected leaders 
for guidance. At the first advent of our lord the question 
was asked on every hand, "Have the rulers [the Jewish priests, 
scribes and elders] believed on him?" Just so it is in the 
world today respecting the declaration of our Lord's second 
presence. Some indeed rejoice to know that the King is here, 
and that soon he will bring out of confusion order and everlasting
 blessing to all the families of the earth. The vast majority
, however, have waited for some expression of approval 
of the message from their elders, the clergy. But as a class 
the clergy are the last to welcome back the King. Indeed, 
many of them are ''willingly ignorant" of his presence. — 2 
Peter 3:5. 

For the past forty years the great King of kings and Lord 
of lords has been sending to the peoples of earth the message 
of his second presence, through the antitypical Zadok (meaning
 righteous; i. e., members of the little flock) and their associates
, who have had the light of present truth. Furthermore
, it has been the duty of all such to administer a rebuke
 to the clergy class for their willing ignorance of the 
Lord's return. With all the advantages of education, time 
and money with which the great teachers of Christendom have 
been endowed, it might be reasonably expected that they 
would have been the very first to discern from the Lord's 
Word the time and the manner of his second advent. They 
have been relieved of the worry and the hardships of ordinary 
business life in order that they might have abundant time 
and opportunity to study the Bible and to give forth its 
comforting and timely messages to their flocks, who pay them 
liberally for such service. They have taken the money; but 


many of them have indeed utterly neglected to fulfil their 
part of the contract. They have ceased to study the Word of 
the Lord, except to criticize and destroy it. Meanwhile the 
■people have been fed upon husks instead of the bread of life, 
the only satisfying portion. 

Now, after nineteen centuries of waiting, our Lord Jesus, 
the rightful King of earth, has come to establish his longpromised
 kingdom. But the multitudes of Christendom, led 
and dominated by their false spiritual guides, neither recognize 
the right of Jesus to the throne of earth nor desire the establishment
 of his kingdom. Doubtless many would prefer that 
the King of kings might not reign, lest they might be torn 
from their pedestal of honor and disadvantaged in the eyes 
of the people through the vengeance of the New Ruler, occasioned
 by their part in the rebellion against him. 

CHUBOH AND STATE 

In times past the civil and the religious powers of the 
world have been yoked together for mutual support, and have 
defended each other. As far as the state was concerned, it 
mattered not whether the religion was a true or a false one, as 
long as it kept the people in subjection to the ruling powers. 
Civil rulers have ever favored the religious system that has 
best served this end. Ecclesiastical rulers have nv turn looked 
to the civil powers for compensating favors; and in the days 
of their power they have exacted much. Thus the two were in 
affiliation. 

Around these two there has always been gathered a 
privileged aristocracy of wealth, brains and education, which 
has ever kept them at the head of social influence and power. 
The tendency has been toward corruption, in both civil and 
ecclesiastical circles, not because the people themselves have 
necessarily grown worse — though this is indeed true in many 
instances — tout because enlightenment has become more general
, and with it temptations to cupidity have greatly increased
. Thus social order has been menaced; while true religion
 based upon the atoning work of Christ has descended 
to a low ebb. Hence many in Christendom today find the 
words of the prophet expressing their disconsolate sentiments 
precisely: "We hoped for peace, but no happiness is here; for 
a time of cure, and behold here is terror. When I would comfort
 myself against sorrow, my heart is faint in me. ... Is 
the Lord not in Zion [Christendom] ? Is her King no more in 
her?"^Jeremiah 8:18,19. 

From the standpoint of Christendom there is indeed little 
to be seen in the way of encouragement. The clash of conflicting
 creeds and their discord with the notes of the Divine 
Revelation are most painfully manifest. In consequence of 
this and of the general awakening and the mental activity of 
our day, which discredits the creeds, we find faithlessness bold 
and outspoken, rampant in every denomination ; while, ignoring
 the Bible doctrine and its terms of salvation for the 
church now and for the world during the " times of restitution
," the clergy instead preach politics, morality and humanitarianism
 as the only essentials of the Christian life. 
THE WOED OF GOD PEOFANED 

The Bible account of the fall of the race in Adam, and 
hence of the necessity of its redemption through Christ, having 
been thus discredited, the entirely antagonistic theory of human
 evolution has been substituted — that man was evolved 
from lower animal forms of life, by his own efforts aided by 
chance and circumstance ; that he has now reached a higher 
plane than was ever before realized; and that he will continue 
to make progress indefinitely. The clergy have instituted 
what they are pleased to term a ' 'higher criticism" of the 
Word of God, by which the sacred record has been whittled 
and trimmed to 'fit the modern state of development of human 
philosophies and sciences (often falsely so-called) thereby to 
lend seeming sanction to the idea that the philosophy and 
the science of today are the climax of perfection and the 
essence of wisdom. They slash the ruthless scissors of criticism 


VII- -37 


[6397] 


(71-72) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Ta. 


into the miracles of Jesus and the inspired writings of the 
apostles, and whittle out of divine testimony such words and 
thoughts as best serve their scientific conceptions of truth and 
of Christianity. They have placed the Bible and its holy 
writers down on a par with all profane history and historians, 
declaring that much of the Word of the Lord is fiction, and 
that it is impossible for any other than "higher critics' J to 
determine where the dividing line between truth and fiction lies. 
But soon the tide will turn; and the people will see that 
they have been deceived concerning the truths of God's plan 
by those whom they have looked to as leaders in religious 
thought. Then they will turn in disdain to all who have been 
"willingly ignorant of the Lord's presence — the clergy— £hose 
who have not wanted the Lord to reign; and they will inquire 
and will demand an answer to the question, "Why are ye the 
last to welcome back the King?" 

THE RETURN OF THE KINO 
The very nature of the present distressing world conditions
, as well as the sure word of prpphecy bearing thereon, 
convinces us that lasting relief to suffering humanity will 
come neither through human uplift nor through socialism nor 
through governmental regulation nor through any league of 
nations, however, desirable such an arrangement might be, 
but only through the power of the Christ, Jesus and his 
church, bringing order out of chaos by the establishment of 
the universal kingdom of peace and righteousness, now even <at 
the door. We wait not for the new King as the sweet babe of 
Bethlehem ; nor yet as "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself
 a ransom for all 1 *; but we wait for him who, having been 
"put to death in flesh, wa* quickened [made alive] in spirit" — 
raised from death a spirit being, whom Jehovah hath highly 
exalted above his former condition as a man, yea, higher even 
than was his spirit condition before he became a man. "Him 
hath God highly exalted" to the divine nature, far a,bove 
human nature or angelic nature or any other nature titan that 
of God himself. Such are the nature and the majesty of 
earth's new King, for whom the whole groaning creation longs 
and waits, whose presence and kingdom will bring to mankind
 the blessings of life purchased with his own precious 
blood, given when he was a man. 

The same King whom Herod and his soldiers crowned with 
thorns and mocked with royal robes, the same King whom 
Pilate crucified between two thieves at the instigation of the 
Pharisees and the elders of Israel, and over whose dying 
body was placed the inscription, "Jesus, the King of the Jews " 
— this same king we now look for, but no longer in a body 
of flesh and humiliation; for that body was prepared for our 
sin-offering, and was laid down in death for man's redemption
. He comes now "in power and great glory," the express 
image of the Father's person, and in the glory and the majesty
 of the Father's person, and in the glory and the majesty 
of Jehovah, "whom no man hath seen nor can see" ( 1 Timothy 
6:16), the same whom Saul of Tarsus saw miraculously, but 
whom his companions saw not. Earth's new King is that same 
wise, sympathizing, loving Savior who wept and died, but who 
now is greatly changed in nature and glorified by divine power ; 
a new organism, but the same being; not flesh, but spirit; not 
weak, but powerful; not corruptible, but incorruptible; not 
human in any sense, but the divine Lord, to whom has been 
given "all power in heaven and in earth." — 1 Corinthians 
15:20,42-44,50; Philippians 3:10. 

As men come to realize, through troublous experiences 
now upon the earth, the futility of lasting happiness amidst 
human selfishness and depravity^ the number of those who 
will long to welcome back the King will increase. They will 
come to appreciate that the eradication of selfishness from 
the earth is a work for the great heavenly Physician, far beyond
 the power of imperfect mortal man. 

THE TIKE OF TROUBLE 

And now, particularly since the end of Gentile times, the 
"Good Physician" has begun to lay bare, cut and scrape the 
evils of a selfish society, exposing depths of corruption never 
before realized by the patient. As he continues to cauterize 
proud flesh, we realize that he purposes to spare no pains to 
make hia work effective. The patient will again suffer and 
groan, and for a time he may prefer the disease to the cur?. 
But the exposure and the eradication of human selfishness must 
progress; for our Lord is a good physician. Eventually the balms 
and ointments of love and righteousness will be applied. Even 
these may smart for a time; but soon they will begin to 
strengthen and heal, and the poor sin -sick world will be restored
 to health and everlasting happiness. 

But while some would rejoice to see enemies bound and 
society relieved of many of its selfish, life-sapping ulcers, nevertheless
 they seem to realize that so just and impartial a Judge 
might also cut off some of their own long-cherished ambitions
, and might pain them by touching their personal selrlshneses
 and their lust for power and for reverence. And they are 
right. This new King is bringing to light all the hidden things 
of darkness, and will correct private as well as public selfishness
 and sin. He will lay justice to the line and righteousness
 to the plummet; and the hail of hard truths shall sweep 
away the refuge of pbariaaical lies, while the waters of truth 
shall overfldw the hiding places of error. (tsaiah 28:17) 
Who would not say that this very work of overflowing the 
hiding places of Babylon by the waters of truth has been 
in progress for some time? And may not we expect the Lord to 
permit his people to continue fffieir efforts in this respect until 
Babylon's utter downfall is accomplished? Surely, dear 
Brethren, great privileges of service are just ahead. 

The message to the clergy of Christendom at the close 
of the Gospel harvest, even as that which Jesus administered to 
the rabbinical class at the end of his earthly ministry, is one 
of scathing rebuke for their unfaithfulness. A prominent 
characteristic of the clergy is their desire for special honors 
and titles. They are known as Reverend, Right Reverend, 
Very Reverend, Divine, D.D., etc., etc. But Jesus said: "Be 
not ye called Rabbi, neither be ye called Master; for one is 
your Master, even Christ; and 'all ye are brethren."— Matthew
 23:8. 

PERSECUTORS OF OOP'S PEOPLE 
When the various denominations began their existence, 
having more of the spirit of Christ than they now have, they 
recognized no distinction between clergy and laity, even as the 
Bible knows no distinction. All were brethren in Christ Jesus. 
Even in the days of the Reformation the faithful ones whom 
Uod used as his special servants were hot known as Reverend, 
D.D., etc., etc., but merely called themselves Peter Waldo, 
John Wycliffe, John Knox, Martin Luther, etc. Unpretentious, 
like Jesus and t^e apostles, they were intent upon serving God, 
and therefore became the servants (ministers) of the church. 
But now the clergy of all Protestantism, as well as of Papacy, 
are far from being servaht$. They are lords. They have itching
 ears, loving the approval of men. As pride and worldliness 
have come in, godliness and power have gradually departed. 
"God resisteth the, proud, but giv.eth grace [favor] to the 
humble [-minded]." (I Peter 5:5) For this reason they 
have lost their power to expound the divine Word ; and today 
we find them forced to confess their ignorance of the plan 
of God. lliey appeal back to the early reformers for their 
information and confirmation, and thus confess that they have 
less light than had their predecessors. They do not teach 
the truth themselves: nor will they permit it to be taught 
by others, if they can prevent it. 

Throughout the age the Lord's consecrated people have been 
more mercilessly persecuted by the clergy class than by any 
other body on earth. It is even so today. The Second Psilm 
shows that they wottH "take counsel together, against the 
Lord, and against hia anointed [the Christ body}." This has 
especially been true since the beginning of the "rage" of the 
nations, at the end of Gentile times. Because of this unjust 
and wicked course of the rulers of ecclesiasticism, the Lord 
said that he would "have them in derision" and would "vex 
them in his sore displeasure." (Psalm 2:2-5) True to his 
promise the Lord has sent the message whereby thpy would 
be held in derision. The prophecy of Ezekiel and the symbols 
of the Revelation are filled with this very message from the 
Lord. It is likened to "hail" (hard, distressing truths) as it 
has fallen upon the clerical heads of Christendom. (Revelation
 16:17-21) This work will undoubtedly continue, in the 
Lord's proyidence, until Babylon's utter downfall is accom 
pi i shed. It is his program for this day. 

No wonder the "elders of ecclesiasticism, the clergy, have 
been the last to welcome back the King! Nevertheless both 
the King and his kingdom are coming. In fact, they are already 
here! The present troubles in church and in state are the 
results of the influence of the long-promised kingdom of 
Christ, now in process of establishment. Worldly men know 
not of this ; for this kingdom "cometh not with outward show" 
or display. But the Lord's children have been forewarned, 
and have known what to look for. They have known that 
"the day of the Lord would so come as a thief in the night." — 
Thessalonians 5:2. 

THE WORLD'S ONLY HOPE 
Those who know that the Christ and his kingdom constitute 
the only lasting remedy for the wrongs and the woes of men 
should be pointing the" groaning creation to this fact rather 
than to the poultices of human contrivance, which can do no 
leal good. Tell them about the return of the King. Tell 
them that he is the great Prophet, Priest and King whom 
the world needs; that as Prophet he, together with the church 
his Iwdy, will cause an accurate knowledge of Ihc truth to 


[6398] 


March 1, 1915 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(72 73) 


rill the whole earth; that as Priest he will be ready to succor 
and pardon all who, under that knowledge, shall' turn from 
-sin to righteousness. Tell them that his death was the relemption
 price lor all mankind; and that the return of the 
rung is to bind Satan completely and to set all of his captives 
:ree, if they will accept the liberty of sons of God under the 


terms of the Npw Covenant. God pity those who are the last 
co welcome back the King! 

"Tell the whole world these blessed tidings; 

Speak of the time of rest that nears; 

He who was slain on Calvary's mountain 

Soon is to reign a thousand vears." 


GOD'S PROVIDENTIAL CARE 


Almighty God, the Lord of heaven and earth, 

thou, the Source and Center of each sphere, 

The Lord of being, throned afar, whose hand 

I'pholds the weight of words, yet, wondrous thought !- 

Nor day nor night too occupied to note 

E'en when a sparrow falls to earth, whose eyes 

A watch-care keep o'er every child of thine; 

Whose guardian angels daily shape the course 
Of those who love thee more than life itself; 
Whose chasteninar rod doth guidp them in the way 
Tli at leads to endless life! —how sweet to feel 


Thy presence ever near, to know that thou 
Dost never sleep nor slumber while thy child 
In time of need doth feebly cry to thee. 

thou in whom no shade of turning lies, 
Thou changeless and invariable One! 
Though all unfaithful prove, yea, though the earth 
And heavens depart, by faith we clasp thy hand, 
We calmly rest our weary hearts on thee, 
Assured that thou wilt ne'er forsake, that we 
Shall be forever precious in thy Bight! 


LOVE'S VICTORY OVER FEAR 

"There is no fear i)i love; but perfect lore casteth out fear." — 1 John 4:18. 


Our text seems to .tell that love and fear are opposites, 
that to whatever extent the one prevails the other is impossible
. We cannot imagine that among the angels there is 
any fear of the Almighty or of one another. They are perfect
. Their relationship with God is perfect. According to 
the divine arrangement and regulation, where there is perfect
 love there is no fear in the sense in which this word is 
used in our text. 

When sin and the divine sentence of death entered the 
world, this matter was well understood. The penalty may 
have caused fear, but not of an abnormal kind ; for God's 
penalty is just and reasonable, and even the pronouncement 
of that penalty was accompanied with a hint of ultimate deliverance
. We find, however, that the great adversary of God 
and man has largely taken advantage of mankind and has 
planted in the human mind an erroneous fear, especially as respects
 the Almighty God. The Seriptures speak of this fear 
and say: "Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of 
men." (Isaiah 29:13) These precepts of men which misrepresent
 the divine character, attitude of mind and purpose 
have been largely the result of false teachings which, the Bible 
declares, have come from the adversary himself. The Apostle 
Paul says: "Many shall depart from the faith [the true 
faith], giving heed to seducing spirits [evil spirits] and doctrines
 of devils." (1 Timothy 4:1) These doctrines, have 
come down to us in the creeds formulated during the dark 
ages; and because of their influence the whole world is more 
or less in fear. 

THE FEAR THAT BEINGS WISDOM 
This same abnormal fear of our Creator is manifested 
nmong the heathen, where it has been engendered by the 
same evil spirits. The heathen have more or less dread of the 
future and of whatever they think has power over them. Many 
of the heathen seem to realize that the demons have great 
power ; for they offer sacrifices to propitiate these evil beings. 
8t. Paul intimates that this was the case in his time, sayincr 
that the heathen sacrificed to devils and not to God. (1 
Corinthians 10:20) Thus by means of deluding the minds of 
men, the adversary has brought the whole world to the plice 
where fear ia the controlling power. Indeed, in some parts 
it has been true in the past; in others it is true to a considerable
 extent now; and in the near future it may be true 
that the civil power will hold that any religion which does 
not teach something of future torment will be an unsafe religion
 for the people to have. 

There is a totally different kind of fear, however, which is 
eminently proper and Scriptural. As we come into the family 
of God. and grow in grace and in knowledge, we begin to get 
the right focus upon the heavenly Father's character and plan. 
From the Scriptures we learn that "the fear of Jehovah is the 
beginning of wisdom." (Psalm 111: 10; Job. 28:28) We 
do not understand this to mean the unreasonable fear, the 
slavish fear, which brings torment, but rather that fear which 
is properly of the Lord and which is enjoined in his Word. 
That proper fear, or reverence, teaches us true wisdom. Then 
we begin to get things right before our minds, to see what God 
really has said and what he has not said; and as we come to 
learn of the justice of God, the mercy of God, the love of 


God, the provision whicjj he has made for man's salvation, 
a deeper and deeper love for him comes into Our hearts. 

In proportion as love comes in, it casts out this wrong 
kind of fear. Then by the time any one has reached the condition
 of perfect love for God, complete love, he will possess 
a complete and perfect understanding or appreciation of our 
heavenly Father's true character, and will have no trace of 
that abnormal or slavish fear which characterizes the world in 
its fallen condition. Therefore whatever degree of this wrong 
kind of fear remains in a child of God, it is a sign that love 
has not yet finished its work. 

WHOLESOME KINDS OF FEAB 

In one place the Apostle Paul speaks of fightings without 
and fears within. (2 Corinthians 7:5) What did he mean? 
What did he fear? We are not to understand that the great 
Apostle was having fisticuffs with anybody, nor that he was 
fighting in any earthly army. No; he was fighting as "a 
good soldier of Jesus Christ," contending not with carnal 
weapons, but with "the sword of the Spirit, which is the 
Word of God." He was contending with those who opposed 
themselves to the truth and to the cause of God. He found 
plenty to oppose him in an outward way; and even in his 
mind he had more or less to contend with in the way of 
fears. 

St. Paul does not specify what kind these fear3 we*c 
They might have been fears to meet his opponents, fears that 
he might not be faithful or fears that he was not approved 
of God. As he does not gtate the nature of his fears, we are 
left at liberty to conjecture. He may indeed have had all these 
three kinds of fears. He was not perfect in the flesh, so 
that he might he without more or less timidity in the presence 
of the adversary, even though he displayed great courage on 
numerous occasions. His fears as to his own success and as 
to whether he might not fail to win the prize may have been 
with him, as he suggested to us when he wrote: "Let us fear 
lest, a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of 
us should seem to come short of it." (Hebrews 4:1) Her 1 
lie refers to a fear or careful watchfulness in respect to a 
failure to attain the things promised. 

This kind of fear is different from that which would be 
natural to us as human beings. It is a proper fear of not 
coming up to our glorious privileges. But surely the Apostle's 
fear was not a dread of a vengeful, unloving Cod, a Kind of 
fear which would manifest a lack of loving trust and confidence
 in the Heavenly Father; for St. Paul's faith in Goo. 
was strong and unwavering. 

LOVE TBItTMPHANT OVER PEAE 

Our Lord Jesus had an experience with fear. The Apostle 
says that when on earth the Master "offered up strong crying 
and tears unto him who was able to save him out of death, and 
was heard in that [matter] which he feared." (Hebrews 5:7) 
We believe this is a reference to our Lord's experience in the 
Garden of Gethsemane, on the night in which he was betrayed. 
Apparently he feared that he might not have come up to* the 
full requirements of his consecration vow, that he might have 
come short to some extent of the Father's will concerning him. 
He waited for some assurance of divine approval ; and when he 
received it, his heart was made glad. 


[6399] 


(?4-75) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


This letter text is in harmony with the. one just preceding; 
for the two refer to a similar kind of fear — that of offending 
God or not doing our best. But with the true Christian there 
must be a conquest of love over fear. In the case of our dear 
Master we see that his perfect love for the Father and his unwavering
 confidence in God resulted in his receiving the Father
's blessing and smile, and in being delivered from the fear 
that he was not wholly acceptable. 

This fear on our Lord's part was not sinful. It was a 
fear such as we also who are striving to walk in his footsteps 
are told to have, lest we fail to realize the precious promises 
vouchsafed to us upon conditions which are positive and unalterable
. It was a fear, not begotten of doubt of the Father's 
abilitv and willingness to fulfil all his promises, but of a 
knowledge of the righteous principles which must in every 
case govern the Father's course of action, a knowledge of the 
inflexible law which righteously affixed the reward of eternal 
life and glory to our Lord's fulfilling his covenant of sacrifice
. At the same time the Master began to realize that of 
himself as a human being, though perfect, his heart and his 
flesh would fail unless reinforced by grace divine. The Psalmist
 expressed this fear of Jehovah, and the source from which 
his help came, when he said: "My flesh and my heart faileth ; 
but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever/' 
-^Psalm 73:20. 

Previous to his being made flesh, the evidences of our Lord's 
loyalty to the will of G od were his acts of delightful service in 
co-operation with the Father in the works of creation and 
in all things appertaining thereto. The humbling to human 
conditions was gladly and cheerfully undertaken. Then followed
 the trials of his earthly life; and finally the severe test 
of Gethsemane and Calvary. Here was a teat of his fidelity to 
God which would cost him all that he had. Beyond this he 
could hope for nothing, except through the mercy and the love 
of God, to whose care he commended his spirit. (Luke 23:46) 
tt was indeed a crucial test ; and although at the time he evidently
 could not see the necessity for every feature of this 
experience, he nevertheless knew that the love of God was too 
great to permit a needless pain to be inflicted upon his beloved 
.Son; and therefore he could trust the Father even where he 
could not at the time trace the inscrutable ways of the divine 
providence. 

A SERIOUS LOSS TO THE SAINTLY 

While it is true that "perfect love casteth out fear," it is 
also true that perfect love is a very scarce commodity on earth, 
even among the Lord's people. The fear which we are to lose 
entirely is "the fear of man, which bringeth a snare." Whoever
 loses the fear of God and the fear of failing to attain to 
the great prize which God has held out before us, is in a very 
dangerous position. He is likely to become self-conscious and 
self-satisfied, and readily drops into the condition where he 
does not believe even in the just sentence against sinners — the 
second death; and where lie is proportionately careless respecting
 the keeping of his own words and thoughts and deeds 
in strictest alignment with the principles laid^ down in the 
Word of the Lord. Having lost his fear of God, he rapidly 
loses carefulness in respect to the Scriptures, and inclines to 
loan more and more to his own understanding, becoming blinded 
to his own faults and weakness. 

There are many Scriptural injunctions as to a proper kind 
of fear. Through the prophet God says that those who fear 
his name are the ones who speak often together, and of whom 
a book of remembrance is made. Again, he promises: "To you 


that fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise with 
healing in his beams." (Malachi 3:16; 4:2) The lesson of 
these various references to fear is that to lose the fear of 
God, in the sense of losing fear of his displeasure or fear of 
coming short of the grand possibilities which he has so graciously
 put within our reach, would be a most serious loss; for 
it would probably cost us our eternal existence. Those who 
have lost this fear are like steam engines which have lost their 
governors, and are apt to run with too much liberty to unfitness
 for service and to self-destruction. Hence, as the Apostle 
again says to the pilgrims who are seeking a heavenly country
, "if ye call on him as Father, . . . pass the time of your 
sojourning here in fear" (1 Peter 1:17), not in levity, nor 
in worldly frivolities, nor in sensualtities, nor in land and 
money grabbing, nor even in carelessness and slothfulness, but 
in earnest watchfulness of every word and act, to please the 
Lord, to copy his character, and thus to make sure your calling
 and election to a place in his kingdom, when it shall be established
 in power and great glory. — 2 Peter 1:4-11. 
TRUE LIBERTY IK CHRIST 

Fear, ignorance and superstition must vanish before the 
light of truth. What a blessed realization it is to be thus 
liberated! Millions are still under the galling yoke of fear, 
the "fear of man which bringeth a snare." Under its delusions
 they fear and reverence some of the basest tools of Satan 
for their oppression and degradation; for their oppressors hypocritically
 claim divine appointment. Moreover, mankind 
in general have been made to fear God as a vengeful tyrant, 
who would consign the vast majority of his creatures to eternal 
torment. Thank God, we who have received the truth have escaped
 that horrible nightmare, and the bondage of Satan is 
broken! 

We are also made free from the fear which we see coming 
upon the whole world, as the great civil and ecclesiastical systems
 that have so long prevailed are being terribly shaken. 
All thinking people are in dread of the possible outcome of the 
near future; and their alarm will increase as we near 
the awful crisis toward which we are rapidly hastening, 
and as the danger becomes more and more visible. Yet in the 
midst of it all, and with the fullest assurance of the infallible 
Word of God that during the next decade the world will pass 
through "a time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation," the true disciples of Christ are not afraid. On the 
contrary they rejoice; for they know that God's object in permitting
 the storm is to clear the moral atmosphere of the 
world; and that after the Btorm there shall come, by divine 
providence, an abiding peace. Instructed in the truth of God's 
Word, they realize the necessities of the situation, and have 
confidence in the divine power that can make even the wrath 
of man praise him. 

Few are the clear, strong spirits who can bear 
To look on Truth in her unclouded blaze; 

Few are the high heroic souls, who dare, 
Above the low pursuit of gain, to raise 

Their firm, unbending purpose. Few can gaze 

At Virtue on her pure and awful throne. 
Ah! few can love the ethereal coin she pays. 

But they must love it ; for the souls alone 
Who master self can claim her birthright as their own, 

And her untarnished crown of glory wear. 


GOD OUR HEAVENLY FATHER 

[This article with the exception of the paragraph* below, was a reprint of article entitled, "Training for Membership in 
the Kingdom," publi&hed in issue of April 13, 1913, whiah please see.] 

April 6.— Matthew 6:24-34. 

WORTHY AND UNWORTHY AMBITION— HEAVENLY TREASURES PREFERABLE TO EARTHLY ONES — THE VALUE OF HAVING A TRUE VIEW 

OF MATTERS — BLESSINGS FOR THOSE WHO FAITHFULLY SERVE THE LORD OUR HEAVENLY FATHER'S ABILITY TO CARE FOR 

US ILLUSTRATED IN NATURE— PROPER CONCERN NOT WORRY— THE CHIEF CONCERN OF ALL TRUE FOLLOWERS OF CHRIST. 

"Our Father who art in heaven^ hallowed he thy name." — Matthew 6:0. 

to lay up clothing or food far in advance of need, except under 
very peculiar circumstances. But gold might be treasured, or 
money in the bank, or bonds or stocks, or farm added to farm 
and house to house; and the same principle would be involved. 
Although no moth could touch the bank account, nor rust 
injure the gold, nor thieves steal the title to the property, yet 
the principle is the same. Treasures of every kind may lose 
their value— do lose their value to us when we die, if not beThe
 Great Teacher taught no extravagance. Energetic 
himself in the Father's business, he instructed his followers 
to be "not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving 
the Lord." Nevertheless his teaching in today's lesson is to 
the effect that our energies are not to take the selfish form of 
laying up earthly treasures, but that we are to lay up heavenly 
treasures instead. Notwithstanding his reference to moth, rust 
and thieves despoiling earthly treasures, we understand the 
Master's teaching as rather on a higher plane, although the 
principle is ;i broad one. All will admit that it would be folly 

[6400] 


fore. Death, corruption, touches everything earthly under present
 conditions, no matter how careful or thoughtful the provisMarch
 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(75-79) 


ion. ''Naked came we into the world, and naked must we 
leave it." (Job 1:21) Intelligent people aie generally agreed 
that God ha a provided a future life beyond the tomb, attainable
 in the resurrection morn. And the Scriptures teach that 
the degree of our blessing then will stand related to our use of 
the present life. It is this point that the Great Teacher emphasized
 in the study of today. All intelligent minds assent to 
the reasonableness of this teaching. 

Let us not take the extreme view entertained by some. Let 
us not suppose that the Master taught that people might not 
make reasonable provision for their own comfort, and so arrange
 matters that they might not be dependent upon charity 
in their old age. Let us not suppose that he meant that parents
 should be neglectful of their duties toward dependent 
members of their own families. The Bible distinctly teaches 
that "he who provides not for his own, and especially for those 
of his own house, hath denied the faith and is worst than an 
infidel." (1 Timothy 5:8) The proper thought, then, is that 
it is right to economize and, as St. Paul expresses it, "to lay 
by in store" for our own future needs or in order that we may 
have wherewith to lend to others in need. God's people are to 
be frugal, to avoid debts, to be "forehanded," to be with some 
reserve of capital. 

SEE* SPIBITUAL VISION INVALUABLE 
Moreover, earthly things are not to be the treasures of their 
souls, but merely their servants, conveniences, always ready 
for use, for every emergency, freely, whole-heartedly. He who 
follows this course will rarely have large earthly wealth. Only 
by making wealth a treasure and setting inordinate desire upon 
it can one become miserly or very rich. Setting the affections 
on things above would signify so loose a handling of worldly 
riches as would hinder the accumulation or preservation of 
great wealth. 

The Master's word is that whoever sets his affections upon 
earthly treasures will become sordid, selfish, earthly; but whoever
 sets his affections upon the things above will correspondingly
 become heavenly, spiritual, blest, generous. We 
have two eyes; and if they be not properly adjusted with relationship
 to each other our vision of things will be distorted. 
Hence we seek to correct such a difficulty in order that we 
may get the true view of matters. So it is with the eyes 
of our understanding. They have both a present and a future 
outlook, an earthly and a heavenly view. It is important that 
we get these rightly adjusted, in order that we may see matters
 in their true light, in order that we may Bee the great 
value of the future life in comparison with the present one, 
and be correspondingly guided to the setting of our heart affections
 there and, in general, balancing all the interests of 
life wiselv. 


As in the natural body the eyes may become darkened or 
blinded, so it is with our eyes of understanding. And if this 
blindness come upon us after we have once seen and enjoyed 
the divine promises, our case would be all the more pitiable. 
How great that darkness would be! 

There is still another lesson for us along the same line. A 
man may endeavor to serve two or more masters, but no one 
can be a satisfactory servant to more than one master at a 
time. No two interests are so completely one that the service
 of either would not more or less detract from the service 
of the other. One of the two masters to whom our Lord refers
 is the heavenly Father; the other is mammon, selfishness
 and sin, together with all that is connected with unrighteousness
, everything contrary to God and his righteousness. 

As a matter of fact we were born in slavery to sin. The 
Scriptures inform us that we were sold into this slavery 
through the disobedience of our first parents. Therefore sin 
has a hold upon the entire world of mankind. They are a race 
of slaves. It is impossible for them to deliver themselves from 
the thraldom of this slavery ; for it is everywhere, the world 
around. Some are loyal to the interests of evil; but the 
great majority of mankind are at heart disloyal to mammon, 
realizing that in serving self they are opposing God. But at 
the same time those who serve mammon, selfishness, get the 
best in the political sphere, the best in the ecclesiastical sphere, 
the best in the social sphere and the best in the financial sphere. 
jAt the present time selfishness succeeds. All human arrangements
 are along the line of selfishness. Whoever, then, works 
along the line of self serves himself better than if he were not 
selfish. Otherwise he would have his fellow creatures in opposition
 to him, misunderstanding him, etc. 

LESSONS FKOM ALL OF LIFE'S EXPERIENCES 
But our Lord inaugurated a new order of things. He declared
 that God is ready to receive unto himself all who forsake
 sin and believe on his Son ; and that as many as will accept
 his gracious arrangements for salvation will be set free. 
"If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." While 
the service of mammon might bless us during the present life, 
yet it would be injurious to our future interests. But the service
 of God would prepare us for future influence. And although
 obedience to God may cost us the loss of the pleasures 
of sin and of some legitimate blessing in the present time, 
nevertheless there is a blessing even now to those who are 
faithful servants of God and righteousness. Moreover, there 
is the glorious prospect of the future. It is necessary, however
, for us to choose between the two masters; for we cannot
 serve both. As Joshua did, so let us determine; "As for 
me and mv house we will serve. the Lord." 


CHRIST OUR SAVIOR 

TThe first eleven paragraphs of this article were reprinted from an article entitled, "Following the Lamb Whithersoever 
He Goeth," published in issue of January 1, 1899. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled, "We Have Found Him, 
Eureka," published in issue of February 1, 1900. Please see the articles named.] 


IN THE FURNACE 


He that from dross would win the precious ore 
Bends o'er the crucible an earnest eye, 

The subtle, searching process to explore 

Lest the one brilliant moment should pass by 

WTien, in the molten silver's virgin mass, 

He meets his pictured face as in a glass. 

Thus in God's furnace are his children tried. 
Thrice happy they who to the end endure! 
But who the fiery trial may abide? 


Who from the crucible come forth so pure 
That he whose eyes of flame look through the whole 
May see his image perfect in the soul ? 

Not with an evanescent glimpse alone, 

A* in a mirror, the refiner's face, 
But stamped with heaven's broad signet, there be shown 

Immanuers features, full of love and grace; 
And round that seal of love this motto be: 
"Not for a moment, but eternity!" 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


THE HUM OF ACTIVITY HAS KEVBB CEASED 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings of love in our Lord. The December 1st issue of 
The Watch Tower has just come to hend ; and my heart goes 
out to you as I read of your hopes of present and future service
 for our King. I believe your clarion call will find response 
in the hearty co-operation of the brethren. Surely all will 
leap to lay hold on these grand opportunities, carrying such 
weight of privilege now and of glory to follow. 

We in this country- have not been restricted so much as you 
have of late; and our thoughts have risen in prayer that you 
might stand in the peculiar and fiery trials, including a measure
 of inactivity, which the Lord saw good to permit. We frequently
 wish that we might know more of your Btate and of 
the detail of the experiences through which you have passed, 
so that we might the more fully sympathize and understand. 
We shall be glad when the vail which covers these things from 
our sight can be lifted. I have found myself longing to bear 
some of your burdens ; and I now assure you of my love and 
of my desire that you may have wisdom from above to organize 
the harvest work yet remaining, and the while to continue to 
supply that meat in due season for which the brethren look to 
the Lord through you. 

In the London Tabernacle the hum of a busy ministry has 
never ceased. Indeed, so far as public lectures, etc., are concerned
. I think we have never been so busy. The J*ord has 


[6401] 


i TO S3) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


graciously given us many opportunities of service. In every 
avenue great activity has prevailed ; and although the war has 
inevitably restricted in some directions, it has served to stimulate
 interest greatly; and we are glad to >be here still and 
to find so much to do. By the Lord's grace and help we will go 
on. When he takes us home, we shall be glad to leave this 
human state with its many weaknesses for that full companionship
 with our dear Lord Jesus and those with him; and 
our works will follow after, accompanied by conditions of 
power and perfection, for which we earnestly strive. May our 
Father's favor be your portion now and forever. 

Your brother in Christ. H. C. Thackway, — England. 
EXCELLENT RESULTS FROM PASTORAL WORK 

Deae Bbethben in the Lord: — 

Loving greetings in his name. In the Dec. 1 Watch Tower 
it is stated that some booklet- tracts are being prepared; and 
as we noted the titles of these we were glad, because we had 
just been expressing a desire that such tracts would be issued
. The sorrows caused by death, maiming, etc., in the war 
are tremendous in this country; and the sisters in the pastoral
 work have found that a little booklet would be read in 
many cases where the larger book, "The Divine Plan of the 
Ages," is refused. The pressure on life is so very great at 
present that most we meet with find that they have no time 
for reading a book; but many who have desires for God think 
that they could read a pamphlet. So the pastoral workers in 
Glasgow will be very gratified if you will kindly send some of 
those new booklets. I enclose £2 to cover cost of transit and 
also to help pay for the booklets. 

You will be glad to know that the pastoral work is still 
going on in Glasgow; and the Lord continues to bless it. We 
trace 201 as now attending the central meetings through the 
work started on two years ago. With love in the Lord and 
best wishes for 1919. May all your labors be blest and guided 
of him I 

Yours in his service. Minna Edgar. — Scotland. 

FOR BRETHREN IN THE ARMY 

Dear Brethren : — 

I write you a few lines, as it might be of interest to you 
to know where the young brethren are who are in the military 
service of the U. S. A. I am from the Chicago Ecelesia, and 
was drafted into service last May, sent to one of our training 
camps, and was placed in the medical department of the 106 
Engineers. At one time there were four of us brethren there 
from different towns, but I am the only one who passed for 
overseas duty, the rest having been discharged because of physical
 disability. 

In September we left Georgia for Long Island, where we 
stayed for a time, and then Avere shipped to "somewhere in 
France " not knowing just where. But I knew that I was safe 
in the Lord. After a thirteen-day voyage, we landed at Glasgow
, and from there went to Winchester, where we remained 
several days. We left England from Southampton, about sixty 
miles from London. I wished that I could have had the opportunity
 to visit the friends there. We traveled through 
many French towns, but remained no length of time at any of 
them, until we arrived at Brest. Our engineers were stationed 
there, to build a receiving camp, which is now one of the largest
 in France. We have not seen any actual fighting at the 
front, however, although the work of the engineers has done a 
great deal for the men. We surely are in the days of the 
falling of the kingdoms. It does not need much faith on the 


people's part, as they can see the fulfillment of prophecy with 
their literal eyes. 

I do not know of any other brethren here, except Brother 
►Stanley Olson, whom 1 have located through the mail. I wish 
1 knew of others also. Our desire now is to go home to our 
beloved ones there. The Lord willing, I may be homeward 
bound in a couple of months. I ask an interest in your prayers
 that we boys may remain faithful and strong in the Lord. 
With Christian love, 

Your -brother in Christ, Frank Gans. 

Medical Dept, 10G Engineers, 

A. P. O. 710, Base 5, Brest, France. 
LOYAL CO-OPERATION PLEDGED 
Dear Brethren: — 

Greetings in the name of our dear Lord and Master, from 
the^Petersburg Eeclesia, by whom I am instructed to send you 
the^following message : 

At the beginning of the new year, which we trust will be 
full of opportunities for service to the truth and to the brethren
, we desire to express to each individual member of the 
old Board of Directors our love and appreciation of the work 
they have performed, and to pledge to the new Board our prayers
" for their successful guidance of the atFairn of the Society, 
and to assure them oi our fullest co-operation in every respect
, believing that this will be one of the greatest years in 
the history of the world for the dissemination of the truth and 
for the furtherance of the establishment of the kingdom 
through the power and grace of our Lord and Savior. 

Yours in his service. R. A. Gamble, Class Secretary. — Va. 
GREAT JOY AX THE RESULT OP THE ELECTION 

Deab Bkethben : — 

After reading the report of the annual meeting of share 
holders in the Jan. 15 Watch Toweb, we wish to express to 
you our great joy at the result of the election. We thank the 
dear Lord for so clearly manifesting his will; and we hereby 
renew our pledge of hearty support and co-operation. We also 
wish to participate enthusiastically in supporting the resolution
 passed by the shareholders in re our brethren in prison. 

We take this opportunity to tell you of our gratitude for 
the privilege of "feasting upon the "meat 'in due season." Truly 
the Lord has prepared a table before us, upon which all our 
needs of spiritual food are supplied. We are ready, yes, 
anxious to co-operate with you in any and every way possible ; 
and we continually pray the Lord's guidance and richest blessings
 upon you. 

Yours in the glorious hope. J. J. Pickering, Secy. — Mass. 
GROWTH OF SPIRITISM TREMENDOUS 
Deab Brethren in the Lord: — 

Loving greetings in Christ our Lord unto you all from Camp 
. With sorrow we notice the tremendous growth of spiritism
. Ouij-a boards are used freely as a pastime and innocent 
amusement. When we called attention to the seriousness of 
having any communication with the evil spirits, and explained
 that many who started with curiosity ended in the 
insane asylum as the result of these winked spirits possessing 
their minds— their only aim and purpose in communicating 
with human beings — our warning was considered very lightly. 
Then we thought how handy it would be to have on hand some 
timely tracts on spiritism, and so to do our utmost to warn 
those in danger. With warmest Christian love to you all, and 
especially the dear brethren in charge of the Lord's work, 1 
remain. Your brother in Christ. TL I., C. 0. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., MARCH 15, 101» 


No. (i 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


Bible students are aware that since the year 1799' we have 
been in "the time of the end." "The day of his preparation" is 
another name given to the same period, because in it a general 
increase of knowledge and numerous governmental and moral 
changes pave the way for the Messianic Kingdom, which is now 
being established upon the ruins of the existing order. The 
many lessons which the peoples of earth have been forced to 
learn during the period of the war have no doubt been real 
blessings in disguise. The lessons in economy have been especially
 beneficial. Jehovah is a great economist. Jesus taught 
his disciples the lesson of economy when he instructed them to 
gather up the fragments of the loaves and the fishes after 
having fed the multitude of five thousand. We think it reasonable
 that the recent necessary restrictions in luxuries, fuel, 
food, etc., have been overruled of the Lord, and are incidental 
lessons in this period of preparation for the kingdom of Christ 
on earth. 


INVISIBLE FORCES AT WORK 

Among the sudden and sweeping changes in this preparatory
 period in which we are living, none has been more remarkable
 than the recent prohibition legislation. When the 
eighteenth amendment to the United States Constitution, forbidding
 the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating 
liquors within the United States and its territories, was proposed
 by Congress in the autumn of 1917, few indeed expected 
that it would be ratified by the required two- thirds of the states 
in so short a time as one year. Tn fact, the third section of 
this amendment provided that the States should have seven 
years in which to ratify it; and that should it not be ratified 
by the legislatures of the several States within that time, the 
article should be inoperative. The fact therefore that the 
amendment has been ratified by more than two-thirds of the 
States, within practically one year from the date of its submission
 to the legislatures by Congress, has been mystifying 


[6402J 


March 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(83 S4> 


to editors of our metropolitan papers, and indeed to the statesmen
 themselves. The New York Tribune, commenting upon 
the speed with which this amendment to the Federal Constitution
 was ratified, remarked that the legislation seemed to be 
"propelled by some invisible force." We believe that the Tribune
 has expressed a great truth, and that the "invisible 
force" is none other than divine providence in this "day of 
his preparation." 

As to how this legislation will he received is another question
. Among the organizations opposed to country- wide prohibition
 is the Roman Catholic Church. Not only did Cardinal 
Gibbons and other great ones of the Roman Catholic Church 
fight against the amendment before ratification, but leading 
Papal prelates continue their attacks upon this Constitutional 
amendment since its ratification by the States. The Reverend 
John L. Bel ford, Rector of the Church of Nativity, Brooklyn, 
N. Y., is reported in the Brooklyn Eagle to have said recently: 
"It is an unjust law; no one is bound to obey it; no one should 
have the least scruple about evading it, breaking it or defying
 it." Whether Catholics in general will attempt to follow 
his advice remains to be seen. 

RELEASING THE SINCERE 
Secretary Baker's action in releasing 113 conscientious objectors
 from Fort Leavenworth is very commendable. These 
objectors were examined by Judge Julian Mack and Dean 
Harlan F. Stone, and were pronounced by them "sincere," and 
for that reason were released. The National Labor Tribune, 
commenting editorially in its issue of February 13th, says: 

"On the 22nd of January Secretary of War Baker released
 113 conscientious objectors who had been courtmartialed 
and sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. He announced 
that they were released because an examining board had reported
 these men as sincere in their belief and in their positions
 as to war. Three months have passed since the war 
ended : and yet eight Christian gentlemen of the International 
Bible Students Association, sincere and honest, as conceded 
by all, are still held in prison. Why not 'recognize their honesty
 and sincerity, and immediately release them? American 
people love honesty and sincerity.'* 

In this connection it is recalled that Judge Harlan B. 
Howe, in imposing sentence upon J. F. Rutherford and his associates
 of the International Bible Students Association, suggested
 that because of their sincerity they were all the more 
dangerous, and for that reason their sentence should be "severe
.'' Apparently Secretary of War Baker takes a different 
view of the matter of sincerity. The Labor Tribune says: 

"During the recent war Italy imprisoned about 3,500 Socialists
 and Pacifists, who are designated as 'political prisoners
.' A few days ago the Italian government released all 
of her political prisoners, setting them free. 

"America entered the war to maintain the principles of 
right, justice and truth, and to make the world safe for democracy
. Everyone knows that the Espionage Act is strictly 
a war measure. The war ended three months ago, and yet 
Congress has taken no action to release political prisoners. 
The President, J. F. Rutherford, and other officials of the 
International Bible Students Association are in prison at 
Atlanta; and notwithstanding that final decision has not yet 
been made in their ease, they are held without bail. They have 
been in prison for seven months, removed from their thousands
 of friends and from the great religious work in which 
they have been engaged for many years. While they are gentlemen
 of the highest type, scholarly and refined, they are compelled
 to associate constantly with the vilest and most desperate
 criminals. What good can result by keeping them there? 
Is the imprisonment of such men, because of their honest and 
sincere interpretation of the Bible, in keeping with the high 
ideals and principles for which the United States entered the 
war ? When the facts are known, will not their imprisonment 
make honest and sincere Americans blush with shame? 

"It* is just beginning to dawn upon the American public 
that Rutherford and hie associates are either victims of a gigantic
 conspiracy or else that there is -a miscarriage of justice
 the like of which has never before been equalled in the 
United States." 

We also quote from the Atlanta Constitution of February 
11th, 1919, as follows: 

"The case of the United States vs. J. F. Rutherford, et al., 
is the fruits of religious intolerance ; and the war and attending
 excitement furnished the opportunity for the perpetration 
of a great wrong against the defendants. . . . Defendants appealed
 their case and applied for bail pending appeal; but bail 
was denied. These gentlemen have been in prison since June 
20, 1918, and their case is not yet heard. . . . Has it come to 
the point in America that high, noble-minded, peaceable Christian
 gentlemen can be railroaded to prison and denied bail pending
 their appeal because they dare tell the truth as they see 
it ? Will America tolerate religious persecution such as Rome 
practiced during the period of the wicked Inquisition? .... 
Why should they suffer further? Is it the desire to make 
martyrs of them to satisfy the grasping and intolerant spirit 
of Romanism and her allies? The liberty-loving people should 
demand the immediate release of these Christians, If they can 
be held in prison, then the principles of religious liberty have 
ceased to exist in America. Let every liberty -loving American, 
regardless of his own religious belief, who favors open and fair 
dealing, call upon the powers that be to immediately release 
these gentlemen, and to let them go out to serve the hundreds 
of thousands of Christian people who desire and need their aid 
and comfort." 

The Literary Digest, in its issue of February 8th, quotes 
from The Churchma?i the following: 

"Just why America should have gone to such lengths of 
severity and cruelty in its treatment of political prisoners is 
not clear to some of us. We are a sentimental people, and it 
not frequently happens that those who shed tears most copiously
 over Belgian atrocities and over Russian martyrdom in 
the days when George Kennan used to relate the terrors of 
♦Siberia, will indulge their own passions quite recklessly on any 
at home whom they despise and hate." 

POLITICAL PRISONERS 

The demand for amnesty in behalf of all political prisoners
 has been heard in Washington. Mr. Gregory, the retiring 
Attorney General, recommended executive clemency on behalf 
of some. Fifty -three cases were acted upon before President 
Wilson sailed for France. A Washington dispatch of March 
5th states, however, that "no action was taken in the cases of 
J. F. Rutherford and his seven associates of the International 
Bible Students Association, convicted in Brooklyn on charges 
growing out of publication of 'The Finished Mystery/ a Bible 
handbook, and now serving sentences in the Atlanta federal 
prison." 

The reason for this is not made clear. Hence the subject of 
amnesty continues to be agitated in the public press. It is not 
alone from the radical organs that we hear the clamor, but the 
oldest and most conservative newspapers and magazines of the 
country are freely devoting much space to the question in issue 
after issue, while the editors of the smaller cities and towns 
are joining hands in what they now call the common cause of 
humanity. On the accepted theory that newspapers do not 
mould, but rather interpret, public sentiment, it is evident 
that herein lies a political storm center of great consequences, 
not to be hushed by legislative indifference or silent contempt, 
but a matter which seems to demand the most respectful consideration
 of every statesman in the Republic. We quote from 
a strong editorial appearing recently in the Capital Times 
of Madison, Wis., as follows: 

"The idea of a political prisoner is repugnant to the thought 
of a democracy. To put men into jail for expressinig their opinions
 has always been foreign to the best spirit in America. And 
yet, there are in our American prisons today hundreds of men 
and women who are suffering for their convictions. Hundreds 
of others are battling in the courts to escape the prison cell. 

"The technical charge on which these men have been put 
into prison is that they interfered with the military establishment
 of the country. Why then haven't we put into prison all 
men who have 'interfered with the military establishment'? 

"Ships were needed to transport soldiers to Europe. This 
country decided to erect a monster ship-building plant at Hog 
Island, to build ships. About $60,000,000 was spent — from 
which we received one ship! Over $40,000,000 was squandered! 

"Is it recorded that any one has gone to prison for having 
'interfered with the military establishment' as a result of this 
Hog Island disgrace? 

"The Hughes report showed a disgraceful situation in the 
manufacture of aeroplanes. Aeroplanes are. the eyes of the 
army. 'The military establishment' was interfered with through 
the criminal manner in which the aeroplane situation was 
handled. 

"Is it anywhere recorded that the persons guilty of this 
criminal situation have gone to prison ? In fact, is it recorded 
anywhere in this country that any profiteer has gone to jail? 
In our opinion the military establishment of the country was 
interfered with ten times over by the profiteers of the country 
than by men who spoke their honest convictions. 

"The war is over. Our armies are 'being demobilized. There 
is no longer any opportunity to 'interfere with the military establishment
 of the country.' Is any public good to come from 
continued persecution of men whose sole crime is that of having
 expressed their opinion?" 


[6403] 


(84-85^ 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


THE RE-BIBTH OF A NATION 

Zionists -now rejoice as they approach the fruition of their 
oft deferred hope of being reestablished in the land promised 
by Jehovah unto their forefathers. For many years the Lord's 
consecrated people, in the light of present truth, have anticipated
 the restoration of Israel at this time; and all such 
may now lift up their heads and rejoice, for our own deliverance
 is thereby indicated to be drawing nigh. — Matthew 24:32, 
33. 

In the 10th article of the proposed constitution for the 
coming League of Nations, unanimously agreed upon by the 
special committee representing fourteen nations, and in the 
further deliberations of the Paris Peace Conference, Zionists 
are able to foresee the immediate re-creation of Palestine asa 
Jewish state, The article in question mentions that "certain 
communities formerly belonging to the Turkish empire have 
reached a stage of development where their existence as independent
 nations can be provisionally recognized." 

In every Zionist quarter the world over the glad note 
of triumph has been sounded ever since the First American 
Jewish Congress convened in Philadelphia on December 15th 
last and provided for the election of seven delegates to present
 the aims of the Jews of the world before the Peace Conference
 at Versailles. Federal Judge Julian Mack of Chicago 
was chairman of the congress. The same congress adopted, 
amid great enthusiasm, resolutions outlining the government of 
the new nation and calling for an International Jewish Congress
 to convene immediately after the signing of peace, that 
all the details may be speedily arranged for. The Philadelphia 
Ledger, in reporting the matter, said: 

"An ideal Jewish Republic in Palestine, a republic founded 
upon Socialistic principles, in which every man will work for 
the welfare of the state, and individual property rights will be 
eliminated, was outlined at a mass meeting of the Poale Zionists
 last evening. Jews from all countries of the world will be 
mobilized in a monster Jewish industrial volunteer army to 
rehabilitate Palestine. The paramount rule of the propo.-ed 
Jewish Commonwealth is that every workman shall work for 
the profit of the community and for the advancement of his 
special trade. Speakers advocated forming agricultural communities
, each consisting of 100 immigrants, in the new Jewish 
nation. These groups will be financed by the First National 
Labor Bank of Palestine, All land will be the property of the 
community." 

In another issue of the same paper the dramatic scene following
 the introduction of the resolution declaring for the establishment
 of this Jewish Commonwealth was described as 
follows: 

"The Jewish hope of centuries was rekindled. The delegates, 
four hundred of them, who had gathered from all parts of the 
United States to represent the four millions of Jews of this 
country, and the hundreds of spectators embraced one another. 
waved the Jewish flags and bunting which they tore from the 
walls in their joy, and wept and cheered as they saw light 
piercing the gloom of centuries of disappointment." 

Numerous Jewish mass meetings have been called in various 
centers of Jewish population throughout the country to further 
urge their cause. Commenting upon the Twenty-second Annual 
Convention of the Federated Zionist Societies of the middle 
West, held in Chicago last month, the Chicago Herald and 
Examiner of February 17th said: 

"Four hundred Zionists gathered yesterday at the Hotel La 
f^alle and last night at three mass meetings, not as in other 
years to dream of a restored homeland, but to exult in its accomplishment
 and to plan its successful fruition. The convention
 will end tonight with a banquet at the Morrison hotel, 
where Norman Hapgood of New York will be the principal 
speaker." 


THE MEMORIAL SUPPER 

"Drink ye all of it; for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." 

—Matthew 26:27, 28. 


As heretofore announced, the date of the Memorial Supper 
this year falls on Sunday evening, April 13, after six o'clock. 
According to Jewish reckoning the first day of the Feast of Unleavened
 Bread falls on April 15, which with that people begins
 on the evening of April 14. But our interest as Christians
 centers mainly in the killing of the Passover lamb, 
which preceded the feast. Therefore our commemoration properly
 begins on the preceding evening — April 13. All calendars 
we have seen give March 31 «as the date of the first new moon 
after the spring equinox. If we calculate from that date the 
14th of Nisan would begin on the evening of April 13, Jewish 
reckoning. See footnote, page 470, Vol. 6, Studies in tiik 

SCBIPTUBES. 

ALL THESE CEREMONIES WERE TYPICAL 

We need not remind the Bible Students of the particulars 
connected with the institution of the Passover — that the Israelites
 were held in a measure of serfdom by the Egyptians; 
and that when in the Lord's providence the time arrived for 
their deliverance, their masters selfishly sought to maintain 
that bondage and refused to let the people go forth to the land 
of Canaan. During the year the Lord sent one after another 
nine different plagues upon the people of Egypt, removing 
these in the same order when Pharaoh craved mercy under 
promises which he afterwards broke. Finally the servant of 
the Lord, Moses, announced a great crowning disaster— that 
the first-born in every family of Egypt would die in one night; 
and that in the home of the humblest peasant as well as in that 
of the king there would be mourning, as a result of which they 
would finally be glad to 'yield and let the Israelites go, yea, 
would urge them to go and in haste, lest the Lord ultimately 
bring death upon the entire people should their king continue 
to harden his heart and resist the divine mandate. 

The first three plagues were common throughout Egypt, 
including Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt. The next six 
plagues did not affect this district. The last, the tenth plague, 
was declared to be common to the entire land of Egypt, including
 Goshen, except as the Israelites would show faith and 
obedience by providing a sacrificial lamb, whose blood was to 
be sprinkled on the sides and on the lintels of their doorways, 
and whose flesh was to be eaten in the same night with bitter 
herbs and unleavened bread, the eaters standing staff in hand 
and girded ready for the journey, with full expectancy that the 
Lord would smite the first-born of the Egyptians with death 
and thus make them willing to let the Israelites go, and with 
full faith also that the Israelites would share in this calamity 
were it for not the blood upon their doorposts and lintels. 

[64 


The Israelites were commanded to celebrate this as one 
of the first features of the Jewish law and one of their greatest 
memorials <&& a nation. As a matter of fact, we find that in 
some degree the Passover is celebrated by Jews in all parts of 
the world, even by those who claim to be agnostics and infidels
. They still have a measure of respect for it as an ancient 
custom. But is it not strange that with the bright minds 
which many of them possess our Jewish friends have never 
thought worth while to inquire the meaning of the celebration? 
Why was the lamb slain and eaten? Why was its blood 
sprinkled upon doorposts and lintels? Because God so commanded
, of course; but what reason or motive, object or leeson
 was there behind the divine command? Truly a reasonable
 God gives reasonable commands, and in due time will be 
willing that his faithful people understand the significance of 
every requirement. . Why are the Hebrews indifferent to this 
subject? Why does prejudice hold their minds? It is for them 
to answer and, answering, to get light and joy from the knowledge
, 

WHAT WE MEMORIALIZE 

Although Christianity has the answer to this question, we 
regret that because of carelessness the majority of Christians 
would be unable to give a reason and ground for any hope in 
connection with this matter. If the Jew can realize that his 
^Sabbath day is a type or foreshadowing of a coming epoch of 
rest and blessing and release from toil, sorrow and death, why 
can he not see that similarly all the features of the Mosaic 
law institution were designed by the Lord to be foreshadowings 
of various blessings, to be bestowed in due time? Why can 
it not be discerned by all that the Passover lamb typified, represented
, the Lamb of God? that its death represented the 
death of Jesus, the Just for the unjust? and that the application
 of its blood symbolizes the application of the merit of the 
death of Jesus to the entire household of faith? Blessed are 
those whose eyes see that Jesus was indeed "the Lamb of 
God that taketh away the sin of the world"; that the cancellation
 of the world's sin is effected by the payment of man's 
penalty; that as the whole world lost divine favor and came 
under the divine sentence of death, with its concomitants of 
sorrow and pain, it was necessary before this sentence or curse 
could l>e removed that a satisfaction of justice should be made, 
and that therefore, as the Apostle declares, Christ died for our 
sina, the Just for the unjust, that he might bring us back to 
God. Thus he opened up a new and living way, a new way 
to life everlasting. 

W T e memorialize four great matters; 

04] 


M«ch 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(86-87) 


( 1 ) The death of our Lord as the Passover Lamb. 

(2) Our relationship or participation with him in the 
sufferings of Christ, the death of Christ, as followers in his 
steps and sharers in his cup. 

(3) We celebrate incidentally and prospectively the great 
deliverance which will soon follow this passing over of the 
present night time. The deliverance will affect first of all 
those passed over, the church — the little flock and the great 
company, the antitypes of the priesthood and the Levitical host 
or tribe. The deliverance of these will come in the morning, 
the resurrection morning, the Millennial morning. 

(4) We also incidentally commemorate the great "feast 
of fat things" (Isaiah 25:6) which will follow the passing 
over of the church, when the passed-over ones shall be associated
 with their Lord in his heavenly kingdom as the great 
antitypical Prophet, Priest, Judge, Mediator and King over 
all the earth, to bless and uplift the human family through 
the merit of the same precious blood which he now permits 
the passed-over ones to participate in sacrificially, after the 
imputation of its merit to them has made them worthy. 

These different points should be kept in memory separate 
and distinct from each other if we would have the greatest 
blessing from this Memorial. 

'BEHOLD THE LAMS OF GOD" 

Looking unto Jesus as "the Lamb of God," we behold his 
spotlessness, "holy, harmless, un defiled, separate from sinners
.'* We behold how "he was led as a sheep to the slaughter
; and like a lamb dumb before his shearer, so he opened 
not his mouth." (Acts 8:32) By speaking the word he could 
have resisted those who were intent upon his destruction. He 
fissures us that no man took his life from him ; he laid it 
down himself, voluntarily. He laid it down, not in obedience
 to the Father's law, for justice could not demand sacrifice
, but in accordance with the Father's will, saying, "I delight
 to do thy will, my God; thy law is written in my 
heart." 

From this standpoint the Christian believer can rejoice 
greatly that the Redeemer spared not himself, but freelv delivered
 himself up with the foreknowledge that in the divine 
purpose the value of his sacrifice would ultimately redound 
first for the blessing of his followers and subsequently for the 
blessing of all the people. Hence in partaking of the broken 
unleavened bread we memorialize the purity, the sinlessness of 
him who gave himself to be in God s due time the ransom 
price for all mankind. From this standpoint we realize that 
his shed blood signified that his death was necessary in order 
that our condemned humanity might be restored to life without
 infracting the divine law. Our hearts should here pause 
to appreciate, not only the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, but 
also the love of the Father, who designed the program, and the 
justice of God thus exemplified, and the wisdom of God in making
 the arrangement, and the faith to grasp the power of God 
as it will ultimately be manifested in the full carrying out of 
all the glorious purposes and promises which we memorialize. 
The second point is scarcely less important to us than is 
the first. The first blessing from the Redeemer's sacrifice has 
been offered during this Gospel age to such as have the hearing 
ear and the appreciative heart." This blesei ng is most astounding
. It purposes a still further favor to such of mankind
 as turn from sin and accept by faith the grace of God in 
Christ, and present their bodies living sacrifices, with full 
consecration, vowing to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. To all 
such, during this Gospel age and until the completion of the 
elect number, the Redeemer will impute the merit of his sacrifice
, in order to make their sacrifices acceptable in God's 
sight, to the intent that they may Buffer with him in the flesh, 
and share with him in the begetting of the holy Spirit now 
and in birth to the spirit plane in the resurrection. Thus as his 
glorified members they may be associated with him in his Millennial
 kingdom, when he shall act as "Mediator between 
God and men/' The word men here includes all not begotten
 of the holy Spirit to be new creatures on the spirit plane. 

Our partaking of the bread symbolically represents our appropriating
 the fleshly perfection of the man Jesus, We partake
 of his perfections by faith, and not actually. He gives us, 
not restitution to human perfection, but merely an imputation 
of his righteousness, his perfection, as covering in the divine 
sight the blemishes and imperfections of our fleshly bodies, 
which we have tendered to God as living sacrifices. When as 
our great Advocate the Redeemer imputes to our offering the 
merit of his sacrifice, the Father accepts the same and begets 
the sacrificer to the new nature as a member of the body of 
Christ; and since we have the treasure of the new creature in 
the earthly, fleshly vessel, the Father's acceptance of us includes
 our justified flesh and all of its interests. It is 


only those who have thus partaken of the merit of Christ, and 
whose sacrifice God has accepted, that are directed in conformity
 to their covenant of sacrifice to drink of our Lord's cup 
and to be immersed daily into his death. 

THE CUP OF THE NEW COVENANT 
The cup is not ours, but our Lord's. The life or sacrifice 
symbolized by the blood is not ours, but our Redeemer's. We 
are merely given the privilege of drinking it, partaking of it. 
The blood of Jesus could have sealed the New Covenant between
 God and Israel, and on behalf of all mankind through 
Israel by the New Covenant, without being offered to us at all. 
The offering to us of the privilege of participation in the cup 
of Christ's suffering and death i* therefore not to indicate that 
it was insufficient nor to mean that we could add anything to 
it. The offer illustrates the grace of God — that he is willing 
to receive us and to make ua joint-heirs with our Lord and 
Savior, if we have his spirit. 

The spirit which actuated Jesus was one of devotion to the 
doing of the heavenly Father's will to the smallest detail and 
even unto death. Exactly this spirit must be in all those 
whom the Father will now accept as members of the bride of 
Christ, the body of Christ, his church in the heavenly glory. 
Hence our Redeemer emphasized the matter distinctly, saying 
that all who would sit with him in his throne must drink of 
his cup of self-denial, self-sacrifice, and must be immersed into 
his death. This is exactly what St. Paul points out to us; 
namely, that our Ijord is the true Bread, the true Loaf, which 
came down from heaven, and that we are invited to be portions
 of the one Loaf and ultimately will be accepted by him 
according to the Father's plan and thus become members with 
our Lord in the larger Loaf, the multitudinous Christ. Hence, 
as St. Paul suggests, when we break this bread together as a 
memorial not only do we symbolize our Lord's broken body, 
but in a larger sense we symbolize the breaking of the church 
and our breaking or dying as members of that church. "The 
loaf which we break, is it not the communion [the common 
union or partici patios] of the body of Christ ? For we, being 
many, are one loaf, the one body ; for we are all partakers of 
the one loaf." — 1 Corinthians 10:16, 17. 

THE MEANING OF THE CUP 

To us the cup of the fruit of the vine means the sacrificed 
life of our Lord. But, additionally, it reminds us that in becoming
 his disciples we accepted his invitation to Bhare his 
cup. To us this means faithfulness in self-sacrifice as the 
Lord's representatives, even unto death. 'The cup of blessing 
which we bless [for which we give thanks as the greatest 
imaginable favor of God bestowed upon us], is it not the communion
 [the general union, the fellowship! of the body of 
Christ?" Does it not represent our Lord's sacrifice and our 
share with him in his sacrifice, 'by his invitation and in harmony
 with the Father's pre-arranged plan, in which he foreknew
 us with Jesus from before the foundation of the world t 

Oh, what a depth of meaning attaches to the communion 
cup from this standpoint! Oh, what heart -searching should go 
with the accepting of it! How evident it is that this communion
 cup represents not merely the turning from sin, not 
jnerely believing in Jesus, not merely preference for right over 
wrong, but chiefly the presentation of believers' bodies living 
sacrifices to God— sacrifices considered holy because of the imputation
 of Jesus* merit, sacrifices which God has accepted, begetting
 the offerer to the new nature as a new creature — 
Romans 12:1. 

No wonder the Apostle intimates that whoever lightly, irreverently
, yet intelligently, partakes of this symbolic flesh 
and symbolic blood brings condemnation upon himself. It is of 
this blood, viewed from this standpoint, that the Apostle speaks 
in Hebrews 10:29. He speaks of some who count the blood of 
the covenant wherewith they were sanctified an unholy or common
 thing — some who do despite to the spirit of grace, favor, 
which has called us with this high calling during this Gospel 
age. He intimates that God's providence for such would be 
the second death. 

"EVEN TO0E SANCTiriCATION" 
We cannot understand the Apostle to mean that church 
members who have never made a real consecration to God. 
who have never understood the real grace of God, the real 
privilege which they are invited to enjoy, should he subjects 
of the second death. On the contrary the context intimates 
that the persons referred to had at one time a clear understanding
 of the matter; that they "were once enlightened"; that 
not only had they been justified by faith in the precious blood 
fond thus enabled to approach God, but on the basis of that 
justifying faith they had gone on presenting their bodies living 
sacrifices. The text cited indeed declares that it refers to only 
such as despise the blood of the covenant (the cup we memo- 


[6405] 


<87-») 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


rialize) with which they had previously been sanctified by the 
begetting of the holy Spirit, testifying the acceptance of their 
consecration by the heavenly Father when they agreed to drink 
of Christ's cup. 

Our sanctification, which is the will of God and in harmony 
with which the present Gospel call is made is effected not when 
we are called nor when we begin to turn from sin nor when 
we begin to hear and heed the voice of God, but when under the 
influence of these blessings and mercies of God we come to the 
'point of full consecration, full surrender, full sacrifice of all 
of the earthly rights and privileges, in order that we might 
have instead the spiritual blessings, the divine nature, jointheirship
 with our Lord in his kingdom. Is it asked: "Who 
would despise such a favor as this ? Who would repudiate the 
privilege of being joint-sacrificers with our Lord? Who would 
spurn his cup and his baptism into death in view of the privilege
 of being associated in the reward?" The answer is that 
surely no one would do so who still retains the spirit of begetting
 and the faith appreciation of the things as yet not seen 
—glory, honor and immortality. If therefore any who have 
once tasted of the heavenly gift and have been made partakers 
of the holy Spirit and have participated in the powers and 
privileges of the coming age — if any such should fall away, it 
would be impossible to renew them again unto repentance. 

KNOWN BY THEIR FRUITS 

We cannot read the heart. We cannot surely know who 
have seen beyond the first vail and who have not. We cannot
 know absolutely who have committed the "sin unto death" 
and who have not. We are not to judge one another. We are 
rather to accept one another's professions, provided the course 
of life confirms these and is not symbolically represented by the 
injurious thorns and thistles. If, however, any should repudiate
 "the blood of the covenant wherewith he was sanctified," 
if any should claim that participation with Christ in this memorial
 cup is participation in something common or ordinary 
and not participation in his great sacrifice, it would imply 
that he had lost his spiritual vision, his spiritual apprehension
 of the value of being a partaker of Christ's cup, the Blood 
of the covenant which is shortly to be sealed for Israel and 
through Israel for all the families of the earth who will come 
into harmony with the divinely arranged terms. 

It may be possible that some who have professed to see 
the spiritual things, some who have professed a fulness of consecration
 even unto death, gome who have professed to appreciate
 the participation in the breaking of the one loaf and the 
drinking of the one cup of fellowship with Christ in his death, 
have never really appreciated these things. Perhaps they not 
only misled us by their statements, but also deceived themselves 
into thinking that they understood. 

Let us remember our Lord's words, "By their fruits ye 
shall know them." If those who once professed that they were 
sanctified, set apart» consecrated saerificers as members of the 
body of Christ, and who partook of his cup of suffering and 
self-denial and then manifested a Mpirit of holiness and gave 
evidence of developing the fruits and graces of the Spirit, 
we may safely consider tliat they were spirit-begotten. Should 
these afterward repudiate the blood of the covenant and view the 
privilege of partaking of Christ's cup as something that is 
merely common or ordinary, tout not exclusive and only for the 
members of Christ— if these now manifest no longer the fruits 
of the Spirit of God, but the fruits of the spirit of the adversary
, we may well fear for them that they have not only lost 
the light, but also lost the Spirit. We are not to expect that 
such would necessarily go to open deeds of violence, murder, 
robbery, etc. It wouid be sufficient evidence of their having 
lost the spirit of the Lord if they should develop afresh the 
spirit of anger, malice, hatred, envy, strife. These St. Pa>ul 
designates works of the flesh and of the devil. 

True, a sanctified member of the body of Christ might be 
overtaken in a fault or might act in a manner that would 
imply anger; but he certainly could not have malice and 
hatred. Besides, if overtaken in a fault he would soon realize 
his difficulty and not only take the fault to the throne of heavenly
 grace for forgiveness, but also go and make full reparation
 and full apology to those wronged, injured, by the act. 
Whoever indicates that his spirit has become a malicious one 
gives evidence that he has already lost the Spirit of God and 
is "twice dead, plucked up by the roots,'* and belongs to the 
thorn and briar family, and not to the vine. 


"THE EARNEST OF OUR INHERITANCE" 

In our memorial service let not our hearts meditate merely 
upon the sufferings of Jesus, nor merely upon the sufferings of 
the members of his body as they walk in his footstep* to sacrificial
 death. On the contrary let us receive a proper exhilaration
, of spirit from our participation in this cup. We read 
that Jesus rejoiced in spirit; and the Apostle urges all those 
who are drinking the cup, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord; and 
again I say, Rejoice!" The Christian's life is not a sad or 
morose one, but a most joyful one. He can even foe joyful in 
tribulation, "knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and 
patience, experience; and experience, hope' 1 ; knowing alto 
that "our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh 
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory" beyond
 the vail.— Romans 5:3, 4; 2 Corinthians 4:17. 

We thus partake in the cup of suffering and joy which is 
an earnest of our inheritance, which we snail receive at the 
second coming of our Lord and our gathering together with 
him, as his members and his bride class. This rejoicing in 
spirit is necessary to our courage and zeal in the service of the 
Lord. Note its operation in St. Paul, who with Silas could 
sing praises to God in the piison, with his feet in the stocks 
and his back lacerated. And bo it should be with all of Christ's 
true followers in the narrow way. With the wound of every 
thorn, with the pain of every sharp arrow of bitter words 
with which we are assaulted for Christ's sake, we may have 
joy unspeakable. 

A further joy may be ours as we comprehend more and 
more fully the significance of this New Covenant or New Testament
 blood in which our Lord offers us an opportunity to participate
. He imputes his merit and thus enables us to be 
dead with him. He thus passes the blood of the New Covenant 
through us, his members. But it Is offered only to such as 
pledge themselves to be dead with Christ. Even then it is not 
given, but merelv imputed or loaned to us to make good or 
worthy our offerings when the great High Priest as our Advocate
 accepts them and presents them to the Father, and God 
begets us by his holy Spirit. 

These earthly rights which belong to our Lord Jesus alone, 
and which are under his control, are to go to natural Israel 
by the New Covenant. (Jeremiah 31:31) "They shall obtain
 mercy through your mercy." (Romans 11:31) We may 
therefore rejoice in sympathetic anticipation of the blessing 
about to come to natural Israel, in which all mankind will 
have an opportunity to share. If Israel's casting away at the 
beginning of this Gospel age was preparatory to the acceptance
 of the Gospel church, how glad we may be that the 
acceptance of that church will not mean everlasting loss to 
natural Israel, but that on the contrary they will be profited 
through the blessing of spiritual Israel, the great High Priest 
and Mediator and fully qualified Ministers of the New Covenant
. (2 Corinthians 3:6) Thus to Israel eventually will be 
given the earthly blessings and promises which God originally 
set apart for them, and which were typified under the Law 
Covenant and its typical mediator, Moses, who ia "like unto" 
or a type of the great Mediator, the Christ of God, of whom 
Jesus is the Head and the overcoming saints, his faithful followers
, his members— Acts 3:22, 23. 

Let us then each year appreciate this glorious memorial 
more and more in its expression of 'iove divine all love excelling
," whose length and breadth and height and depth surpass 
all human comprehension. 

"LET US KEEP THE FEAST 

We urge upon the Lord's people who recognize the foregoing
 facts and signification to meet in the name of the Master
 as his members, and to comply with his invitation, "po this 
in remembrance of me," and not as do the Jews— in remembrance
 of the type. But as St. Paul said, "As oft as ye eat 
this bread and drink this cup, ye do show forth the 'Lord's 
death until he come." (1 Corinthians 11:26) Then at his coming
 he shall change the church, which is now a body of humiliation
, and make it in the truest sense a glorious body. — Philippians
 3:21. 

Again, we suggest that where the dear friends possibly can 
do bo they meet together in little groups; but that where this 
is impossible, they nevertheless celebrate alone with the Lord. 
We do not urge large gatherings on such occasions, but the reverse
—that each little group or company meot by itself as a 
separate organization of the body of Christ. "Where two or 
three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 
midst of them." — Matthew 18:20. " 


OUR RISEN LORD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "A Spirit Hath Not Flesh and Bonos;' published in issue of dune 1, 1898, 

whioh pi cane see. | 

[6406] 


March 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


<S8 93) 


God's ways are not our ways, his thoughts are not as ours; 
He wounds us sore with cruel thorns, where we have stooped 

for flowers; 
But oh! the oft-pierced heart those precious drops distil. 
That many a life, else all unble&t, with healing balm shall fill. 
Then give. O ^ive, the flower to those who pray it so mav be, 
But I would choose to have the thorns, with thee, dear tord, 

with thee. 


Kan judgeth man in ignorance he seeth but in part; 
Our trust is in our Maker, God, who searcheth every heart. 
And every wrong and every woe, when put beneath our feet, 
As stepping-stones may help us on to his high mercy seat. 
Then teach us still to smile, O Lord, though sharp the stones 

may be, 
Remembering that they bring us near to thee, dear Lord, to 

thee. 


CHRIST IN GETHSEMANE 


'Tis midnight; and on Olive's brow 
The star is dimmed that lately shone; 

Tis midnight; in the garden now 
The sufTring Savior prays alone. 

'Tis midnight; and, from all removed, 
The Savior wrestles lone with fears; 

E'en that disciple whom he loved 

Heeds not his Master's grief and tears. 


Tis midnight: and for others* guilt 
The Man nf Sorrows weeps in blood; 

Yet he who hath in anguish knelt 
Is not forsaken by his God. 

'Tis midnight; and from other-plains 
Is borne the song the angels know ; 

Vnhoard by mortals are the strains 
Tli at sweetly soothe the Savior's woe. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT OUR HELPER 

acts 2:1-8, 14-18. 
[Paragraphs 1-4 of this article were reprinted from article entitled, "The Spirit at Pentecost,*' published in i&sue of 
January 1, 1910. Paragraphs 5-13 were reprinted from an article entitled, "Speaking With Other Tongues," published in 
issue of December 15, 1901. Paragraphs 25-29 were reprinted from article entitled, "Save Yourselves From Thi3 Generation
," published in issue of January 1, 1909. The remainder is printed below. Please see the articles named. 1 

OPPORTUNITIES FOB PREACHING men," it does not appear that the miracle of the apostles' 

The number of Israelites, otherwise called Jews, residing in speaking in various languages did more at first than to excite 


the surrounding nations, "dispersed among the Gentiles," 
where they were engaged in business, was much greater than 
the number who resided permanently in Palestine. Yet there 
was among them a reverence for the Holy Land and the Mosaic 
law: and the latter commanded an assembling at least representatively
, at the Passover, at Pentecost and at the Feast 
of the Tabernacles. (Deuteronomy 16:16) In consequence great 
numbers came to Jerusalem from the surrounding countries as 
representatives of families and communities to bear tithes and 
to offer prayers and sacrifices at the Temple, on these occasions
. The countries from which they came are mentioned, 
and include a radius of several hundred miles and the most enlightened
 portions of the world at that time. Although Greek 
was the ruling language of that period in official matters and 
among the learned, yet the majority of the people evidently 
understood little more than their native tongues and dialects ; 
nor did the character of the worship at Jerusalem make it necessary
 that they should be very fluent in one language. They 
came together to worship and to present offering* rather than 
to hear preaching. 

Yet doubtless the Lord's arrangement through Moses with 
reference to this feast had in view the very opportunities for 
publishing the good tidings recorded in today's study. The 


curiosity in some, while with others it was attributed to an 
evil influence, to intoxication. Thus Satan, who endeavored 
to calumniate our Lord as a "wine bibber" and possessed of 
Beelzebub, the prince of demons, would now fain hinder the 
people from hearing the message of the Gospel preached with 
the power of the holy Spirit sent down from heaven, and accompanied
 with wonderful manifestations. Then as now the 
servants of God were traduced even by "devout men." See 2 
Corinthians 6:8. 

ST. PETER'S SEEMON 

St. Peter's explanation of the Pentecostal blessing should 
not be taken to mean that what was witnessed in the upper 
room on that Pentecost nearly nineteen centuries ago completely
 fulfilled the Prophet Joel's predictions. No Bible student 
will dispute that the fulfillment of the prophecy began then, 
with the early church, and has been in process of ful Ailment 
during all the centuries since. It is as true today a» it was 
then, that the blessing of the holy Spirit is granted to all of 
God's servants and handmaidens; and the remainder of the 
prophecy will be fulfilled with equal accuracy in due time. After
 these days of the Gospel age, after these days of the outmiracle
 of speaking in various tongues was appreciated by pouring of the holy Spirit upon God's servants and handmaid- 
------ ■ j ves of true re iigion through- ens, will come the glorious epoch of Messiah's kingdom, i 


some at least of these representatives of true religion through 
out the world. Doubtless the testimony of the apostles heard 
here was carried to every quarter, if not in sufficient power to 
convert to Christ, at least in sufficient measure to prepare the 
way in some degree for the message which was to be carried 
throughout the world by the apostles and by believers in general
 who subsequently, as a result of the persecution in Jerusalem
, scattered and went everywhere preaching the Gospel. 
Although the people mentioned were religious, "devout 


— ., . - - „ . „ , in and 

through which God will pour out upon the world of mankind 
a great blessing of enlightenment and uplift from the Bin and 
death conditions now prevailing everywhere. It will be to the 
accomplishment of this end that Satan shall be bound for a 
thousand years ; and the darkness which now covers the earth, 
and the gross darkness which" now blinds the heathen, will be 
chased away by the glorious Sun of Righteousness, with healing 
in his beams.—Malachi 4:2; Matthew 13:43. 


IMPORTANT NOTICES 


PETITION AND PUBLICITY WORK 
Excellent reports are being received from the dear friends 
in all parts of the country as they joyfully participate in the 
splendid opportunities for witnessing which the petition affords
. Although some opposition was encountered in certain 
localities by reason of prejudice, the general response has been 
tremendous and extremely gratifying. The tracts have been 
read and digested; newspapers have opened their columns to 
our message ; men in public life have had their attention called 
to our good work ; and many have inclined a sympathetic and 
hearing ear, and have desired to know more about the truth for 
which our brethren have been called upon to suffer so severely. 
Many classes have succeeded in getting considerable matter 
into their local paper*. We recommend this as a good plan. 
Some of the friends have written us asking whether they 
should cease circulating the petitions 'on any particular date. 
We answer: No; not until you nave secured every signature 


possible. Continue to canvass. Send to us for additional 
blank petitions as you need them. Please keep in mind the fact 
that we aTe not asking our neighbors for any favor, but are 
merely giving them an opportunity to help preserve justice, a 
duty which properly devolves upon all. Members of the local 
classes should not forget that they themselves should sign the 
petitions as well. We all realize that the wrongful condemnation
 of our executives was a condemnation of the I. B. S. A. 
as a whole, an4 that their vindication in the public mind will 
mean a vindication of the entire organization and its' work. 
Hence it is a matter in which the whole church is involved. 
A STIMULUS TO THE COLPORTEUR WORK 
The recent publicity given to the I. B. S. A., through the 
newspapers, tracts and house-to-house canvass with the petitions
 has in many places greatly increased the demand for the 
Scrtptube Studies. Some colporteurs find it easier to make 
sales when the prospective customer learns that the books are 


[«407] 


(93 94) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


published by the International Bible Students' Association. It 
arouses their interest, and they forthwith want to know about 
the truth as we see it. We are sure that the colporteurs will 
take advantage of this favorable situation and "do with their 
might what their hands find to do." 

We suggest that those contemplating entering the colporteur
 work would do well to begin at once, if possible, that they 
may now assist in supplying the message of truth to the inquiring
 ones, ere the interest languishes. We would like to 
hear at once from all such prospective colporteurs, also from 
any former colporteurs who have temporarily left the service 
but would be glad to resume. 

OLD TOWERS IN BOOK FORM 

So numerous are the requests for back issues of The 
Watch Tower, which we are unable to supply, that we have 
wondered whether it would not be the Lord's will for us to 
reprint in book form the complete file of former issues, a a far 
back as 1879, when the publication began. By resetting in 
type similar to that used for the Sunday School lessons in recent
 issues, we are informed that all The Watch Towers from 
1879 to 19"18 inclusive may be gotten into seven volumes of 
about 1,000 pages each, provided that the cover pages are 
omitted between each issue- (except at the beginning of each 


volume) and the pilgrim page eliminated. By the use of moderately
 thin paper, each volume would be only about two 
inches thick and would weigh less than three pounds, the pages 
being the same size as in the present Watch Tower. Each 
volume would contain the issues of several years, approximately
 as follows: 

Vol. I, 1879-188G Vol. IV, 1899-1903 

Vol. II, 1887-1893 Vol. V, 19041908 

Vol. Ill, 1894-1898 Vol. VI, 1909-1913 

Vol. VII, 19H-1918 

The last volume would also contain an Alphabetical Index 
covering all articles appearing in The Watch Tower during 
the entire harvest period and also an index to Scripture citations
. These volumes, substantially bound in embossed cloth, 
could be sold for $2.25 each, we are told, or the entire set of 
seven volumes for $12.00 expressage collect. All who would 
like, to have us undertake the publication of this priceless 
treasure, which would be a fitting climax to the harvest and 
a legacy to posterity, will kindly write us a postcard at once, 
stating which volumes you would like to purchase or whether 
you expect to order the entire set. If the demand is sufficient 
to warrant it, we will gladly proceed with the edition. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


JEHOVAH AN ACCURATE TIME-KEEPER 

Dear Brethren: — 

For some time I have been thinking that the world war 
must have started exactly at the conclusion of the 2520 years 
of Gentile Times. But the war, as we know, began two months 
before October, 1914. Nevertheless since it has proven to be 
the beginning of the "time of trouble," I have believed the 
Scriptures would somehow show that fact with as much precision
 as they relate other great events in chronology. For 
instance, the flood was dried up on the very day of Noah's sixhundredth
 year. (Genesis 8:13) The exodus occurred 430 years 
to a day after Abraham's entrance into Oanaan (Exodus 12:40- 
42, 51) The Israelitish wandering in the wilderness was completed
 on the eve of the Passover, exactly 40 years to a day 
from the time the wandering began. — Numbers 33:3; Joshua 
5:6, 9, 10. 

Will the Scriptures prove that the great "time of trouble" 
was to begin on August 1, 1914, exactly 2520 years to a day 
from the beginning of "the times of the Gentiles"? Let us see: 
As pointed out by Brother Edgar in "Great Pyramid Passages
,'* Volume 2, pages 41 and 42, "the years of the kings of 
Judah began in the spring ; and when a king, through death or 
for any cause, vacated the throne, the year during which he 
ceased to reign was counted in the total years of his reign, 
while the first year of the reign of his successor was reckoned 
as beginning from the following spring." Zedekiah was Judah
's last king; and in harmony with the custom we read in 
2 Chronicles 36:10 that he began his reign "when the year was 
expired" or, as the Revised Version has it, "at the return of 
the year." Thus we have sufficient proof that Zedekiah began 
his reign with the month Nisan, in the spring of the year. Now 
Zedekiah was driven out of Jerusalem in the 11th year of his 
reign, "in the fourth month, in the ninth day" of the month. 
(Jeremiah 52:1-7) But the "desolation" which marked the 
end of God's typical kingdom and thus the beginning of Gentile
 dominion, occurred on the tenth day of the fifth month. 
(Jeremiah 52:12-27) Hence it is this destruction of Jerusalem 
that would seem properly to mark the beginning of the 2520 
years of the Gentiles, even as the Lord said: "Jerusalem shall 
be trodden down of the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles 
be fulfilled."— Luke 21:24. 

If therefore the times of the Gentiles began on the tenth 
day of the fifth month of the Jewish religious year (which 
began in the spring), they would likewise end on the tenth 
day of the fifth month, 2520 years later. By consulting the 
1914 Almanac we find that the fifth new moon from the spring 
equinox occurred at 9:38 p.m. July 22 — which would be July 
23, Jewish time, as their day begins at sundown. Thus the 
beginning of the fifth Jewish month in A. D. 1914 would be 
tfuly 23; and the tenth day of that fifth month would be August
 1, 1914. It was on that very day that Germany declared 
war on Russia, followed immediately by a break with England 
and France ; and the great time of trouble began ! 

We cannot help but wonder in amazement at such manifestation
 of the Father's love and care for his people in the end 
of this age, in furnishing such striking proofs of accuracy of 
our chronology that our faith might be strengthened in this 
time when the dark night is settling down over the whole 
world. Surely we can trust our interests to him who has 
shown such foreknowledge in predicting events thousands of 


years ahead with s>uch precision that the prophecies have been 
fulfilled to the very day! 

Yours in the King's service. R. X, Clemons. — A\ V. 
GLADLY EMBRACING THEIB OPPORTUNITIES 
Beak Brethren: — 

The new volunteer matter is surely the most powerful literature
 we have ever placed before the public. Nobody will 
fail to read it and to reflect on what it cost in suffering to produce
 this subject matter. Am glad also to note the spirit in 
which the dear, faithful, consecrated brethren joyfully take 

hold. I was at when the first letter announcing it was 

received. Without a minute's delay the entire class was organized
 to begin work at once. One brother, a barber, advised 
me that while shaving a U. S. Congressman recently, he inquired
 the gentleman's opinion as to the release of Conscientious
 Objectors and particularly the International Bible Students
. The Congressman gave an unqualified opinion in favor 
of prompt release. As for the petitions a lawyer brother of the 
above mentioned class volunteered to call upon every lawyer 
in the city; a dentist brother said that he would personally 
visit every doctor; etc. Is this not a good suggestion for other 
classes? Let each one use all the influence at his command 
for this work. May the dear Master find us each faithful! 

Yours in his service. M. L. Herr. — Pilgrim. 

Seep appreciation of Christmas gifts 
Dear Friends of the Tower Office: — 

I wish to thank you for remembering my dear husband on 
Christmas. It was very kind of all of you to do so, and I assure
 you that it is much appreciated by us both. He hopes 
soon to be ahle to thank you in person. He wished me to tell 
you that the friends ail over the country sent large quantities 
of good things, and that they are well provided for. They 
were privileged to share with many others He passed out 
fifty good-sized boxes from what he had personally received. 
Many of the poor friendless prisoners wept at being remembered
. 

Again thanking you all for your great kindness, and trusting
 that the new year has many rich blessings in store for you, 
I am Sincerely yours, Mrs. C J. Woodworth, — Pa. 

GRATEFUL FOR PRESENT PRIVILEGES 

Dear Brethren: — 

Enclosed find report of last Sunday's meeting, which opportunity
 of service I enjoyed very much. The strangers present 
seemed favorably impressed with the truths presented and also 
with reference to our dear brethren at Atlanta, and came forward
 readily to sign the petition. From my conversation with 
some of these strangers who seemed loyal to the Ransom and 
possessed of a Christian spirit, though still affiliated with 
Babylon, I thought they may be members of the Benjamin or 
Judah class — recalling the grand article on "Joseph and his 
Brethren" in Aug. 1st, 1918, Watch Tower. Benjamin and 
Judah, etc., must be feeling the famine and are coming to 
Joseph for food. 

May our Father continue to bless you all in the glorious 
work going on at the present time! I presume it is calculated
 to cause a division of the waters, lining up the people 
either on the side of the Lamb or on the side of the Beast. — 
Rev. 17:14, Comments. 

Yours in fellowship and service. A. E. Burgess.— Ohio. 


[6408] 


March 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(94 95^1 


IK FULL HABMONY WITH THE BOCIETT 
Bear Brethren: — 

The name "Brother Kice" having appeared in connection 
with the music on the program of a convention of those not 
standing with the Society, I wish any remembering me to know 
that I have had nothing whatever to do with the matter. I 
have no expectation that the dear Lord will change his appointed
 way of dispensing spiritual food to the household of 
faith; and 1 could think of or desire no greater privilege than 
that of serving the Lord and the dear friends in connection 
with the Society's arrangements. My fervent prayers are offered
 daily for all connected with the work of the Society, especially
 those in bonds. I also thank him that he so richly 
blesses your labor of love. 

Your brother in Christ. B. M. Rice. — Illinois. 

GOD WILL SEE THAT JUSTICE IS RENDERED 
Dearly Beloved Brethren: — 

We desire to express our confidence in the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society as being under the direct supervision 
and overruling care of our Lord. His dealings with the Society
 in the past, his bringing it through every storm has 
proven this to us. We are in full harmony with the outcome 
of the last election of officers, and are assured that they were 
elected in an effort to express the will of the Lord. We desire 
to render our full co-operation in their endeavors to serve the 
Lord and his truth. 

For our brethren in prison we express the belief that although
 they are in bonds yet they have a clear conscience, void 
of offence toward God and man. We trust that if it is his 
will the Lord will soon show to the world the injustice of their 
imprisonment, and that they may be released to pursue again 
the work of serving the truth". We extend much love and our 
prayers for your effectual service and Christian growth. 

Your brethren in Christ. The Tiffin Ecclesia. — Ohio. 

THE EARTHQUAKE OPENED THE IE PRISONS 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

Recently we have had wonderful opportunities of proclaiming
 the Lord's truth here, something which had become absolutely
 impossible before the German "earthquake." We heard 
of the difficulties in America and of our dear brethren's lot. 
W T e pray daily for their welfare and for yours, and we trust 
that the Lord hears our prayers. In Germany, too, many 
brothers have been in prison for righteousness' sake; but now 
they are all at liberty. The "earthquake" opened their prison 
doors. In the love of our Lord, 

Your brother by his grace. Hans Raulvbrs. — Holland. 

ARMENIAN FUGITIVES DI 8 TRIBUTE TRACTS 
Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

The last five packages of literature which you sent never 
reached me. No doubt they went to the bottom of the sea. ^ I 
knew about the Armenian r.s.m. Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 while still 
in Armenia. Among the fugitive Armenians coming into Egypt 
from Jerusalem there were some who had your b.s.m. Nob. 5 
and 6. I wanted to read these, but they were too much worn. 
Kindly send me several copies. 

Your books, "Millennial Dawn," "Photo-Drama of Creation" 
(Scenario) and your tracts are a great help both to me and 
to the bishops and archbishops here in Egypt. (Armenians) 
Our minds are illuminated by the truths explained in these 
books. Especially do they help me in my Bible class. I have 
distributed all the books and tracts which you sent in your 
first lot. Depending upon your generosity, I did not refuse any 
one who asked for literature; and now I have not even one 
copy left with me. Therefore I hope you will remember us, 
and will send more literature to take the place of what was 
lost on the way. 

Your brother in Christ. Varton Varterebsian. — Egypt. 

ASSURANCE OF HEARTY SYMPATHY 
Dear Brethren: — 

Just a line to assure you of my hearty support and sympathy
, and also to express my thankfulness and my gratitude to 
the Lord for the very rich and abundant blessings I have received
 from The Watch Tower during the past year. I am 
certain that the divine blessing has been upon you. I am also 
very glad to note that we may have an elucidation of the minor 
prophets. Could we have a few thoughts on the prophecy of 
Jeremiah? It has struck me as having perhaps a peculiar 
application (also of peculiar significance) to the present time. 

With many prayers that the Lord will guide and direct 
you more and more into his holy will, and bless you abundantly
 above what we can conceive or think during this present 
year, I am 

Your loving brother in the Lord. 

Alfred L Payntee. — Eng. 


appreciation of present difficulties 
Dear Brethren: — 

We are sending you a new year's greeting in Christ, in whom 
we have fellowship and are mystically united. We are aware 
of the many struggles through which the Society has been 
passing. But as a ship that has not only a cargo but precious 
lives on board, has been attacked by fierce tempests at one time 
and by submarines at another, but has finally escaped, it is 
sailing on, dispensing food and thus nourishingthe souls of the 
Lord's people far and near. We often pray that you dear 
brethren may be filled with wisdom, strength and perseverance 
to do the Lord's will. We feel it incumbent on us to do as 
did Aaron and Ilur, holding Moses 1 hands. Please accept our 
love and our expression of appreciation of the work carried on 
hy you in the name of our Redeemer and Head. May you receive
 that crown of life which fadeth not away, and may you 
be stimulated to go on with renewed zeal and effort as you 
anticipate the joy it will afford you of seeing the many brethren
 whom you have never seen in the flesh, and whose names 
you have never heard, hut to whom 3011 have ministered and 
who are sharing with you those blessings flowing from the 
throne of Jehovah, in whose presence there is fulness of joy 
and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore. 
Tiie Bog Walk Ecclesia.— B. W. I. 
WHOLE TOWN SIGNED THE PETITION 
Dear Ones in the Lord: — 

Knclosed find petition papers. We wish to make mention 
of how the Lord has blessed us in this wonderful privilege. The 
population of our city is six hundred, and all the business men 
of the town signed our petition. We wish to note also that 
only twelve persons refused to sign. Our little class consists 
of only six sisters; and we are all truly thankful for the way 
that has opened up that we might in some manner show our 
love for those whom wc love so dearly. May the Lord's richest
 blessings rest upon you. We think of you and pray for 
you incessantly. With much Christian love we are, 

Yours in the Lord. Archer City Ecclesia. — Texas. 

PLEDGE OF LOYALTY EENEWED 
Dearly Loved Brethren: — 

As we stand in the opening days of an eventful year we. 
the assembled brethren of this Ecclesia, desire to renew our 
pledge of loyalty and support to our brethren whom the Lord 
has graciously placed at the headquarters of the channel, the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, We feel too deeply 
to express in words the gratitude and loving thankfulness we 
are deriving from the Society's labors of love. Perhaps the 
expression of our hearts is found in the words of one writer, 
that as sons of God we are dwelling in the inner circle of the 
Almighty Jehovah. We just desire to remain loyal and true 
to the principles of God's Word, and to be as humble and teachable
 as the little child used by our Elder Brother as an example
 of humility. With fervent Christian love, we are 

Yours by his favor. The Stockport Ecclesia. — Eng. 
"GREEN PASTURES BESIDE STILL WATERS" 
Dear Brethren: — 

We desire to express to you our entire satisfaction and 
approval of the election of officers of the Watch Tower Bible 
and Tract Society. We are confident that the Lord is still 
using the Society as the channel for feeding his sheep; and 
while the Tower contains such nourishing spiritual food we 
need not, nor will we, seek new pastures. So, praying God's 
continued blessing upon you, we are, 

Your fellow servants. The Mayfield Ecclesia. — K$. 
in hearty accord with the watch tower 
Brethren: — 

Having just had our regular annual election of Elders and 
other officers for our Ecclesia, we beg leave to report that at 
the meeting a resolution was introduced to the effect that the 
Fargo Ecclesia is heartily in accord with the dear friends now 
getting out the blessed Watch Tower; and that every member
 of this Ecclesia is more than ever convinced that the good 
old Watch Tower is the proper channel, and we praise the 
Lord for permitting us to receive it. May he continue to prosper
 the work as he sees it necessary; and be assured, dear 
friends, that you have the undivided* support of this Ecclesia 
and that you are remembered daily at the throne of heavenly 
grace. 

With much Christian love. The Fargo Ecclesia.— N. D. 
DECISION RENDERED SY CHURCH BOARD 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: — 

At the regular meeting of the Board of Riders and Deacons 
of the Detroit Ecclesia, it was decided that no communication 
derogatory or otherwise not bearing the stamp of the Watch 
Tower Office should *>e read to the class by the Secretary, with- 


[6409] 


(99-100) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Fa. 


out submitting same to the Board of Elders for their sanction. 
Yours in the Master's service. E. A. McCosff, Secy. 

PRESERVING THE UNITY OF THE SPIRIT 
Deab Brethren: — 

It is with pleasure that we write to inform you that we 
here are of one mind and still believe that the Lord is using 


the Society, guiding its affairs. The last Pilgrim's visit was 
much enjoyed, and his talk on Faith was strengthening indeed
. We all wish to continue faithful, ready to do whatever 
the Lord privileges us to have part in. May God keep and 
comfort those who have charge of the Society's affairs now, 
and bless all his little ones everywhere! 

^ours in the Master's service, Linton Ecclesia. — Ir\d. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL 1, 1919 


No. 7 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


ROLLING TOGETHER AS A SCROLL 

The subject of church unity now takes a most prominent 
position in the pages of the public press. All eyes are turned 
toward the visit of the committee of Episcopal bishops to the 
pope of Rome in behalf of the proposed "League of Churches." 
Bishop Welle r of Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, Bishop Anderson 
of Chicago and Bishop Boyd Vincent of the diocese of Southern 
Ohio, sailed on the steamship Aquitania on March Gth for 
Rome, where they will interview the pope in an effort to gain 
liis cooperation in the union of all Christian churches. The 
commission is an official body of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church, authorized by the general convention held in Cincinnati
 in 1010. As a result of that convention a committee was 
appointed and was preparing to sail for Rome in the autumn 
of 1914. The great war which broke out at that time, however
, delayed the movement, which has now sprung up with 
increased vigor with the coming of peace. 

That the pope is not averse to the idea is indicated by a 
dispatch from Rome under the date of March 6th and published
 in the New York World as follows: — 

"It is learned from the Vatican that the Holy See is preparing
 an exhaustive memorandum, in which it explains its 
attitude toward the American projects for a pan-Christian 
conference and for a union of all Christian churches. The 
memorandum will fix those points upon which the Pontiff is 
prepared to support the American scheme." 

Bishop Murray, of the diocese of Maryland (Episcopal) 
comments upon the project in The Baltimore Sun of March 5th 
as follows: 

"We are trying to get a working agreement among the 
various churches to find a common ground of operation. We 
are not trying to emphasize the points in which the various 
Christiana bodies differ, but to develop and make prominent 
thobe things on which we can all agree. All of the chuTches 
are parties to the negotiations and I feel that we have a right 
now to expect success." 

The Most Reverend Patrick Joseph Hayes, Archbishop of 
Xew York, is reported as saying that the proposed league of 
churches is "a very encouraging thing, as a sign of the 
times at the close of the war, to have such a movement toward
 effecting unity of faith in one fold with one shepherd." 
He is quoted as saying further: "It is especially gratifying that 
this commission of the Protestant Episcopal Church is going 
to the Catholic Center of Christendom, where I am sure it 
"will receive a welcome." 

Bishop Weller, a member of the commission to th« pope, 
in an interview with the newspapers in New York before he 
sailed, said: 

"Our duty is simply to see that the general conference comes 
together and that the basis for action is established. Already 
in this country the Baptists, the Congregationalists, the Methodists
, the Presbyterians, the Moravian Brethren, the Disciples 
of Christ, Methodist Episcopalians and other Protestant sects, 
the Old Catholics of Europe and the Xon-conformists throughout
 Great Britain are definitely committed to the world conference
 plan. The sects have already appointed their commissions
. These commissions are ready to attend a conference. 
Once we have secured the adhesion of the Catholic Church, 
there remains only the task of appointing a time and a place 
for the gathering." 

Bishop Weller explained that the Roman Catholic Church 
and the Holy Eastern Church, alone among the Christian 
sects, had thus far failed to accept the invitation to a world 
conference, and that if the present mission could secure their 
cooperation then the last obstacle to a world conference would 
be removed. He said the commission intended to visit the 
patriarch of the Greek Church and also the head of the 
Russian Church in addition to their visit to the pope. 

According to Dr. Charles I). Williams, Bishop of Michigan 
(Episcopal), the Presbyterian church — the denomination to 
which President Wilson belongs — is now really at the head of 
the present American plan for a league of Churches, In an 
Article in the March issue of Reconstruction he said: 


"The leadership in the movement towards organic unity 
has long been in the hands of the Protestant Episcopal church. 
Those of other communions who have been interested in that 
movement have long been sitting with amazing humility on 
the steps of the Episcopal House of Bishops, awaiting such 
crumbs of comfort and hope as might fall from the Masters* 
table. 

"The Presbyterian General Assembly picked up the abandoned
 leadership. On their initiative the representatives of 
thirty-five million American Christians met recently at Philadelphia
, appointed committees of preparation and summoned 
a great meeting in the near future, not later than 1920, to 
take action for such a practical organic unity of American 
Protestantism as shall be consistent with individual liberty." 
WILLING TO SACRIFICE STAKE AKD CREED 

That the Presbyterian Church in America is especially interested
 in the church unity project is corroborated by the 
following dispatch from the Pittsburgh Post of March 12th: 

"The merger of the Presbyterian and United Presbyterian 
churches was put forward as the logical forerunner of a great 
religious unifying movement which should bring in all of the 
ten or twelve Presbyterian denominations and possibly some 
of those not Presbyterians, at last night's session of the 
prayer conference on union. Dr. Robert E. Speer of New 
York, member of the board of foreign missions of the Presbyterian
 Church, and spokesman for his church at the gathering
, ventured the prediction that in any union with the United 
Presbyterian his church would be willing to sacrifice name, 
forms and prerogatives which need be sacrificed to further the 
union. A great gathering of Christian bodies under one head 
was the' ideal that Dr. Speer set forth." 

The foregoing is clearly in fulfillment of Bible prophecy as 
interpreted by Pastor Russell more than thirty years ago. 
Through The Watch To web* and particularly in Studies rN 
tiik Scriptures, Volume IV, page 258, written 23 years ago, 
he said: 

"The 'sure Word of prophecy* indicates very clearly that 
the various Protestant sects will form a cooperative union or 
federacy and that Catholicism and Protestantism will affiliate
, neither losing its identity. These are the two ends of the 
ecclesiastical heavens which, as their confusion increases, shall 
roll together as a scroll for self protection — as distinct and 
separate rolls, yet in close proximity to each other. (Isaiah 
34:4; Revelation 6:14) For this * desired end Protestants 
show themselves ready to make almost any compromise, while 
Papacy has assumed a most conciliatory attitude. Every intelligent
 observer is aware of these facts; and every reader 
of history knows the baneful character of that great antichristian
 system that now sees, in the great confusion of 
Protestantism, its opportunity for readvancmg to power. And 
though realizing in itself a strength superior to that of divided 
Protestantism, the great Papal system also frnrs the approaching
 crisis, and hence desires most anxiously the \inion of 
Christendom, fcapal and Protestant, civil and religious." 
"IK THE DAYS OF THESE KHTGS" 

Bible Students are familiar with the account of King Nebuchadnezzar
's vision of the great image whose head was of gold, 
arms and breast of silver, belly of brass and legs of iron, and 
the feet of which were iron smeared with clay." The Prophet 
Daniel gave an inspired interpretation thereof, indicating 
that the four metals composing the great giant typify four 
great world-empires, beginning with Babylonia, which was 
represented in the head of gold. (Daniel 2) History shows 
the fulfillment of the vision. There have been just four universal
 empires of earth, namely, Babylonia, Medo-Persia, Greece 
and Rome. The feet smeared with clay (ecclesiasticism) resembled
 stone rather than iron. Thus the **Holy Roman Empire" 
was a counterfeit of "the stone f»ut out of the mountain without 
hands" — the true church. — Daniel 2:34, 45. 

The ten toes of the image typified ten divisions of ancient 
Rome, which would he in existence in Europe when the Fifth 
Universal Empire would be established — the Messianic King- 


[6410] 


April 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(ioo-ion 


dom. Having this in mind, one of our readers has called our 
attention to the list of delegates at the Paris Peace Conference
, as published in the Official U. 8, Bulletm of Feb. 8, 
1919. Although there are thirty-two powers and dominions 
represented at the Peace Table (with from one to five delegates
 each, and the total delegation numbering exactly 
seventy), the brother who sends us the Bulletin thinks it sufficient
 that there are just ten European powers in attendance 
at the Conference, and that these ten are the only governments 
in Europe that have participated in the drafting of the 
League of Nations. With just ten European powers possessing
 charter membership in the coming League of Nations, the 
brother asks whether we may not expect soon to see a very 
literal fulfillment of Revelation 17:12, 13. The text reads: 
"And the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which 
have received no kingdom as yet [not yet crowned or approved 
by Papal Rome J ; but receive powers as kings one hour with 
the beast. These have one mind [leagued together under one 
head], and shall give their power and strength unto the 
beast." The ten European powers having accredited representatives
 at the Peace Table are: Great Britain, France, Italy, 
Belgium, Serbia, Greece, Roumania, Portugal, Poland and 
Czecho-Slovakia. 

In this connection it may be interesting to note that Rome 
is already taking credit to itself for President Wilson's celebrated
 "14 points" and the League of Nations idea developing
 therefrom. The Pittsburgh Post of Feb. 25, 1919, quotes 
Father R. L. Hayes of Pittsburgh as follow^: "President Wilson
's 14 points, which were presented to the central powers 
as grounds on which a cessation of hostilities could be granted, 
were originally propounded by the pope. Point for point, the 
document on which peace was finally brought to the world 
follows the plea of our Holy Father offered twCr years ago. 
At that time it was not acceptable, but its principles lived to 
finally bring about peace." 

FAMINES— PESTILENCES— EABTHQUAKES 

When Jesus answered the question of his disciples: "What 
shall be the sign of thy presence and of the end of the age?" 
he declared among other things: "Nation sball rise against 
nation and kingdom against kingdom; and there shall be 
famines and pestilences and earthquakes in divers places," 
(Matthew 24:7) This remarkable prophecy, as Bible students 
know, has been in fulfillment for the past several years. Since 
the end of Gentile times we have seen kingdom rise against 
kingdom, which was followed by famines and pestilences and 
earthquakes (revolutions) in rapid succession. Indeed, these 
various elements of the great "time o£ trouble" have intermingled
 so that the famines, pestilences and earthquakes now 
ravish the human family simultaneously. We quote a British 
dispatch of March 7th, published throughout the world, reading
 as follows: 

"George H. Roberta, the food minister, said today that he 
could state on absolutely unimpeachable authority that the 
situation with regard to food conditions in great areas of 
Europe was nothing less than tragic. 

" 'It is not too much to say that Roumania is starving, 
that Serbia is starving, that Austria is starving and that 
Germany is starving/ he declared. 'Ever since the armistice 
was signed the Allies have been doing what they could to 
relieve the situation, and food is being sent to all the countries 
that I have named. But it is not enough, and the question 
now arises whether we shall be able to get sufficient food to 
those countries in time to prevent a catastrophe.' " 

In addition to the famines the Lord mentioned that pestilences
 would be specially manifest in the earth at this time. 
It is even so. The influenza epidemic has 3wept the entire 
earth from the frigid zones to the equator, from the Esquimaux 
of the extreme north to the Hottentots of the torrid regions. 
In the short space of one year this pestilence alone has claimed 
twelve million lives, which is in excess of the combined casualties
 of the four and a half years of war. 

In the prophecy above quoted the last mentioned item is 
"earthquakes in divers places/' It is well known to students 
of prophecy that an earthquake is the Biblical symbol for 
revolution. Hence the Lord was- indicating that the great 
war that was to precede the Messianic Kingdom would be immediately
 followed by revolutions in many places. There have 
been literal earthquakes of great violence in recent years, also. 
Doubtless others will follow. 

The revolutionary period began in Russia in 19t7, and has 
rapidly swept over Europe. We quote from the Philadelphia 
Public Ledger of February 26th, 1919, the following: 

"Yesterday three men to whom the people of the United 
States are accustomed to pay heed were reported as saying 
without previous consultation, practically the same thing. 
The three men were President Wilson, Ex-President Taft, and 


the British Premier, Lloyd George. The statement on which 
they agree we may perhaps find best put in the arresting 
words of Ex-President Taft at Omaha: 

u 'Today is more serious in Europe than the day upon 
which the German hordes came nearest to Paris. It is 
the crisis of the world. Should Europe go to pieces 
America would be involved in another world war without
 the least doubt/ 

"There is no question whatever that the ever-seething 
volcano of social unrest in Europe approaches the eruption 
point. It may not burst forth. Lloyd George is pressing 
the British Parliament to 'railroad' an emergency measure 
for the purpose of averting 'civil strife* in the United Kingdom
. This, remember, is in a victorious country which is 
to get and not to pay indemnities, which is not blockaded, 
which is well supplied with food and whose industries are 
being transferred to a peace basis as rapidly as possible. But 
in spite of all these advantages, the wrenching, wrecking, 
dislocating effects of four years of war, tearing apart the 
old relations between wages and prices, burying the old 
economic runways, tossing the old systems into chaos, have 
produced so serious a situation that even the British Premier 
must appeal to Parliament to take swift measures to prevent 
'civil strife/ 

"And he means just that. It is well known that if the 
miners strike, a total industrial tie-up will follow; and that 
the other trade unions, notably railway men, stand ready 
to prevent troop movements. The government will be 
pinioned, industry wttl be paralyzed and the chief victor of 
the war may stagger through universal distress into disaster." 

In this connection we are reminded of the ominous words 
of President Wilson in his Boston address on his recent return 
from Europe: 

"When I speak of the nations of the world I do not speak 
of the governments of the world. I speak of the peoples who 
constitute the nations of the world. They are in the saddle, 
and they are going to see to it that if their present governments
 do not do their will some otheT governments shall, 
and the secret is out and the present governments know it." 

At this juncture we find the Roman pontiff coming for 
ward and offering his service as arbitrator or advisor. An 
Associated Press Dispatch from Paris under date of March 
11th reads as follows: 

"It has become known that Pope Benedict has addressed an 
appeal to the powers emphasizing the urgency of the speedy 
conclusion of peace with Germany. It is understood that the 
Pontiff states that the Vatican possesses reliable information 
that the situation in Germany, socially and economically, is 
very grave, and that he fears the spread of Bolshevism with 
such rapidity that it might result in the establishment of 
a Bolshevik state, which, in turn, might become allied with 
Bolshevik Russia. w 

WONDEKFUL WITNESS FOB THE TEUTH 

Our readers are familiar with the teachings of the Scriptures
 which indicate that the Lord's people in the end of this 
age shall appear before kings and rulers and statesmen of 
earth in giving their final witness as ambassadors of the coming
 kingdom. (Revelation 10:11) We have often wondered 
what means the Lord may use in arousing the attention of the 
ruling class so that they would look into the teachings for 
which the saints are now obliged to suffer. It seems evident 
that at least one of the circumstances which the Lord uses 
in permitting his people to gain audience with those in authority
, is the case of our leaders who are now suffering imprisonment
 for having taught the doctrines of Pastor Russell. 

During the past few weeks a country-wide agitation has 
been started in behalf of these brethren, who were not only 
given a severe sentence because of their sincerity, but have even 
been denied bail, pending the appeal of their case. This has 
aroused the attention of newspaper editors, Congressmen, Senators
 and Governors, and many of them have signed petitions 
for the release of the Bible Students from prison. As a sample
 of numerous letters which Congressmen have written in 
response to letters received by them, we quote the following 
from Congressman M. Clyde Kelly of Pennsylvania, received 
here on March 1 : 

'*In response to your letter of the 25th will say that I am 
interested in securing justice for the men in whom you are 
interested. I have gone into the case thoroughly with those 
who know the situation and am asking for a full report with 
view to action." 

Also a letter from Congressman E. W. Saunders of Virginia 
has been received, reading as follows: 

"I am in receipt of your letter relating to the case of the 
Bible Students now in confinement at Atlanta. I beg to say 
that I favor the pardon of these men, and will be very glad 


[6411] 


(101-102) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


to join in a recommendation to that effect. These people are 
not criminals in the ordinary sense of the word, though they 
may have been guilty of a technical violation of the law. 
But the war is over now, and we ought to try to put it beyond
 us as rapidly as possible/* 

We have received copy of letter from Mayor Henry W. 
Kiel of St. Louis, Mo., which he has voluntarily addressed 
to President Wilson, reading as follows: 

"Allow me to add my individual request to those already 
forwarded to you asking that Messrs. Rutherford et al., of 
the International Bible Students Association be admitted to 
bail pending a final decision of their case in the higher courts, 


and if possible that pardon be granted in these cases." 

Many letters of request for further information and expressing
 kindly interest in the case of our brethren have been 
received from Governors of the various states and other men 
in public life, Many Congressmen and other officials, state 
and national, have signed the petition calling for the release 
of our President J. F. Rutherford and his seven associates in 
bonds. Thus a wonderful witness for the truth is being given 
through the petition and publicity work. Public men, ordinarily
 difficult to reach, are showing much interest in having 
justice done to our brethren, and also are having their attention
 drawn to the truths for which the brethren stand. 


LOYALTY TO THE BRETHREN 


"TVe ought to lay down our lives 
The Lord's will concerning all his followers is that they 
should love one another as he loved them. St. John expressed 
this sentiment, saying that as Jesus loved the church and 
laid down his life for the church, so also his followers should 
lay down their lives for the brethren. If this is the love standard
 that the Lord has set for his people,, how sorely some 
will soon be disappointed in respect to his will if they have 
ignored this requirement! If, instead of loving the brethren 
and laying down their lives for them, they say all manner of 
evil against them, etc., what then? Then they are false brethren
. They they are the peril of the true brethren. 

Oh, how much the true followers of Jesus need to impress 
upon themselves this great lesson — that love does no ill to his 


/or the brethren." — 1 John 3:10. 

neighbor, that love is sympathetic, suffereth long and is kind, 
vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, seeketh not merely its 
own interest and welfare, but the interest and welfare of 
others ! 

The supreme test of our loyalty to God is our love for 
him; and this love is manifested by our desire to do those 
things acceptable to him. There is little that we really can 
do for the Almighty. He is so great and we are so small! 
But if we have his spirit of love, then we shall love all those 
who love him. And our conduct toward them will demonstrate 
the real sentiment of our hearts. Thus seen, we are daily making
 our record in the Lord's sight, daily showing him to what 
degree we are worthy or unworthy of his great reward. 


"HE THAT RECEIVETH YOU RECEIVETH ME" 

''Verily, verily, I say unto you, lie that receive l h irhomsocvei I send receiveth me; avd he that reeeiveth me receircth him 

that sent me." — John 13:20. 


The strong emphasis which our Lord used in stating this 
vital principle, taken in connection with the time and the 
conditions, indicates its importance and the necessity of its 
full comprehension by those who would complete their course 
with joy. He had finished his public ministry, had foretold 
his passion and death, had celebrated the last feast of the 
Passover, had inaugurated the Memorial Supper, had washed 
the feet of the apostles, had proclaimed his true office as Master
 and Lord, had explained the symbolism of his having 
washed their feet, had informed them that the servant is not 
greater than his Lord and had announced that those who 
knew and did these things would have happiness as a reward. 
Then he added enigmatically, "I speak not of you all. I know 
whom I have chosen; but that the Scripture may be fulfilled, 
He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up his heel against 
me." Then immediately follows the statement of our text; 
and "when Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in spirit, and 
testified and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you that one of 
you shall betray me." Only one who had companied with the 
Lord and had been under the power of his spirit could become 
a "son of perdition." — John 17:6-8, 12, 

Later in this same discourse our Lord told his followers 
that he was about to leave them ; that though gone from them 
he would remain the Way, the Truth and the Life; that no 
man could come to the Father but by him; and that the holy 
Spirit would come in his name — his power, authority — and 
bring all his teachings to their remembrance. 

FALSE TEACHERS AND TRTTE PROPHETS 

Thus the things of the "so great salvation which first began
 to be spoken by the Lord" were confirmed to his later 
followers by those who heard him, God also bearing witness 
with signs/miracles and gifts of the holy Spirit, according to 
his will. (Hebrews 2:3, 4) After our Lord has ascended far 
above all things, having led captivity— death — captive, he gave 
gifts to men. "He gave some apostles, and some prophets, 
and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the 
perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry [service
], for the edifying [building up] of the body of Christ; till 
[until] we all come to the unity of the faith, and of the 
knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the 
measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ; that we henceforth
 he no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried 
about by every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and 
cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive," 
(Ephesians 4:11-14) Hence we know that under our Lord, 
first in the body arc the apostles, foundation stones in the New 
Jerusalem; then second, prophets, the angels to the seven 
churches, whom he who walked in the midst of the seven 
candlesticks held in his own right hand (Revelation 1:13, 20; 
2:1), sending each one in his due time with his appropriate 
message to the church which he especially serves. 


Each one of the seven periods of the church had its special
 messenger and its special message, which it could get 
only through its messenger. (Revelation 2:1, 7, 8, 11, 12, 17, 
18, 29; 3:1, 6, 7, 13, 14, 22) Following these angels, seven 
prophets, came numerous evangelists, pastors, teachers; but 
each church had only the light of its own angel, or prophet, 
and that of his predecessors, while the succeeding period of 
the church had to wait the installation of its angel by the 
Lord for its particular message. And as there were false 
teachers in fleshly Israel, making void the message of its prophets
, so the Master warned of false teachers to follow him and 
his apostles and his prophets. The Apostle Paul, too, said 
that from among the disciples themselves, and chiefly from 
among the elders, would arise men speaking perverse things, 
to draw away disciples after themselves.— rActs 20:30; Jude 
12, 13, 16-20. 

Note how the Lord in our text coupled the acceptance of 
those whom he sent with the acceptance of himself and the 
Father. The converse must be equally true. The rejection of 
any whom he sent would be the rejection of him and the 
Father. In connection with their acceptance he says: "If ye 
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, I speak not 
of you all. I know whom I have chosen [that will remain 
faithful, not loving their life to death]; but that the Scripture 
may be fulfilled, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up 
his heel against me." And the one to whom he gave the "sop " 
and who accepted it, went out after Satan had entered into 
him and, as foreknown by our Lord, betrayed him. Nor did 
our Lord under the circumstances seek to hinder him.— John 
13:27. 

Consisting of bread and wine, the memorial pictures the 
life of our Lord given for the life of the world. In this sacrifice
 the consecrated ones have communion, common union, in 
presenting their bodies living sacrifices and thus becoming 
sharers in the Sin-offering, (Romans 12:1 ; 2 Corinthians 
4:1-18, especially verse 11) From those who draw back come 
the Judases, the sons of perdition. 

THE ANTITYPICAL "SON OF PERDITION*' 

To whom much is given, of him much is required- (Luke 
12:47, 48; John 15:22) The early church had much given 
them, and much was required. (Revelations 2:5, 9) Yet 
from among them arose "false apostles, deceitful workers, 
transforming themselves" as ministers (servants of righteousness
 (2 Corinthians 11:13, 14) ; those who turned aside from 
the end of the commandment, love, to "vain jangling," desiring
 to be teachers but failing to understand the things thev 
affirmed, (1 Timothy 1:5-7, 19, 20) A careful noting of the 
constant and varied "strange doctrines" which the Apostle recited
 show-s how the adversary through his willing and duped 
agents strove to put out ^^ l*ght which our Lord had brought 
into the world. — John 3:19-21. 


[6412] 


April 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(103-104) 


Thus in apostolic days "the mystery of iniquity" was working
, whose coming was in all the deceivableness of unrighteousness
 in those who received not the truth in the love of it. 
Many who followed their vicious ways caused the way of truth 
to be evil spoken of. History has proven how Satan succeeded 
in bringing in the dark ages, foretold in the Word of God to 
come after men — the apostles — slept, resulting in the full development
 of the antitypieal Son of Perdition. 

After opening the eyes of the man born blind, our Lord 
said: "While I am in the world, I am the light of the world." 
(John 9:5, Diaglott) The Greek word here translated "while" 
has the significance of "whensoever." "That was the true 
light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world." 
Yet it shone "in darkness, and the darkness comprehended 
it not." To those who would hear, our Lord said: "While ye 
have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the children
 of the light." (John 12:36) And some believed. Thus all 
down the age there have been children of the light. 
JOT SINCE OT7B LOBD'S KBTTTBN 

During this last talk with his disciples our Lord also told 
them that he was going away to prepare a place for them, 
but that he would come again to receive them to himself. To 
and through the angel to the church of Laodicea he said: "Behold
, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my 
voice and open the door, I will come in to him and will sup 
with him, and he with me," To the faithful, watching servants
 who open the door at his knock when the Master returns
, a blessing is promised in a full repast as he girds himself
 and causes them to sit down to meat while he serves them. 
—Luke 12:37. 

Thus it has been since 1874. And with the return of "the 
true Light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the 
world," how light on every subject that affects man has come 
in and continues to come, and no power of malevolence can 
stop it ! Oh, the blessedness of those who have sat at the 
Master's table, as he served through his wise and faithful 
steward, who was made ruler over the household to give them 
meat in due season! Volume after volume with abundant side 
dishes, has he given us. Of a truth he was made ruler over 
"all the goods," all the "meat in due season." (Luke 12:43, 
44; Matthew 24:45-47) And why was this angel given rule 
over "all the goods," while the other angels had a more limited 
stewardship? No doubt it was because the time was near 
when the Mystery of God would be finished (Revelation 10:7), 
and the faithful living in this period would need all the meat 
to build them up and to sustain them. 

THE TABLE OF THE LORD'S PROVIDING 

Then, too, it was the divine purpose that there need be and 
would be but seven angels to the church. Moreover, there 
would be a table where our Lord would sup with his espoused, 
and she with hin>— a channel of service. And where has this 
been found ? The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society is this 
channel, founded for the promotion of Christian knowledge, 
teaching how to walk in our Lord's footsteps, as he left us 
an example. — 1 Peter 2:21. 

How bountifully this table, this channel, has provided the 
"meat in due season," bringing forth things old and newl 
Clearly setting forth line upon line and precept upon precept 
from the Word, it has not shunned to declare the whole counsel
 of God. (Acts 20:27) Man's perfection from the hands of 
the Creator; his fall through disobedience; the enforcement of 
the death penalty on all in Adam, making clear that "man hecame
 a living soul" and that "the soul that sinneth it shall 
die" — these fundamental truths are constantly reiterated. The 
doctrine of the Ransom is set forth with equal clearness — that 
through transference by divine power of the life principle from 
the Word in his prehuman existence (John 1:14), the holy 
Child was born in Bethlehem of Judea, becoming in due time 
the anointed Jesus who died, the just for the unjust, that 
he might bring us to God, thus providing the ransom sacrifice
 through which God could be just and yet the Justifier of 
him that believeth; and that on this foundation of satisfied 
justice Jesus became the spiritual seed of Abraham, through 
whom all the families of the earth shall be blest. 

Furthermore, the work of the Gospel age hag been fully 
explained. Those now joined to our Lord through consecration
 and spirit-begetting become living branches in him as 
the true Vine of the heavenly Father's right hand planting, 
and members of this spiritual seed of Abraham, heirs according
 to the promise. (Galatians 3:8, 16, 29) All thus favored 
of God obtain a clear vision of "the mystery hidden from ages 
and generations," but now made known through the holy 
apostles — "Christ in you, the hope of glory." As "this same 
Jesus" was highly exalted after his suffering, "being made so 
much better than angels as he had obtained a more excellent 
name than they," becoming "the express image of the Father's 


person," so those who have obtained the precious faith in the 
Lord's finished work will be made like him. Through the 
righteousness of God and our Savior Jesus Christ they are 
given exceeding great and precious promises, that through 
these they too might become partakers of the divine nature. 
(2 Peter 1:4) While in the flesh this class will diligently 
flee away from the corruption which is in the world through 
natural desires. 

CURRENT EVENTS EXPLAINED 

The second coming of our Lord and the consequent overthrow
 of Satan's empire have been clearly set forth. In our 
Father's house there are many mansions, distinctions of natures
 — human ^ angelic, cherubic, seraphic, etc. Our Lord went, 
as he said, to prepare a different and higher one for his 
faithful followers, even the divine. He promised that he would 
come again to receive them to himself. Furthermore, he would 
so come as he had gone. As then the watching faithful ones 
saw him go in the clouds, bo the same class would see him 
return in like manner, to displace the angry nations, first executing
 wrath upon them in retributive justice for their iniquities
, causing the very agencies they depended upon for peace 
to be their destruction. — Jeremiah 25:15-38; Ezekiel 28:18. 

The long-promised time of trouble has been emphasized 
through this channel which the Lord has used throughout the 
harvest period. After having assembled the nations and pouring
 upon them his indignation, even his fierce anger, because 
of their iniquities, destroying the present order with the fire 
of his jealousy, God will then turn to the people a pure language
, that they may call on him with one consent. Then he 
will set forth a feast of fat things and wines on the lees, well 
refined, for all people. In this new order, the mountain of 
the Lord's house, the Messianic Kingdom, God will destroy 
"the face of the covering [death] cast over all people, and 
the vail [ignorance] that is spread over all nations," leading 
them to say : "That is our God ; we have waited for him, and 
he will save us; this is the Lord; we have waited for him, we 
will be glad and rejoice in his salvation." In this "restitution
 of all things," the bride class will be associated with our 
Lord as kings and priests to their God, and will reign with 
Christ a thousand years, until the last enemy — death, is destroyed
 and earth's sovereignty turned over to the Father *tfeat 
he may be all in all. 

Again, at the second presence of the Lord, the light has 
been shining forth in a fulness unexcelled even in apostolic 
days. Again the wily and powerful adversary, through various
 and strange doctrines, putting light for darkness and darkness
 for light, is using every means to create strife and animosities
 among the consecrated, causing divisions contrary to 
the Word, putting non-essentials for fundamentals, raising 
false, unscriptural standards and using these as criterions for 
fellowship. Again sects are forming; but those approved will 
recognize the Lord and his arrangements and will not join 
in those movements which will cause the way of truth to be 
evil spoken of, and which lead off into "blackness of darkness
." — Matthew 6:23; Jude 13. 

EVIL INFLUENCES NOW AT WOBK 
Since the Laodicean "angel," as a part of his stewardship, 
and as the final arrangement thereof, prepared for a continuance
 of the table, the channel, on the foundation of the 
Ransom and its corollaries — the seed to bless and the resurrected
 to receive the blessing — shall we turn away from the 
feast of "meat in due season" to feed on various and strange 
doctrines and to "be tossed to and fro and carried about by 
every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning 
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive?" Shall we 
become puffed up in our fleshly minds, not purely "holding 
the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having 
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the 
increase of God," building itself up in love? "He that receiveth 
whomsoever I send receiveth me, and he who receiveth me receiveth
 him who sent me." "If ye know these things happy are 
ye if ye do them. I speak not of you all; I know whom I 
have ciiosen!" 

Ah, Beloved! It behooves us in this "end of the age," when 
the Lord is sending "forth his messengers, who will gather 
out of hi3 kingdom all seducers [from the faith] and iniquitous
 persons" (Matthew 13:41, Diaglott), that we reject not 
his table (channel) lest we be led to the cup and the table of 
devils. (I Corinthians 10:21) Let us keep our hearts with all 
diligence, remembering that out of the heart are the issues of 
life, and that out of its abundance the mouth speaketh. And 
while our God tries us whether we love him with all our 
heart, we can take to ourselves the Master's injunction, 'Tiet 
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid," remembering
 also his assurance, "Peace I leave with you; my peace I 
give unto you; not as the world giveth, give Iunto you . . . 


VII— 38 


[6413] 


(104-105) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PiTTSBl RCAl, P 1 


In the world ye shall have tribulation. But be of good cheer. 
I have overcome the world." Thus we can be tranquil, brave 
and strong, very courageous, even though a thousand fall at 
our aide and ten thousand at our right hand; for only with 
our eyes shall we behold the reward of the wicked, who say 
and do not. 

THE BASIS OF EVBBY SIFTING 
We might have personal preferences here and there in the 
selection of elders among- our little ecel*sja or among officers 
and directors in the Society. But recognizing that the will of 
the Lord as expressed in the voice of the majority decides these 
matters, 1 we can cast all our care in these, as in all things, on 
him who careth for us, knowing that all things are open 
and plain unto him with whom we have to do. He is working 
all things through Christ according to the counsel of his own 
will; and as he causes the deeds of evil men to praise him, 
restraining what would not, so even more assuredly he will 
overrule for his glory and our good if any error should come 
in through the earthen vessel of those who serve in his order 
and arrangement. (Galatians 2:11, 12) Let us take heed 


that there never be in any one of us an evil unbelieving heart 
in departing from the living God, through which we become 
hardened by a delusion of sin. 

Every sifting has rested on attacks upon the agency through 
which the Lord has sent his message. Not receiving it, but 
rejecting it and claiming to point to a definite time when the 
Lord cast it off, these while teaching error themselves are 
condemning "another man's servant," whom he, the Lord, is 
able to sustain (Romans 14:4) and to whom he gives evidence 
of his approval in supplying the proper meat at the proper 
time. 

"For ye have need of patience [patient endurance] that 
after having done the will of God, ye might receive the promise
 [to rule with Christ]. For yet a little while, and he that 
shall come will come, and will not tarry. Now the just [my 
just One] shall live by faith; but if any man draw back, my 
soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them 
who draw back unto perdition [See John 17:13], but of them 
that believe to the saving of the soul." — Hebrews IO-37-3H. 


TWO CAUSES OF DISSENSION IN THE CHURCH 


A man is merely what his will U and what th.it will can 
make out of the body and its circumstances. And flu at the 
very beginning of our discipleship,, the first thing is to see that 
we are dead as respects our will, and alive toward the Lord 
Jesus Christ. All who do this God calls new creatures. He 
grants them the Holy Spirit, that the new mind, the new 
will, may be theirs. In proportion as they obtain the new 
mind, the new will, in that same proportion will the Oneness 
with one another exist. 

That which causes dissension amongst the Lord's people 
is either a lack of loyalty or a lack of knowledge. If it is a 
lack of loyalty, the disloyal will gradually drift away. The 
Lord does not choose to force any of his family. He is choosing
 such as worship him in spirit and in truth, such as are in 
every respect loyal. He Ijas set aside for the purpose of selecting
 this class the entire Gospel age. This great work has 
been, in progress for more than nineteen centuries; and this 


company will he a little flock. They will, evidently. In* a *eiy 
select class. They are required to walk by faith, not by sight. 

Not many have the loyalty to God and to righteousness to 
walk that way and to count the world as loss and dross — as 
nothing,, with all its projects. As the disloyal ones leave the 
ranks, more and more the loyal ones will find themselves 
drawn together, and more and more of oneness will be found 
among those who are faithfuL This would necessarily be true 
in every time and in every country. All who are thoroughly 
loyal would desire to do the Father's will, desire to lay down 
their lives in the Father's service. And this desire would 
make them one. 

The Lord speaks of his disciples being perfected in one. 
As each individual member of the church makes progress, he 
becomes more worthy to fill the place or use the opportunity 
provided for him. And thus the body of Christ becomes more 
efficacious. 


THE TABLE OF THE GREAT KING 

"Thou vrevarest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies; thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth oicr.' 
^ — Psalm 23:5. 


To serve in the courts of an earthly monarch has ever 
been considered a great privilege, and to sit at the royal table 
is an honor enjoyed by but a favored few. With this thought 
in mind we can especially appreciate the condescension of Jehovah
 as illustrated in the beautiful words of Our text. Why 
should he come to this sinful, accursed realm and select even 
a handful of earth's inhabitants to be his sons and to serve 
them, as members of the divine family? If the Lord, the 
great King of the universe, has been pleaded to prepare a 
table laden with "meat in due season" for his household and to 
invite us to partake thereof, it would be a most ungrateful, 
unworthy guest indeed who would spurn such a blessing and 
turn away from the food which God himself had set before 
him. 

Our text indicates that to sit at the Lord's table would be 
to expose ourselves to the envious gaze of enemies, headed by 
Satan. "Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of 
mine enemies." Those who have been enlightened by present 
truth, who have been privileged to feast on the good things 
which the Lord has spread before his children during the 
past forty years, can appreciate the significance of this statement
. One by one the harvest saints have left the Babylonish 
"tables of vomit" (Isaiah 28 :3) to partake of the meat of present
 truth. In each instance it has meant persecution, and 
of times vilification and ostracism which have been very hard 
to endure; yet in it all our cup of joy at the privilege of feasting
 upon the truth and of suffering for Christ's sake has 
literally overflowed. 

"NOT iaNOBANT OF HIS DEVICES" 

With each publication of harvest truth, gladdening the 
hearts of the Lord's people, there has been manifested a corresponding
 hatred on the part of all the enemies of the truth; 
for indeed these "Helping Hands for Bible Students" have 
been plagues to ecclesiasticism. — Revelation 15:5-7.* 

Satan has been increasingly active in his endeavors to detract
 and to diffract the minds of the Lord's people, and to 
draw them away from the table of truth which has been 
prepared for them. In some instances he has succeeded. It 
seems strange that any one who has once been privileged to 

[6414] 


enjoy the food of the Lord's providing would on any account 
leave the King's table and household, and return to the 
emptiness of the world. Nothing has incensed the adversary 
more than has the seventh course of "meat in due season," 
which the Lord in his providence has seen fit to spread before 
us. While it has strengthened and refreshed thousands of the 
Lord's faithful children, "the seed of promise," it has been as a 
grievous plague upon the ecclesiastical lords, "the seed of 
Satan.'* Numerous are the insidious arguments that have 


been propagated by our wily foe to draw away the Lord's people
 from the food — arguments designed either to nauseate or 
to frighten them. More than ever has it been true, as expressed 
by our text, that this last feature of present truth was spread 
before us "in the presence of our enemies." 

To those who are familiar with Satan's tactics it Bhould 
hardly be necessary to suggest an offset to his arguments. Yet 
in order to strengthen the faith of those whose hearts are 
right, but whose minds have become temporarily confused, we 
are pleased to set forth a few positive evidences that none 
other than our Lord himself has served ns with the truth of 
Ezekiel and Revelation, which at the same time constitute the 
last plague upon Babylon. Let ns not say : *\Vhy should we 
accept it as present truth?' Rather let us say: 'Why should 
I not accept it as meat in due season from the Lord?' 
THE "HAIL" OF PRESENT THUTH 

Did not the Laodicean messenger, "that wise and faithful 
servant," promise us throughout his ministry and in the hour 
of his death, that the church should expect and would receive 
an exposition of these two prophetic books? Have they not 
now been explained thoroughly and clearly and in accordance 
with all other features of the divine plan? Did not the same 
channel or agency which the Lord has been pleased to use 
in publishing the preceding messages of the harvest period 
also publish these truths for the comfort and encouragement 
of the church in its hour of direst need? Is not the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society the one and only channel which 
the Lord has used in dispensing his truth continually since 
the beginning of the harvest period ? Did not this last published
 message contain the "hail" uf truth which the Scrip 


Wril 1, 1919 


T II E IV A T C II T O W E R 


(1(15 107) 


turca indicated it would. (Revelation 10:19, 21; Job 38:22, 
23} Furthermore, has it not brought to the Lord's consecrated
 people tremendously rich blessings as they have feasted 
upon the wonderful symbolisms so confirmatory of the plan of 
God as explained by the Laodicean servant? 

The explained truths of Revelation and Ezckiel are such 
as to comport with the prophetic description of what the Lord 
said he would proclaim in the end of this age. He indicated 
that he would administer a stinging blow to Babylon, which 
would cause her to stumble and fall. He said that when the 
seventh vial was poured out "great Babylon came in remembrance
 before God .... and there fell upon the men [the 
clergy] a great bail." (Revelation 16:19-21) From this it 
is evident that the burden of the last message of the age 
would be upon the heads of ecclesiRsticism. 

"I WILL HAVE THEM IN DEBISION" 

Again, in Psalm 2:1-4 the Lord prophetically shows that in 
the end of the age the nations would rage, and that forthwith
 the great ones of ecclesiasticism would take counsel together
 against the Lord and his anointed; i. e., against the 
anointed body of Christ (the feet members), and thus against 
the Lord himself. Then the Lord said that he will "have 
them in derision .... and vex them in his sore displeasure
." fs not the very keynote of the message of St, John 
and Ezekiel found in the Pj^almist's statement that "the Lord 
shall have them in derision''^ The burden of nearly every 
chapter in these prophetic books is that very message against 
nominal Christendom, because of their sins against the Lord 
and against his anointed body. Therefore since the Lord said 
that this is the message which he would pour out in the end 
of the age, does it not appear evident that those who find 
fault with the irony and derision of the explained messages 
of these prophets are reallv complaining against the doing 
of the Lord? 

What could be clearer evidence that the Lord himself 
has served us with the true explanation of Revelation than 
the fact that the seven messengers have now been identified 
for the first time in the history of the church? Bible students
 nf recent years have no difficulty in identifying Pastor 
Russet] as the seventh messenger. But who were the six 
preceding messengers was a matter that could not be guessed 
at until recently. Now we know who they are, and we can 
see the reasonableness of the identification of each. 

EPHESUS AND SMYRNA PERIODS 

(1) St. Paul is now known to be the messenger to the 
Kphesus or first epoch of the church. The proof that this is 
correct lies in the fact that the message which the Revelator 
quotes as the words of that angel is indeed and in fact the 
very message found in the Pauline epistles. Compare Revelation
 2:l-(i with Hebrews 10:32-38; 2 Corinthians 7:11. 13; 
Galatians (>:!): 1 :6; and Acts 20:17-30. Thu3 if St. Paul in his 
writings has delivered the very message which the Revelator 
declared would be delivered by* the angel of the first epoch of 
the church, then we have this proof that St. Paul was the messenger
 to the church of Ephesus. 

(2) St. John is now identified as the messenger to the 
second or Smyrna epoch of the church. Some have asked : 
'Why should we call St. John the angel of the second epoch? 
AVhy should he not J>c called the angel of the first epoch? 
Was he not an apostle before St, Paul was appointed?" We 
answer: Yes; but Revelation 1:19 clearly shows that St. 
John's commission to write appertains to the second epoch of 
the church instead of the first. There we read: "Write therefore
 the things which thou hast seen [past], and the things 
which are [present tense], and the things which must shortly 
come to pass hereafter [future]." This passage indicates that 
at the time of St. John's appointment as a messenger one 
epoch was in the past, that he was living in the second epoch, 
and that there were other epochs to follow. *The things which 
are" were of course the things which were then occurring at 
the time when St. John 'was commissioned to write. What wns 
then transpiring? Persecution of the Smyrna epoch of the 
church was then transpiring on a general scale; iattd at this 
very time St. John himself -was an exile on the isle of Patmos
 because of his faithfulness in proclaiming the truths of 
our Lord. 

PEMECimONS KT PAGAN BOMB 
The message to the Smyrna -church, therefore, is one of comfort
 in their afflictions. "By the anorel of the church of Smyrna 
write: I know thy works and tribulation nnd poverty, but thou 
art rich [blest, favored] ; and T know the blasphemy of them 
which sav they are Jews [Israelite* indeed], and are not. but 
are of the synagogue of "Satan. "Fear none of those things 
which thou shalt suffer. Behold, the devil shall cast some of 
you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation
 ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will pf^P 


thee the crown of life." (Revelation 2:8 10) The word 
Smyrna means "bitter"; and as Pastor Russell has well said 
in the last issue of The Watch Tower which he published, just 
prior to his death: "Some of the most sublime pictures of 
Christian endurance that the world has ever seen were enacted 
during the Smyrna period of the church." In the same article 
Brother Russell explained that the "ten days" of special tribulation
 here mentioned were symbolic days ("i. e„ ten years) and 
referred to the persecution under the Roman Emperor Diocletian
 during the years 303-313 A. D. 

(3) Arius is clearly identified as the messenger to the 
third or Pergamos epoch of the church. The word Pergamos 
means "earthly elevation," and manifestly refers to that epoch 
of the church which witnessed the rise or Papacy through the 
conversion of Constantine, the last pagan emperor of Rome. 
In 325 A. D. Constantine convened the Council of Nice; and 
there the first Babylonish creed was formed — the Nicene Creed. 
The identification of Arius as the third angel is found by a 
comparison of history concerning this council with the message
 which the Revelator says would be delivered by the angel 
of the church of Pergamos. We read: "By the angel of the 
church in Pergamos write. ... I know where thou dwellest
, even where Satan's peat is [the scat of Antichrist]; and 
thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith 
in those days wherein Antipas [antipapists] was my faithful
 martyr, who was slain among you, where Satan dwelleth. 
But 1 have a few things against thee, because thou hast there 
them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balac to 
cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat 
things sacrificed unto idols and to commit fornication." — Revelation
 2:12-14. 

CEEED IDOLS KEBTJKED 

It is clear that this message covers the period of Papacy's 
rise, beginning historically with the Nicene Council of 325 A. 
D. The mention of Balaam is significant. Balaam presumed 
to be God's prophet; yet "he connived with an earthly king 
to injure God's chosen people for earthlv reward. He advised
 the king that with the assistance of fair Women of the 
land of Midian the Israelitish men of war could be enticed, 
and led away from God and into worship of idols. 

How complete is the picture! The clergy of this period, 
claiming to be prophets of God, catered to* the civil power 
of Rome; and through the women of the land {the churches 
which had descended to an earthly level) they put stumbling 
blocks before the true Israelites indeed, and made them worship
 the CTeed idols which began to be erected in 325 A. IX 
The message by the angel of the church of Pergamos is the 
first rebuke against creed idols to be found in the book of 
Revelation. Tf the angel' of the church of Pergamos was- thus 
to administer such a rebuke, undoubtedly history will explain 
who he was; and so it does. It was tt'ie faithful Arius who 
stood forth in, the midst of the 384 bishops assembled at the 
Cfotnfcn of Nice; and in plain terms rebuked them for mutilating
 the teachings pt the Scriptures and. for sacrificing the truth 
for that false trinitarian creed! Tfhis rebuke cost him his 
bishopric; and he was banished to the Balkan mountains, one 
of the most inhospitable places in tne worlds But the influence 
of his teachings spread far and wide; and Arianism became 
the backbone of the -Reformation movement which occurred 
twelve centuries later. Arius is the only person in history 
that fits the picture; hence he must have been the messenger 
to the church of Pergamos. 

(4) The fourth messenger to the church was manifestly 
Peter Waldo. His identification is found in Revelation 2:21, 
in which this messenger of the Thyatira epoch was to announce 
to Papacy that God would give her a "space to repent." The 
word translated "space" is the Greek word chronos, which 
means a time — a symbolic year. Bibje students know that a 
year in symbolic language means 360 years literally. The 
faessage to Papacy by this fourth angel therefore in substance
 was: "I will give you 360 years to reform; and if you 
do not reform within that time, a great reformation movement 
will be launched anyway." The Protestant Reformation began 
in full force with -the excommunication of Martin Luther on 
the loth of June, 1520* and 860 years prior thereto takes us 
back to the year 1160 A. D. It was in that very year 1160 
that Peter Waldo hegan his great work of proclaiming the 
truths then due: This Scripture identifies him as the messenger
 to the fourth epoch. 

(5) John Wycliflfe was manifestly the angel of the church 
of Sardis. The word "Sardis" means "that which remains." 
In addition to signifying the remains of the true church, which 
had been driven into the wilderness, the word may also signify 
that winch remains of the 360 years or "space" of repentance. 
At any rate it is evident that this fifth messenger was to make 
his appearance between Waldo's day and 4hat of Martin 
Luther. WycliflTe is the only reformer of special promin- 


[6415] 


(107-108) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


ence during that period. To him belongs the honor of making 
the first translation of the Bible into English; and it is said 
that he wrote no less than two hundred tracts and pamphlets 
attacking transubstanti&tion and the mass, and more or less 
clearly treating the central doctrine of the ransom. Wycliffe 
was the father of the Lollard and the Hussite movements ; and 
his influence was soon felt throughout all Christendom. In 
the year 1378 he stood forth as the great doctrinal reformer. 
At that time there were 142 years of the "space to repent" yet 
remaining to run. John Wycliffe was clearly the messenger 
of the epoch directly preceding Luther's time. 

THE PROTESTANT REFORMATION 

(6) Martin Luther is identified as the messenger of the 
sixth or Philadelphia epoch of the church by the same text 
which identified Peter W,aldo. (Revelation 2:21) Luther stood 
at the end of the "space to repent," even as Waldo stood at 
the beginning of that period. However, even if we had no* 
text of Scripture by which to identify Luther, no one familiar 
with church history could well doubt that he was the messenger
 of the epoch of the church which preceded the harvest of 
the Gospel age; for he was the most prominent figure in the 
whole Reformation movement prior to the proclamation of 
present truth. On various occasions Brother Russell has so 
referred to him. 

(7) Charles Taze Russell was the seventh messenger. No 
Bible student who has examined the evidence has any doubt 
that he was the angel to the church of Laodicea. Through him 
has come a clear unfolding of the Divine Plan of the Ages. 
He is the most prominent messenger mentioned both in the 
Revelation and in the prophecy of Ezekiel. 

This identification of all seven messengers to the church 
should be clear evidence to all consecrated Bible students 
that the interpretation of the Revelation is from the Lord. 
A close study of the explained symbolisms of the seven seals, 
the seven trumpets, the seven plagues, etc., as well as the exposition
 of Ezekiel is equally convincing. We need merely to 
mention the remarkable explanation of Ezekiel's vision in the 
first chapter of that propnecy in order to convince sincere 
Bible students that only the Lord could have clarified this matter
. It is of no private interpretation. 

The four symbolic creatures with their four faces (lion, 
ox, man and eagle) are now seen to be in harmony with the 
symbols of Revelation 4:7; and a comparison of the two passages
 shows that God's four attributes of Justice, Power, Love 
and Wisdom are unquestionably referred to. This being true, 
the remainder of the vision of Ezekiel is apparent when once 
we see that the "wheels" or cycles allude to the ages of the 
divine plan. However, only wisdom from above could have 
clarified this hitherto dark chapter. 


FOOD FOB HUNGRY SAINTS 
Another choice portion of "meat in due season" which the 
Lord has been pleased to serve upon his table iB the clarification
 of the Temple of Ezekiel. This feature alone should 
be sufficient to convince any spirit-begotten, truth-hungry saint 
that God has guided in the publishing of these truths, never 
before understood. Perhaps not one of us understood anything
 in connection with the last nine chapters of Ezekiel's 
prophecy, relating to this wonderful temple, prior to the outpouring
 of the seventh vial. And yet we should have noticed 
the emphasis laid upon it by the Lord when he said: "Behold 
with thine eyes and hear with thine ears, and set thine heart 
upon all that I shall show thee; for to the intent that I 
might show them unto thee art thou brought hither; declare 
all that thou seest to the house of Israel." (Ezekiel 40:4) 
This passage plainly shows that all the features of this 
temple were to be understood and declared to the true Israel 
(the church) for their guidance, ere their sojourn is completed
. The Lord has fulfilled the promise. Numerous important
 details of the great plan of God are now made as 
clear as the noonday sun through the typical features of the 
Ezekiel Temple — details which could not have been illustrated 
in the simplicity of the Tabernacle in the wilderness. Yet 
they are in exact accord with the great fundamentals so clearly 
taught in "Tabernacle Shadows," 

In view of these things which have been made plain to us 
through the only channel which the Lord has been pleased 
to use in the end of this age for serving truth to his household
, who can doubt that it is indeed the Lord who has 
placed upon his table the exposition of these two prophetic 
books of the Bible, which have never been previously understood
 by his church? Seeing, then, that the Lord is serving 
us, even though it be "in the presence of our enemies," let us 
not be dismayed by the opposition of those enemies of truth 
and righteousness, but faithfully receive from the Lord's table 
this additional evidence of his love and favor, and grow strong 
by the assimilation of this "meat in due season." "Greater 
is he who is for us than all they that be against us." 

Is not the way to heavenly gain 
Through earthly grief and loss? 

Rest must be won by toil and pain — 
The crown repays the cross. 

As woods when shaken by the breeze 

Take deeper, firmer root, 

As winter's frosts but make the trees 
Abound in summer fruit, 

So every heaven-sent pang and throe 
That "Christian firmness tries, 

But nerves us for our work below, 
And forms us for the skips. 


INTERESTING QUESTIONS 


HAS THE HARVEST ENDED? 

Question. — Did the harvest of the Gospel age end in the 
Spring of 1918, or it is still in progress? 

Answer. — In The Watch Tower of Sept. 1, 1916, Brother 
Russell treated this matter in considerable detail in an article 
entitled "The Harvest is not Ended." He there explained 
that the three and a half years of Jesus' ministry were not 
strictly occupied in harvest work, but rather he was then engaged
 in preparation for the harvest, which began at Pentecost
. He then called attention to the fact that there was no 
"garner" into which to gather the wheat prior to Pentecost
. The forty years' Jewish harvest was therefore explained 
to have begun in A. D. 33, and expired in A. D. 73; and by 
parallel the Gospel harvest was seen to have commenced just 
1845 years later than the Jewish harvest, viz., in A. D. 1878, 
expiring chronologically in the Spring of A. D. 1918. This 
was the last statement on the subject of chronology uttered by 
the messenger to the church of Laodicea. We see no reason
 for doubting its correctness. 

ALL CEOWNS APPORTIONED 

Question. — Some have made consecration of themselves 
since the Spring of 1918. Could such be begotten of the holy 
spirit and enter the race for the great prize as members of 
the "little flock"? If so, in what sense could we say that 
the harvest has ended? 

Answer. — We think it quite probable that in the Spring 
of 1918 all crowns had been apportioned, and that no more 
crowns would be available except as some then standing may 
prove unfaithful. In that event the Lord would fill up the 
vacancies by begetting to the divine nature a number of consecrated
 ones equivalent to the number of unfaithful ones 
who have lost their crowns. You may then wonder if that 
has not indeed been true ever since 1881, in which year thf* 


general call ceased. In what sense therefore, would it be 
different since 1918 than before? We think the difference 
might be this: That in 1881 a sufficient number had been 
called and begotten of the spirit to complete the foreordained 
144,000, but that forthwith there was a great falling away, 
to such extent that between the years ^ 1881 and 1918 there 
never was a sufficient number in the race at any one time to 
take up all the vacant or available crowns, until about springtime
 of last year, when again, for the first time since 1881, all 
available crowns were apportioned and no vacancies existedHowever
, since that time there has probably been another falling
 away on the part of some, requiring others to be brought 
in to fill the vacancies. But the difference between the present
 situation and that which existed from 1881 to 1918 may 
be that since the Spring of 1918 there are more candidates 
than there are crowns, whereas prior to 1918 there were more 
crowns than candidates. 

SHOULD WATEE IMMERSION BE PERFORMED 

Question. — Should we continue our efforts to spread the 
truth and to leave people to consecration, encouraging them 
with the promises of glory, honor, immortality, and jointheirship
 with our dear Redeemer? Should the symbol of 
baptism still be performed? 

Answer. — We Bhould be "instant in season and out of season
." preaching the truth, and endeavoring to lead people 
to consecration of their will to the will of God. All who gain 
life on whatever plane must come to a knowledge of the truth 
and must consecrate their lives unto the Heavenly Father. We 
see no reason why we should not also continue to declare the 
divine promises held out to the little flock, because it is not for 
us to know whether the one to whom we are speaking may or 
may not be accepted of the Lord to fill a vacancy caused by 
the unfaithfulness of another. If the person ii not apirit- 


[64161 


Atril 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(108-111) 


ually minded he will not appreciate spiritual promises, and 
in any event he will not be harmed by having heard them proclaimed
. We think it proper, however, to always explain to 
those now coming to a knowledge of the truth, that there is no 
guarantee in the Scriptures that an immortal crown surely 
awaits them. They shouM be encouraged to consecrate their 
life to God, and rest in the assurance that whatever they obtain
 in the way of future reward will be infinitely more than 
they deserve or could reasonably expect or comprehend. As for 
water immersion: we see no reason why such a beautiful and 
fitting symbol should cease to be performed, ( 1 ) because we 
know not but that the candidate may have been accepted to 
prospective membership in the little flock; (2) anyway, the 
burial in water would continue to picture the complete burial 
of the will of the candidate into the will of Christ, and that he 
is reckoning himself "dead indeed unto sin" so far as his new 
will is concerned. The candidate having consecrated himself, 
has done all that anybody could do; hence it is proper for him 
to Bymbolize that fact before others. Whether he is to be 
apportioned a crown is a matter for the Lord alone to determine
. For aught we know the symbol of immersion may be perpetuated
 throughout the Millennial age in picturing individual 
consecrations. 

IN BE THE SECOND DEATH 

Question. — Is the world now subject to the second death! 

Answer. — God's law, when broken, brings the sentence of 
death upon the sinner, as in the case of Adam. If broken by 


any one who has been delivered from that sentence pronounced 
upon Adam, God's law would bring condemnation afresh upon 
the guilty person. The Bible speaks of this second condemnation
 as the second death. 

The first death sentence passed upon all mankind because 
of one man's sin. The second death sentence will pass upon 
none except for wilful, intelligent sin of the individual. Such 
a sin could not be committed, however, until after such a person
 had been delivered from the sentence previously upon nim 
through father Adam — the first death sentence. The world, 
therefore, cannot now die the second death; for mankind are 
not yet released from the first death sentence. No man could 
be judicially tried and condemned to death while already under 
a death sentence. To have a second sentence he must have 
come, either actually or reckonedly, from under the first 
sentence. The world has been condemned once, in Adam. Not 
until they shall have been released from that condemnation 
can they come under another condemnation. Hence the 
Bible declares it to be God's purpose that there shall be a 
great day, a thousand-year day, in which Christ w T ill give the 
world a judgment, or trial. The right to give them this trial 
our Lord Jesus has secured by his own death, having tasted 
death for Adam and all his posterity, condemned to death in 
him. {Hebrews 2:9) The death of our Lord, a perfect man, 
would be the full offset for the sentence upon the first man. 
Thus the way is opened for the great "times of restitution" 
mentioned by the Apostle Peter. 


MAN MADE IN THE IMAGE OF GOD 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of January 1, 1907, under the title, "Man Created in God's Image,' 

which please see.l 

LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


PETITION WORK A BLESSING 

Dear Brethren: — 

You will be glad to know we have been blessed in connection
 with the petition work. One firm of lawyers, after reading
 the petition, said they would rather it asked for an unqualified
 release than to have the bail feature attached. They 
gladly signed it, and reqiiested three clients, who were in 
their office at the time, to sign also. Later in the day one 
member of this law firm saw me in front of his office and 
called me in, explaining that another client was there who 
would be glad to sign my petition. The client was an officer 
of the Life and Casualty Insurance Co. and readily added 
his name to my list. 

Another lawyer told me that however expedient it might 
have been to lock up these sincere Bible students during the 
war, those reasons could not possibly exist in times of peace; 
that in his opinion a grave mistake was being made in keeping
 them in prison ; and that "such a violation of the principles 
of free speech, free press and religious liberty, the fundamentals
 upon which this grand country was established and 
has prospered, is sure to bring trouble, especially if continued 
beyond the cessation of hostilities." 

With continued Christian love, I am, 

Your brother in the Lord. Grover 0. Poweix. — Tenn. 
PEOPLE READILY SIGN PETITION 
Dear Brethren: — 

You have already received some 2,000 signatures from this 
place; but we are glad to continue the good work. It is not 
much trouble to secure signatures to this petition. If other 
places keep up the same ratio you surely will have a great petition
. We secured all the above mentioned signatures before 
the tracts arrived. 

Please note the enclosed petition contains the very best people
 of our city and state, including the Governor, Ex-Governor, 
Mayor, Ex-Mayor, lawyers, bankers, physicians, dentists, druggists
, County Judge and one minister. 

With loving greetings to all we beg to remain, 

Your brethren in the Lord. E. K Hodges, M. D. — Ark, 
MESSAGE 07 LOYALTY FEOM ABROAD 

T>ear Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in our dear Redeemer! It is my privilege 
to transmit to you the following resolution passed unanimously 
today by the London Tabernacle congregation : 

"This congregation having heard with much pleasure that 
the annual meeting of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society
 recently held in Pittsburgh was a happy occasion of fellowship
 and communion in spirit, and that our dearly beloved 
Brother J. F. Rutherford, the chairman of this congregation, 
was re-elected President of the Society; Be it therefore 

"Resolved: That the London Tabernacle congregation take 
this opportunity to express its loving union in spirit with our 


dear brethren in America, and its full agreement with the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society in its service for the 
Lord. With one heart and mind we continue in the way which 
the Lord of the harvest has hitherto directed our steps, and intend
 so to continue, accepting the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society as the Lord's channel of service and blessing to 
his people." 

Prior to our having received word of the result of the election
, it had been unanimously agreed by us that the elected 
President of tftie Society be our choice for Chairman of this congregation
; and that Brother Hemery, as the Society's representative
 in Great Britain, be our Chairman in his absence. We 
would be glad if you can convey to Brother Rutherford our 
warm love, with assurance of our prayers on behalf of himself 
and of his fellow-prisoners. 

We are rejoiced by many evidences of the Lord's presence 
with us, and we are looking forward to continued opportunities
 of service in laying down our lives for the brethren, and 
in seeking to carry the message of comfort to the world in its 
darkening hours. We realize more fully than ever the Lord's 
gracious arrangements for us through our dear Brother Russell, 
whose memory is ever with us. With fervent love in the Lord. 

Yours by grace. T. Seeck, Secretary. 

REJOICING IN THE TKUTH 

Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

I am thankful to be able to tell you I am now a sister in 
the Lord, and symbolised my consecration at the recent Toronto
 convention. I have gladly taken the Vow unto the Lord 
and am endeavoring to carry out my covenant with him faithfully
. I am so grateful to my Heavenly Father that he has 
made the blessed provision by which I may bring my prayers 
td the throne of grace in behalf of all the saints ; also that I, 
notwithstanding all my weaknesses, am counted in when the 
other dear ones offer their prayer* for the Lord's people. I 
am privileged to enjoy the sweet fellowship of the dear little 
class at this place, for Which I give thanks. Praise his holy 
name forever! 

Please find enclosed Express Money Order for $ 

which is for "Good hopes," to help a little in the blessed work. 
"If God be for us, who then can be against us?" 

Your sister by his grace. Ltdia Dabeb. — Ont. 

A VALIANT SOLDXEB OF THE CEOS8 

Dear Brethren: — 

Loving greetings in his holy name by whose kind favor I 
address you as brethren! I am a soldier brother in khaki; yet 
withal I am rejoicing in the fact that I am also a soldier of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, wearing the armor which he provides 
for those ^who will ultimately be overcomers. (Ephesians 6:10- 
18) How I rejoice that I have heard God's Reveille Bugle 
Call, when he says: "Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise 
from the dead; and Christ will give thee light," (Ephesians 


[6417] 


(98 115) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


5:14) From the evidences we see about us it is quite certain 
that our Captain has not called, "Halt!" nor that we should 
stead still; -but that his providences rather speak loudly: 
"Forward! March!" I have realized his leading haad ever 
with me during my trying experiences of military life; and 
still I am trusting, though I cannot always trace. 

For a time I was stationed at — , and was much influenced
 by the thought which is persuasive in the Northwest, 
that The Watoh Towes is no longer the Lord's channel. I 
was -much confused and bewildered; but these questions, with 
others, kept coming to my mind: If this be the case, why is 
it that some who accept the Seventh Volume and some who 
reject it mn meet together, and apparently have harmony 
in a common cause against this channel? And if such a time 
has truly come to * 'stand fast" without having a message to 
deliver, then there is surely nothing left to do but to wait; 
but why then so much ado about proselyting? 

After much prayer and thought I came to the conclusion 
that it was another sifting taking place and that as usual our 
adversary is directing every issue he can against this channel 


and those who accept its message as from the Lord. Let me 
assure you, deax Brethren, that the current Towebs are as 
dear to me now as ever. How like a bell-buoy do they ring 
out, sounding the dangers that lurk in the way, still guiding 
us on to our haven of rest! 

For a benediction I would say: "Mizpah!" (Genesis 31:40) 
with the thought as rendered in the margin — "To the Beacon 
Light or Watch Tower." With much Christian love to all 
tfhe dear co-laborers at Pittsburgh and elsewhere. 

Your brother by his grace. D. E. Wellington .^— Qal. 

OOHTBIBTJTIKa HIS "MITE" 

Deab Bbethben:— 

Herewith lists of petitions which constitute my little "mite" 
•in behalf of our dear brethren in Atlanta. You will see our 
Congressman from this district heads the list, also our Sheriff, 
Probate Judge, Assessor, Collector, Supt, of Schools, etc. 1 
surely have been rejoicing in this grand privilege of having 
a share in this witness work. 

Yours in the service of our king. W. J. GoodlST. — Ala, 


BOOKLET TRACTS FOR MAILING 


We are now printing a limited quantity of tracts in booklet 
form treating the subjects "Where are the Dead?" "What is 
the Soul?" "Calamities, Why Permitted?" "Is there a God?" 
"Is Christian Science Scriptural?" and "Spiritism is Demonism
," Similar tracts on other subjects are also in preparation 
and will be announced later. Each tract covers lS. cages, 
size 3% x 6*4 pages, small enough to enclose in an ordinary 


envelope without folding. Being in booklet form they are 
much more attractive, also far more expensive, than the 
former bsms. For this reason they should be used for mailing
 only to persons who you have reason to expect would 
read them. They are not intended for house-to-house distribution
. They will be supplied free in limited quantities. 


BACK ISSUES REQUESTED 


Friends who have issues of The Watoh Toweb fo? the 
years 1879, 1880 and 1881 will confer a favor by lending us 
the following issues: November and December, 1879; January
, April, September and November* 1880; January, February
 and March, 1881. With these exceptions our file is complete
 from 1879 to date. As announced in our last issue, if 


there is a sufficient demand for the reprinting of all the baek 
issues in book form the Society will gladly undertake the 
proposition. Numerous orders have already been received; 
but it will require a large quantity additional in order to 
print them at the prices given in March 15th Toweb. 


The Society requests that all instances of opposition to the 
petition work emanating from the clergy be reported to this 
office at onee, % Publicity Department. Give name, address
 and denomination of the clergyman, and specific facts 


FRIENDS, PLEASE NOTE 

as to what course he pursued to hinder the work. Be sure, 
also, to mail us all newspaper clippings bearing upon such 
opposition, giving name of paper and date of publication. 


BRETHREN ADMITTED TO BAIL 


Just as this issue goes to press we are in receipt of telegram
 advising that Brother Rutherford and associates have 
been admitted to bail pending the hearing of their appeal. 
It is exactly nine months since they were imprisoned. Sentence
 v?as pronounced on Friday, June 21, 1918 — the first day 
of Summer; and they are now granted bail on Friday, March 


21, 1919, which is the first day of Spring. This, however, 
means only temporary freedom until their case is finally 
passed upon. We suggest that the petition work be continued
 with increased vigor, merely drawing a pen through 
the third clause relating to bail. Please mail petitions to uas
 rapidly as possible. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., APRIL 15, 1910 


No. ft 


LIBERTY IN CHRIST 


'7/ the Son therefore shall make you fre, 
When one is released from bondage after having suffered 
restraint for many days, and is fully conscious of his freedom
, he experiences a peculiar thankfulness and joy. All 
persons that have lived on the earth have been in some kind 
of bondage. When Adam was in Eden he enjoyed full liberty, 
full life and happiness. After a brief sojourn there he found 
himself deprived of liberty, in bondage to sin end death; 
and he is yet in the great prison house of death. All of his 
children were born under condemnation, and therefore in 
bondage. They found themselves in this condition, not willingly
, but because of conditions coming to them over which they 
had no control. "As by the disobedience of one man sin entered
 the world and death by sin, so death has passed upon 
all men; for all are sinners." (Romans 5:12) Because of this 
bondage the whole creation irom Adam until now has groaned 
in pain and yet groans, waiting for the day of deliverance. 
All of these are asking themBelve3, Is there anything better 
for us in the future? 

MODEBN BABYLONIAN CAPTIVITY 
Christ Jesus through his apostles organized the church, 
the members of his body; and during the early part of its 
development its members enjoyed liberty. The time came when 
ambitious politicians entered the church, organized man-made 
systems in the name of Christ, and the members were sube
, ye shall be free indeed." — Jno. 8:36. 
jected to the bondage of such organizations. The many systems
 that have been organized throughout the period of the 
Gospel age have each formed a prison house, figuratively 
speaking, depriving many of their true liberty in Christ. These 
systems the Lord designates in the Scriptures as "Babylon," 
meaning confusion, and he describes the consecrated ones in 
"Babylon" as those who are groaning because of their captivity
, or incarceration. He foreshadows the joy of those released
 from this condition, putting these words in their 
mouths, "When the Lord turned a^ain the captivity of Zion, 
we were like them that dream. Then was our mouth filled 
with laughter, and our tongue with singing." (Psalm 126:1, 
2) Thus he pictures in a small degree the joy coming to any 
one receiving liberty, especially those who receive liberty 
through a full knowledge and obedience unto Christ. 

Another form of bondage which we find prevailing throughout
 the world is the bondage of fear. The ruling element of 
all nations is suffering from fear of their enemies. It is chiefly 
because of fear of future wars that statesmen of the world 
are now forming a league of nations with the avowed purpose 
of securing a greater measure of liberty and protection to the 
peoples of the nations. There are now, according to press 
reports, thirty- two nations interested in the formation of such 
league. That the league will be formed is clearly foreshadowed 


[6418] 


\prii. 15, 1919 


THE IV A TCH TOWER 


(115 116) 


by tho Scriptures, notwithstanding the fact that there is strong 
opposition to it from various sources. 

It is not infrequent that men fail into bondage to the laws 
of the land, sometimes justly so, and sometimes unjustly so. 
There is sometimes a wilful and deliberate violation of law 
resulting in bondage to the violators. There are times when 
bondage results because it is believed that one lias violated 
the law. Thus one may find himself in a certain kind of bondage
, deprived of certain liberties without any fault or intentional
 wrong-doing on his part. We have a very striking illustration
 of this kind of bondage in the experiences of certain 
officers and members of our Society — our brethren in Christ. 
We give herewith a brief resume of the facts leading up to 
their incarceration and subsequent release, for a time at least. 
A BRIEF RESUME OF OUR BRETHREN'S CASE 
Our beloved Pastor and brother, Charles Taze Russell, the 
seventh messenger to the church, began his active service in 
this exalted position more than forty years ago. In one of the 
early issues of The Watch Tower he published an article 
under the title, The Finished Mystery. In 1886 he began 
the publication of a series of Bible commentaries — Studies 
in the Scbiptures, announcing in the preface of an early 
edition of Vol. 1, that this series would comprise seven volumes
. Throughout the period of his faithful service he frequently
 referred to the seventh volume, which would treat 
Revelation and Ezekiel, and which would conclude the series 
of Studies in the Scriptukes. (See Z. '06, p. 236) However
, before the publication of the last, the Lord took him to 
his great reward. The compiling and publication of this last 
volume — The Finished Mystery — was left to others. Our 
eight brethren in bonds for many years were associated with 
Pastor Russel) and acted under his direction in the promulgation
 of the message of the kingdom of Messiah. Certain ones 
of them were and are officers of our Society. Others of them 
were selected by the Society to prepare from Brother Russell's 
comments the copy of The Finished Mystery for publication. 
This work began in December, 1916; and by the latter part of 
March, 1917, the copy was almost complete. 

In April of that same year the United States entered the 
great world war. In June of the same year there waa enacted 
tho so-called "Espionage Law," providing for the punishment 
of any persons who should conspire together for the purpose 
of producing insubordination, mutiny or disobedience in the 
army and navy. Our brethren were so fully occupied in promulgating
 the message of Messiah's Kingdom and proceeding 
with the work which our dear Pastor had begun that they did 
not even take notice of the enactment of the Espionage Law, 
They were charged with conspiracy under that law, which 
means an agreement between themselves to obstruct or interfere
 with the raising and operation of the army and navy 
of the United States. The Finished Mystery was used as a 
basis for their indictment, trial and conviction. Their testimony
 at the trial disclosed that they never had at any time 
a thought of conspiracy; that they had never entered into any 
kind of an agreement to interfere with the government, and 
had no desire to do so. Notwithstanding, they were tried in 
the District Court of the United States and convicted, and 
on the 21st day of June. 1918, were sentenced to twenty years 
imprisonment "in the Atlanta penitentiary. 

OUR BRETHREN "LIVING EPISTLES" 
Their trial was had at a time of great excitement in the 
public mind. The brethren testified at the trial that they 
never had a thought of interfering with the war or causing 
insubordination or mutiny or disobedience in the army and 
navy; that they were and are fuUy consecrated to the Lord 
to do hia will ; that he had through his Word, more than 2500 
years ago, foretold the great world war; that they could not 
willingly oppose it and be consistent with their covenant; that 
those being wholly consecrated and devoted to the Lord could 
not, however, conscientiously engage in the war, hut that their 
position was to hold aloof from all controversies and devote 
their time and strength and energy to the promulgation of the 
message of Messiah's Kingdom, thereby pointing the people 
to the great liberty, joy and happiness that shall he theirs 
when that glorious reign of Messiah is begun. 

In due course they were incarcerated in prison and were 
received and treated like other prisoners. All such institutions
 have strict rules; and it was their desire and endeavor 
to live up to those rules, having full confidence in the promise 
that "all things work together for good to those who love the 
Lord and who are called according to his purpose." (Romans 
8:28) They entered the prison in full confidence that the 
Lord had permitted their incarceration for some good purpose, 
and that ultimately it would appear that he would use it to 
his glory and to their own good and to the good of other members
 of the church. It was known to the officers when they 


were received at the prison, of course, that those men were 
and are preachers of the Gospel. Doubtless all the officers 
of the institution had been advised that it was the doctrines 
and teachings preached by our brethren that caused them to 
be imprisoned; and doubtless moved with the desire to prevent 
any disturbance amongst the numerous other prisoners our 
brethren were advised when entering the prison that they must 
do no preaching within its walls. To this one of the brethren 
replied to the officer, "We promise you that we will not attempt
 to force oui belief upon anyone. We will answer only 
such questions as we are asked; we will comply with your 
request." 

Several weeks passed, and without any development. All 
prisoners are required to attend chapel service on Sunday 
morning and as many aa desire may remain for Sunday School 
thereafter. Our eight brethren decided that they would remain
 for the Sunday School, forming themselves into a class 
for study and fellowship together, with no intention of inviting 
any one else to join that class; nor did they invite any one. 
Their deportment, their manner of life, their kindness shown 
to others drew to them other inmates of the prison; and from 
time to time some of these would join the Sunday School class 
and listen to the explanation of the questions involved. Our 
brethren took turn about teaching this class. As the class 
increased in numbers, some of the officers drew near, that they 
also might hear. Interest increased until the members of the 
class were ninety in number. Many of these prisoners showed 
a deep interest in that wonderful message of hope of deliverance
 promised in the Word of God. A number of them asked 
questions concerning the same, which questions were answered 
to their satisfaction. They became deeply attached to our 
brethren, and when it was indicated these were to he released 
from the prison there were many kind expressions of gladness 
mingled with regret heard from the lips of other prisoners 
and some were asking, What shall we do for our Sunday 
School class! On the last Sunday in this prison one of our 
brethren gave a brief address, outlining the divine plan. With 
the keenest interest their fellow-prisoners listened; and many 
of them shed tears of joy for the hope of the great liberty 
that shall come, not only to them but to all mankind through 
Christ Jesus, when his kingdom of righteousness is fully es* 
tablished. 

A FEW RESULTS OF THEIR INFLUENCE 
It is generally thought that all men who are incarcerated 
in prison have very hard hearts, and pay no heed to the mes" 
sage of the Lord; but this is not so. The message of truth, 
which is so reasonable, so loving, so wonderful ? appeals to 
many, even under the most adverse circumstances. There is 
nothing that so transforms one's life as the truth. There is 
nothing that can fill a life with such joy as a knowledge and 
appreciation of God's wonderful plan of redemption. Amongst 
the members of this class was one man, seventy-two years of 
age, brilliant of mind, educated and refined, who remarked 
"I am seventy-two years of age, and I had to get behind prison 
bars in order to hear the truth. I am glad for this reason 
that I was sent to the penitentiary. For fifty-seven years I 
have asked questions of the ministers, and never could get 
satisfactory answers. Every question I asked these men [referring
 to our brethren] has been answered to my satisfaction." 
On one occasion this old gentleman spent three hours in asking 
and having answered Bible questions of one of our brethren. 
Another in the class remarked, "My time is about to expire; 
I am sorry I have to leave this prison on account of the Sunday
 School class. Can you tell me where I can find some people
 like you when I go away?" Another bright young man 
expressed great sorrow in being deprived of the privilege of 
the aid of our brethren in Bible study. On the night before 
their leaving the prison he expressed himself to one of our 
brethren as follows: 

"To you and everyone with you, I send this parting message
. Somehow when I'm near you or with you I cannot express
 myself. I seem such an atom, hardly worthy oi so wonderful
 a friendship as yours. I want you to know that you 
have left with me a desire to he a better, bigger man, if such 
can emerge from a carcass so soiled and world-worn as mine. 
You have taught me the meaning of the word 'love' as used 
between men. You have taught me that there are things in 
this world far more precious than rubies; and if He who is 
supreme desires that I never see you or yours again I shall 
be satisfied, knowing that I have at least had the first gleanings
 of a beautiful knowledge, the friendship of you wonderful
 men, and the opportunity to help myself if only I can 
and will remain strong. I*m weak, very weak, no one knows 
this better than I, but 1*11 try and I'll fight with myself if 
necessary, to achieve the full fruits from this seed you have 
planted, so I may help not only myself but those about me. 


[6419] 


(117-118) 


THB WATCH TOWER 


PITTSBURGH, Pa. 


"This may all sound odd, coming from such as I, but deep, 
way deep in ray heart I mean it, every word. Perhaps some 
day I shall come to you and say, 'Now I'm a man 1 ; and when 
I do you will know that all was not in vain. I may slip (Itfe 
is a funny proposition ) , and if I do, Til pick up the remnants 
and start anew. 

"May I thank you, every one of you, again and again, wishing
 you God speed, his blessing and guidance in the great 
and wonderful future." 

PETITION FOB RELEASE 

Some two months ago, and some time after the signing of 
the armistice, a number of newspapers throughout the country 
began an agitation for release of all prisoners held under the 
Espionage Law. Amongst the papers that were particularly 
active in behalf of our brethren was the "National Labor Tribune
," of Pittsburgh. Voluntarily and unselfishly the publishers
 of this paper made a determined effort to call the attention
 of the people to tJhe incarceration of our brethren, and to 
call upon the officers to release them from prison, either by a 
pardon or by dismissal of the proceedings or upon bail pending 
the final determination of their case. As the publicity campaign
 increased through various newspapers, one of the members
 of our Society deemed it proper to issue a statement concerning
 the facts leading up to the incarceration of our brethren 
in prison; and this was iBsued in the form of volunteer matter
 which had a wide distribution throughout the land. A few 
of the dear friends objected to this; but the majority realizing
 the splendid opportunity to again call attention of the 
world to the great blessings that are coming to mankind 
through Messiah's kingdom, rejoiced in the opportunity to participate
 in the work. 

As to which was right was clearly manifested by the Lord's 
leading and his blessing. Thousands of letters have been received
 expressing great joy for the opportunity of thus calling 
the people's attention to the divine message which shall ultimately
 comfort the hearts that are now made sad by the awful 
conditions prevailing in the earth. Everyone who has engaged
 in this particular volunteer work has received a great 
blessing in his or her own heart. They have thus been privileged
 to carry the message of the Gospel of the kingdom to 
governors, rulers and the mighty men of the earth, as well as 
to hundreds of thousands of the common people. Of course 
they were interested in having their brethren released from 
prison, but the greatest blessing came in bearing the message 
of truth to others, teaching them that the groaning creation 
shall ultimately be delivered from bondage into the glorious liberty
 and light of the kingdom of our Lord. The truly consecrated
 Christian realizes that the chief purpose of his being on 
the earth is to give testimony concerning the kingdom as he 
develops in Christ-likeness, and by his activities demonstrate 
that he has walked with Jesus and learned of him, and that 
through the Son of Man alone can the desire of all nations 
come. There is no privilege to be compared with that of being 
an ambassador for Christ; and everyone who has shunned 
to have a part in this volunteer work has thereby, we believe, 
shown a lack of loving zeal for the Lord and his cause, and 
has deprived himself or herself of a great opportunity of service
, and missed a great blessing from the Lord. 

Friends throughout the land circulated a petition giving 
opportunity for others to sign, asking for the release of our 
brethren. The response to this was beyond the greatest expectation
 of any one; and without doubt the largest petition 
that has ever been signed for the release of any prisoners has 
been signed for the release of our brethren. Many of the 
friends, while engaged in this work have said: "Suppose our 
brethren are not released; we have had the wonderful privilege
 of bearing the sweet, divine message to the people and 
thus glorifying the name of our King." 

Our brethren were tried in the United States District Court 
for the Eastern District of New York before Judge Harland B. 
Howe. In pronouncing sentence upon them the court remarked
, in substance, that a person teaching and preaching religion 
usually has much influence, and if he is sincere he is all the 
more dangerous. Since the signing of the armistice there has 
been a genera) agitation for the release of all political prisoners
, those convicted under the Espionage Law, and many have 
been released. It appears that the Attorney General communicated
 with Judge Howe with reference to our brethren, and 
in response thereto received from Judge Howe a letter recommending
 commutation of sentence. Ok March 15th the newspapers
 throughout the country carried a New York dispatch 
reading as follows: 

JUDGE HOWE ASKS CLEMENCY FOB BBBTHBEN 

"Federal court action today in cases of eight followers of 
the late Pastor Russell, who during the war were sentenced to 


twenty years in prison, disclose that the legal fight for clem* 
ency has the support of United States Judge Harland B. Howe 
of Vermont, who presided at their trial in Brooklyn last year. 

"The defendants were convicted of violation of the Espionage
 Law. Immediately after the United States assistant district
 attorney had refused today to enter an agreement to have 
the eight released on bail pending a hearing in the court of 
appeals, it was learned that Judge Howe had written to the 
Attorney General urging that the sentences be commuted. It 
is understood he declared, however, that defendants did much 
harm by preaching and teaching their religious doctrines." 

It is a great satisfaction to the heart of each one of the 
Bible Students that the court found no fault with our brethren
 "except against them concerning the law [doctrines! of 
their God." (Daniel 6:5) We feel quite sure that this will 
create in the heartB of thousands of people a greater desire to 
know the doctrines of the divine plan which our brethren have 
taught and teach ; and thus the Lord will use the occasion to 
his praise. 

BELEASED ON BAIL 

On the 21st day of March, 1919, counsel for our brethren 
presented to the United States Circuit Court of Appeals in 
New York City an application for their admission to bail pending
 the hearing of the case on appeal. Much public sentiment 
had been worked up against our brethren by reason of false 
reports. For instance, enemies of the truth falsely reported 
that our Society had installed upon the Bethel Home a powerful
 wireless, capable of sending messages across the Atlantic, 
and that this instrument was used to communicate with the 
enemy, This slanderous report was published throughout the 
world, having been inspired by dishonest and untruthful persons
. The fact is that there never was a sending wireless instrument
 at the Bethel Home at any time. In Pastor Russell
's lifetime a brother had presented him with a small receiving
 wireless, and at the time of the entrance of the United 
States into the war this receiving instrument was wholly useless
 and could not be used for any purpose. There never was 
a message sent from the Bethel Home by wireless, and never 
was there a message received. The instrument was practically 
of no use to any one, and was dismantled early in the Spring of 
1917. 

Another instance of misrepresentation was that the International
 Bible Students Association headquarters, the Bethel 
Home, was a place for harboring German agents. On May 4th, 
1918, a report to this effect was filed before a Committee of the 
U. S. Senate and" incorporated in the Congressional Record. 
Doubtless it was the result of some report made by some overzealous
 employee of the Department of Justice. The truth is, 
there never was at any time a German agent or representative 
or any one who even pretended to represent the German government
 upon the premises of the International Bible Students
 Association, or at the Bethel Home. It is easy to understand
, however, how these false reports, being believed by 
the public, would quickly inflame the public mind and cause 
feelings of revulsion against our Society by all honest people. 
No doubt that these false reports had much to do with the arrest
, prosecution and incarceration of our brethren. However, 
no true child of God feels any spirit of hatred for any one on 
account of this; for he realizes that the great Adversary blinds 
the minds of men to the truth and uses them for the persecution
 of others, and that the Lord permits this for a good purpose
 and will ultimately overrule it to his glory and make the 
wrath of men to praise him. The time will come when those 
who have thus been blinded, will have the eyes of their understanding
 opened ; they will hate iniquity, and will turn to 
righteousness and love and serve the Lord. 

Bail for our brethren had been twice denied by the courts; 
and upon a presentation of the petition and argument they 
were, on the 21st day of March, 19-19, exactly nine months to 
the day from the date of their sentence, ordered to be released 
on bail. The knowledge of this fact being flashed over the 
wires, the friends everywhere greatly rejoiced. On Tuesday, 
March 25th, our brethren left Atlanta for Brooklyn, and in 
many places along the way many friends congregated at the 
stations with the hope of an opportunity of expressing their 
joy for the release. Arriving at Brooklyn they were immediately
 taken before Mr. Justice Chatfield, who admitted them to 
bail in the sum of $10,000 each, and they were released. The 
case on appeal was set for argument on the 14th of April; 
but, anticipating a delay in reaching a decision, the court ordered
 them to report on June 4th, or earlier if required. 

Immediately they were accompanied by a number of friends 
to the Bethel Home* where between five and six hundred friends 
had assembled to welcome them. They were received in the 
large dining room, and as they entered their eyes fell upon a 


[6420] 


April 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(118 120) 


large banner, containing a cross, and crown, and the words, 
"Welcome Home, Brethren," and the text, "If the Son therefore 
shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed." The dear friend*, 
who had assembled had provided a very sumptuous banquet; 
and as all partook of it, their hearts rejoiced in anticipation 
of the great wedding feast and banquet that all the members 
of the body of Christ will enjoy after the Messiah is complete
 and all are gathered home/ In the course of remarks at 
this banquet one of the brethren said, in substance, "There is 
nothing that so thoroughly humbles a man as to put him in 
prison, and subject him to the strenuous rules of prison life. 
There is nothing that brings him so fully to a realization of 
the blessings of liberty. The one therefore who has in his 
heart a desire for righteousness develops by reason of his incarceration
 a condition of mind that makes' him ready to hear 
tho message of truth, which brings to him hope of better days 
to come. This illustrates how that men of the world are now 
being humbled hy the trouble and stress that is upon the nations
 of the eartli, and that the Lord is permitting all this to 
create a heart condition amongst mankind that will make 
them ready to receive the great Messiah; and all who during 
his reign have the desire for release from bondage and who 
desire his blessings, will have them and will receive them with 

joy- 1 * 

There was great rejoicing amongst all present. Some two 
hours were spent in the singing of hymns and listening to reports
 made by our brethren, and all present again expressed 
their joy that they had had some part in making known the 
message of the kingdom, and that the imprisonment of our 
brethren had made such witness possible. 

Not one word of regret because of their imprisonment was 
expressed by any of the eight brethren returned from prison. 
While we all realize that the incarceration is anything but 
pleasant to the flesh, yet the new creature in Christ Jesus can 
rejoice, knowing that these light afflictions endure but for a 
moment and work out fof those who patiently endure them a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Some of 
them were heard to say that this home-coming reminds them 
of the resurrection, when friends will be brought face to face 
again who have long been separated. All the brethren expressed
 themselves as thankful to the Lord that they had been 
counted worthy by him to endure some of the afflictions similar 
to those endured by the apostles and the great Master because 
of their faithfulness to the truth. They nad nothing but expressions
 of kindness for all Not one word of resentment fell 
from any lip. 

Brother Rutherford did not arrive in Pittsburgh until Tuesday
 morning, April 1, several of the other brethren having 
preceded him there. Learning of their coming, the brethren 
of the Watch Tower Office provided a banquet at the Hotel 
Chatham, for the office force alone, in honor of our returned 
brethren. The dining table had been beautifully decorated 
with potted and cut flowers, and a very sumptuous repast was 
served, after which brief remarks appropriate to the occasion 
were made by several of the brethren. 

HOW MADE FREE 

Our text says: "If the Son therefore shall make you free, 
ye shall be free indeed." Since all men came under the bondage
 of death through the disobedience of Adam, the only means 
of relief from this bondage is through Christ. The man Christ 
Jesus gave his life a ransom for all, and in due time this truth 
shall be testified to all. (1 Tim. 2:4-6) No one can be said 
to have full liberty in Christ until he has a knowledge of the 
divine arrangement and acts upon that knowledge. Throughout
 the Gospel age many have heard the message, but few have 
believed, and less have had a clear understanding and appreciation
 of it. Thousands of good, honest Christian people have 
united themselves with some church organization and blindly 
followed their blind guides, being fenced in by unreasonable 
•creeds, and have thus been in bondage to "Babylon," not enjoying
 the freedom in Christ. During the harvest of the Gospel
 age all of those who came out from Babylon, accepted the 
full message of the truth and acted upon it, have been enjoying 
the liberty in Christ. 

The Master tells us: "Fear not t little flock, it is the Father
's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." The clear inference
 to be drawn from this is that even those who have been 
begotten of the holy Spirit, but who still draw back from a 
full and complete sacrifice to the Lord, or a loving devotion 
in the service of the Lord because of fear, are to that extent 
in bondage, and that their release from bondage can come only 
through full, complete and unreserved love and service to the 
Lord, 

How then could we say that any one incarcerated in a 
prison could be said to be free? We answer, Because the laws 


of the land can incarcerate in prison the body of man, but the 
body of a Christian is merely the temporary vessel of the new 
creature. It does not lie within the power of men or of the 
Adversary to imprison the new creature fully devoted to the 
Lord; for he realizes that the Lord is with him wheresoever 
he may be. 

SUFFERING FOB CHRIST'S SAKE 

The Lord very wonderfully manifested himself to our brethren
 while incarcerated in prison, and without doubt they were 
permitted by him to be placed in prison for the accomplishment
 of his own good purpose. Realizing this fact, while the 
flesh might suffer and cringe under the punishment, the new 
creature would rejoice with him in the fact that he was counted
 worthy to fill up some of the sufferings of Christ left behind
 for the body of Christ's sake, which is the church. (Col. 
1 :24) Appreciating the words of the Apostle Paul in the text 
last above cited, our brethren realize that their suffering and 
imprisonment were largely for the benefit of other members of 
the body who were not actually in prison. No one can pnter 
the kingdom of heaven without suffering. As the Apostle puts 
it: "If one member suffer, all suffer.'* "For unto you [as 
brethren] it is given in the 'behalf of Christ, not only to believe
 on him, but also to suffer for his sake." (2 Tim. 2:12) 
And again, "And if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and 
joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that 
we may be also glorified together." — Romans 8:17. 

And thus we see that while the Adversary seizes upon any 
possible pretext to try to cause the followers of Jesus to suffer
, all such new creatures fully alive to their privileges rejoice
 in the suffering; and the Master overrules it for their 
own good and to his glory, thereby causing the wrath of men 
to praise him. When we see therefore that the suffering with 
Christ is essential in order to enjoy his glories, we realize that 
everyone occupying the blessed relationship of membership in 
the body of Christ takes great joy in being counted worthy to 
thus suffer; for, as the Apostle says, this is evidence from 
tlehovah that the spirit of glory and of God rests upon such. 
(I Peter 4:12*15) How sweet, then, is the promise, "No 
weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper!" 

FBESDOM IK CHRIST JESUS 
The new creature is in a measure in bondage to his flesh — 
the fleshly body; for while he sojourns in this earthly tabernacle
 he is looking forward to the time when he shall be released
 from that and be clothed upon with a glorious body, and 
be like his Lord. The poet has thus beautifully expressed it: 

*'If I in thy likeness, O Lord, may awake 

And shine a pure image of thee, 
Then I shall be satisfied when I can break 

The fetters of flesh and be free/' 

No matter how much persecution may be inflicted upon 
God's people, abuse, slander, libel, opprobrium, imprisonment, 
and even death, the Lord will see to it that all of these shall 
work together for the good of everyone who loves him supremely
 and who is called according to his purpose. It is impossible
 therefore, to hold such a one in bondage ; for he has 
received the freedom through Christ, and the Son of God having
 made him free, he is free indeed. 

The time is coming, and that ere long, when freedom shall 
come to all mankind. There are thousands of good, honest 
people in the world who believe that this freedom can come 
to them through Socialism; but freedom through this channel 
is impossible. There now threatens the earth that which is 
commonly called "Bolshevism" ; and many have pinned their 
hopes to this as the means of freedom and blessing. But these 
are doomed to disappointment. Others have hope that anarchy
 will bring them relief; but this scheme likewise, as well 
as all other human schemes, must fail. The child of God is 
not at all surprised to see such conditions of unrest prevailing 
amongst men. For more than six thousand years the human 
race has been in bondage to the great Adversary and has 
fallen under the great enemy, death. "The whole creation 
groans and travails in p»in together," waiting for the time 
when they may be delivered from this bondage and receive full 
liberty. The mass of humanity does not understand how this 
blessing is to come. It has been the privilege of Christians, 
especially during the harvest period of the Gospel age, to see 
that this liberty will come to mankind through the beloved Son 
of God, Christ Jesus. Hence the new creature itself shall be 
delivered from bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty 
of the children of, God, when the body of Christ, the great 
Messiah, is fully united in glory with the Head. (Romans 8: 
19-22) Then there will be no more opportunity for euch Buffering
. 


[6421] 


H20-122) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PITTSBURGH. TV 


Happy will be that home-coming, when all the faithful 
saints, having finished their course of suffering, shall receive 
an abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of -otfr Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ. Happy will be that union when all 
the* members of the bride class are united with the great bridegroom
. Happy indeed will be that day when the glorious 
Bridegroom presents to the Father Ma heavenly Bride, decked 
in all her robes of glory and beauty, and then will follow the 
great feast of rejoicing, the banquet of the Lord, to which the 
great company class will be invited. 

Truly the heart of every Christian rejoices now as by the 
eye of faith, he looks beyond the dark cloud of war, strife, revolution
 and other terrors that threaten mankind and sees liberty
 for all through the precious Son of God, the great Deliverer
 and Liberator of mankind. When his judgments are 
in the earth then the people shall learn righteousness. ( Isaiah 
20:9) Then the knowledge of our great King shall come to 
all, and then the knowledge of the truth shall increase until 
it fills the whole earth as the waters fill the deep; then all 
the sad hearts shall be made glad ; then all the peoples of the 
earth shall come to a knowledge of God's arrangement and 
will have the opportunity to accept full liberty, complete happiness
, and life everlasting. Then they will realize the full 
import of the text, "If the Son therefore shall make you free, 
ve shall be free indeed. *" 


THE FINISHED MYSTERY 

[Reprinted from THK WATCH TOWER of July, 1882, which pli-aw .-ci'.l 

"YE _ ARE DEAD" 

(COLOSStANS 3:3} 


Ah! yes, so "dead," the sharpest word will leave no sting, 
Nor o'en the slightest quiver to my heartstrings bring; 
So "dead," that when reviled, I'll calmly hold my peace, 
And bid revengeful thoughts within my soul to cease. 

So "dead," that no alluring love or hope or joy 

Will ever prove unmixed with some of earth's alloy. 

So "dead," T care not, though unloved, unsought, unknown, 

My best, my truest friend I find in God alone. 


Content where'er he leads, through sunshine or through rain, 
Whate'er my portion be, of pleasure or of pain. 
So "dead," the life I live is "hid with Christ in God," 
My chief delight to follow where the Master trod. 

So "dead," I'll neither murmur nor repine, though long 
The time, but only strive to suffer and be strong, 
Assured some day, some where, he'll claim me for his own, 
His bride, then crowned with life, he'll share with me his 
throne. 


GUIDING THE FEET OF CHRIST 

4 '/'or )ve shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways; they shall hear thee up in their hands, lest thou 

dash thy foot against a stone/* — Psalm 91:11, 12. 


For more than forty years the Lord, true to his promise, 
has kept the feet members of the body of Christ against the 
wiles of the evil day. This, ae explained by the servant of the 
Laodicean church, ia the assurance the Lord was giving when 
he caused the words of our text to be written by the Psalmist 
David. The Psalmist did not understand these words ; for he 
was a natural man — not discerning spiritual things. (1 Corinthians
 2:14) Satan surely did not apprehend their significance
 when he quoted them to our Savior as his first tcrnptation
 in the wilderness* Probably Jesus himself did not then 
fully comprehend that the "feet'' referred to were in reality 
the "feet members of that great mystical body which has 
stretched out through nineteen centuries from his day, and 
which now stands upon the mountains of earth, bringing good 
tidings of eternal peace and salvation to mankind through the 
Messianic Kingdom, for which we are chosen ambassadors. 
< Isaiah 52:7) Nevertheless we today are witnesses of the fact 
that the promise of our text has been abundantly fulfilled in 
this respect; and we can now give thanks unto the Lord for 
his keeping power. 

There have been testings and siftings during the harvest 
period; but all in some way have been overruled by the Lord 
for good. Our heavenly Father would not permit anything to 
come into the life of the church that would not result in good. 
{Romans 8:28) He would not let the feet members be dashed 
against a stone of offense and therebv have their spiritual life 
injured, as long as they were sincerely trusting his promises 
to uphold them. However, he would not hinder any individual 
member from leaving the body, from going out from under his 
protecting care, if any so prefer. God does not use compulsion
 to hold the body "of Christ together. "The love of Christ 
constraineth us." It is a privilege to share in the anointing 
which came upon our Lord and head, and which runs down 
over the skirts of his garments, even unto the feet. 
A STIMULUS TO SPIRITUAL LIFE 

The more of the holy Spirit, the antitypical anointing oil, 
we have, the more joyfully shall we co-operate one with another
 in the forwarding of God's great designs. The picture of 
the anointing oil flowing down from the head over the body, 
even unto the skirts of the high priest's garments, suggests to 
our mind that it is necessary" for the feet members to bo active
, as in running, in order to get their full share of the 
anointing oil. Let us therefore, dear Brethren, be swift in 
using our opportunities as feet members of the body, resting 
in the blessed assurance that he will guide us lest we should 
stumble and fall. 

Among the experiences of the Lord's people during the harvest
 period, none have been of greater importance than the 
events of the past year or more. That which has seemed to be 
a calamity to the church may yet redound to God's glory and 
praise in promoting the cause of truth by awakening an interest
 in thousands who have not as yet 'known of the presence
 of the Lord nor of the agency which he is using in preparing
 the way for the Messianic Kingdom. 

While the expositions of Revelation and Ezekiel have 
proved a great stimulus to the spiritual life of the church, they 
have so angered the adversary and his hosts as to stir them up 
to especial efforts to rob the Lord's people of this blessing. 
They have endeavored to confuse the minds of some. Others 
have been frightened by the roaring of this lion. (1 Peter 5:8) 
But notwithstanding all this, we are persuaded that the vast 
majority of the feet members have properly appreciated the 
fact that these wonderful truths have been provided for their 
assistance, and have not been stumbled by the insidious arguments
 of the evil one. While thus most of the Lord's saints 
have been convinced that it is the Lord who has served us with 
the true exposition of the hitherto dark prophecies and symbols
 of Revelation of Ezekiel, and are making diligent use 
thereof in their Christian development, nevertheless for the 
sake of strengthening that conviction and perhaps of helping 
some who have been confused and intimidated by the great 
smoke from the nostrils of Satan, we desire to review certain 
striking evidences that we have been served with "meat in due 
season' through the outpouring of the "seventh plague." — 
Revelation 16:17. 

THE " SEVEN SEALS" OF REVELATION 

Let us note afresh the masterly wisdom which the Lord 
has displayed in the symbols of the Revelator, which have 
hitherto been incomprehensible. Tn this connection let us especially
 keep in mind the loving kindness of our God in permitting
 the last members of the "feet" of Christ to enjoy an 
understanding of those symbols for their comfort and encouragement
. Take, for instance, the matter of the seven seaK 
The meaning of these seals was not made clear to the early 
church nor to the various epochs of the church throughout the 
age, nor even to the Laodicean period of the church until near 
the completion of the harvest. 

All we knew concerning the seven seals of Revelation was 
that Brother Russell had explained that the opening of all of 
them did not take place down here in the harvest period, but 
that they had progressively been broken, one by one, throughout
 the Gospel age. In times past we have read in Revelation 
the description of the first seal and the white horse, the second 
seal and the red horse, the third seal and the black horse, the 
fourth seal and the pale horse, etc. But we did not understand
 them. And yet — strange that we never thought of it in 
this connection before — we knew from our previous studies of 
the Scriptures that the term horses is used in the Bible as a 
symbol of teachings, doctrines, creedal hobbies. How clear 
now it lias all become! 

Since horses in symbol picture doctrines, then a white 
horse would symbolize a pure doctrine, a red horse would represent
 an impure doctrine, while a black horse would indicate 
a doctrine or teaching which is wholly devoid of truth. N"w in 

[6422] 


Appil 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(123 124) 


the light of the explained syml>o!s of the Revelator we can see 
the entire development of "the man of sin" and the history 
of the church throughout the age, as represented in these seven 
seals. Was it not the pure teaching of Christ and his apostles
, ''with the faith once delivered to the saints/' which was 
committed unto the church in the beginning of the age? Yea, 
verily! It was a white horse that carried the church during 
the first epoch of her history. Nevertheless it was noted by 
the Apostle John before his death that already there were many 
antichrists in the midst of the church. — 1 John 2:18. 

Soon they began to form creeds, corrupting the truth. Thus 
the second vision of the Revelator in this connection disclosed 
the fact that the rider had transferred his seat from a white 
horse to a red one. As soon as the first false creed was formed, 
the development of Antichrist was rapid; and by the time that 
the second and third ecumenical councils had been held, we 
find that the truth taught by Christ and his apostles had become
 wholly corrupt. Thus with the opening of the third seal 
the Revelator saw that the Papacy was now riding upon the 
hack of a black horse — their doctrines or creeds were wholly 
devoid of truth. — Revelation 6:3-5. 

Then the fourth seal was opened; and there went forth a 
pale horse, whose rider was called Death, and Hell followed 
him. This horse would indicate a deathly doctrine which would 
call for the extermination of its opponents. We at once 
recognize this as picturing the period of the Crusaders, whose 
doctrine was that no Protestant should live. This period of 
oppression continued down through the days of Tetzel, until 
the Reformation. — Revelation 6:7, 8. 

THE KEFOEMATXOX PEEIOD 
Then comes the opening of the fifth seal, which discloses 
the Reformation work in the days of Martin Luther. Note 
again how wonderfully the Lord has shed his Iightupon these 
important truths. We read: "And when he had opened the 
fifth seal, I saw under the altar the bouIs of them that were 
slain for the Word of God .... And there was given unto 
each of them a white robe; and it was said unto them that 
they should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants
 and their brethren that should be killed as they were, 
should be fulfilled" — tilled full, completed in number. (Revelation
 6:9-11) The phrase, "a little season," is from the Greek 
word chronos, which means a time, or year. 

Bible students recognize that a year in symbol means 360 
years literally. This text therefore shows that when the fifth 
seal was opened the faithful sacri fleers of that period, who had 
won the white robes of victory, must wait in death for about 
360 years, until the full number of their fellow servants should 
be called. Tims we have another proof, not only of the correctness
 of the interpretation of Revelation, but of the parallel
 dispensations as set forth in Volume 2, Studies in the 
Scmptubes. It was in 1518 A. D. that the great Reformation 
work of Martin Luther began to spread on a general scale; 
and one chronos (360 years) from that time brings us to 1878, 
the time of the resurrection of the sleeping saints. Gould anything
 be clearer? Is not this indeed present truth, meat in 
due season? Can we not accent it from the hand of the Lord 
with rejoicing? God be merciful to those who murmur and 
would spurn such light! 

"THE TIME OF THE END" 
The sixth seal was next opened, and at that time there waa 
a great earthquake. (Revelation 6:12) In the symbology of 
the Bible an earthquake is a symbol of revolution. The Lord 
has graciously inserted this reference to an earthquake in the 
above cited Scriptures in order that we might be able, to time 
the opening of this seal, which was to occur sometime between 
the days of Luther and the beginning of the harvest. There 
were two great revolutions during that period of three and onehalf
 centuries — the American Revolution in 1776, and the 
French Revolution of 17S9. The French Revolution was really 
caused by the spirit of liberty engendered by the successful revolution
 in America. The two events stand related one to another
 as cause and effect. 

This brings us down to the opening of the seventh seal, 
which our dear Pastor has explained as referring to the unfolding
 of the light of present truth. This seventh seal, therefore, 
began to be opened about 1874 and continued to open throughout
 the harvest period as one by one the Scbiptube Studies 
were published. It was not until near the end of the harvest, 
however, that the seventh seal would be sufficiently opened so 
that the meaning of this and of other visions of the Revelation 
could he understood. This is manifest from the reading of 
Revelation 8:1-13, which indicates that the John class in the 
end of the age would not be able to see (discern, comprehend) 
the meaning of the seven Reformation trumpets until the opening
 of the seventh seal had sufficiently progressed to clarify thie 
vision. The thought ifl not that the seven trumps of the Reformation
 period were to follow the opening of the seventh 
seal, but rather that the understanding of those seven Reformation
 trumpets would follow the opening of that last seal; 
It would not be until the "censer** was cast forth into the 
earth that sufficient light would be produced to clarify the 
vision of the "seven angels which had the seven trumpets" of 
the Reformation.— Revelation 8:1, 5, 6. 

The reasonableness of the interpretation of these scab we 
submit as strong evidence that the explanation which the 
church has received of these things is from the Lord. Let us 
therefore rejoice, dear Brethren, that the Lord is fulfilling his 
promise to guide and direct the feet members unto the end. 


RESIGNS IN FAVOR OF 

Dear Brethken: — 

In June, 1918, when it seemed evident that some of our 
brethren who were on the Board of Directors of our Society 
would be taken away to prison, they resigned and others were 
elected by the Board to take their places. It was understood 
at the time that if these brethren should be returned to the 
work of the Society they should take their original place on 
the Board. At the last general election at Pittsburgh, held 
on January 4, 191i>, I was elected as a member of the Board 
of Directors, and I feel that that was largely influenced by 
the fact that I was already on the Board as above mentioned. 
The record shows that I was originally elected to All the 
vacancy occasioned by the resignation of Brother A. H. Macmillan
. Brother Macmillan has now returned to the office and 
will be engaged in the office work, while my field of usefulness
 seems to -be greater in the Pilgrim service. I therefore 
feel that it would be pleasing to the* Lord and in the interest 
of his work if I would resign my position on the Board in 
order that Brother Macmillan, whose place I took, might be 
returned to his former position as a member of the Board. I 


BROTHER MACMILLAN 

feel that it is not so much the question as to who fills the 
place, hut in what place can we be most useful and most pleas* 
ing to the Lord ? I have greatly appreciated my privileges and 
am thankful to the Lord for opportunity of service on the 
Board or anywhere else. I take this occasion to express my 
deep appreciation of the confidence reposed in me by the shareholders
 in voting for me; but I believe, when they see why I 
have taken this position, that they will commend my action. 

In view of the foregoing conditions and circumstances, and 
having in mind the best interests of his cause, and desiring to 
serve it and him faithfully, I believe it would be pleasing to 
the Lord and to all of his people that I tender my resignation 
in favor of Brother Macmillan, that he may be replaced on the 
Board in the position he occupied prior to June last. I therefore
 respectfully tender my resignation at this time, to take 
effect immediately, for the purpose of carrying out the .views 
expressed above* 

Your brother in the service of our Redeemer, 

K. H. Bakbee, — Pilgrim, 


SIN AND ITS CONSEQUENCES 

[This article was a reprint of that published in issue of January 15. 1907, under the title, "Disobedience, Penalty, 

Hope," which please see.] 


''The Lord will watch between us now, 

Though we are far apart ; 
He knows thy thoughts, he knoweth mine, 

And keeps us heart to heart* 
What though the land and sea divide, 

Yet there is naught to fear ; 
The same blue sky still shelters us, 
And God himself is near. 


MIZPAH 


"Absent from each, yet close to hira, 

Holding the self-same hand, 
No anxious thought, no weary sigh, 

But he will understand. 
He knows the ties we hold so dear, 

Each wish of thine and mine, 
The love, made piuser, stronger still 

By his great love divine." 


[6423] 


THE GRACE OF GOD 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The New Life in Christ," published in issue of March )5, 1903, which please see. J 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


BACK ISSUES A PRICELESS IKHEEITANCE 
Beloved Brethren in the One Hope: — 

Reading in the last Watch' Tower the important notice and 
suggestion concerning the reprinting of the Watch Towebs 
from 1879 to 1918 in seven volumes, I must state here that you 
were reading my heart's wish, a«d not only mine but, if I 
am not much mistaken, the wish of all the children of God 
everywhere. How good it would be to have such a precious 
and priceless work in the home, a priceless inheritance for our 
children! Thanks and praise to the Lord for this suggestion 
he gave you! And according to his good will may he fulfil 
our hunger and thirst for it to his glory. 

Therefore, please enter my name for one whole set of the 
seven volumes of The Watch Toweb for 1879-1918. May the 
Lord 'bless and help you all! With praise and thanksgiving I 
remain, 

Your loving brother. Jos. P. Samek. — New York City. 


THANK US FOE THE PRIVILEGE OF SIGNING 

[>ear Brethren: — 

We are glad to be able to enclose three petitions filled with 
names, and expect (D. V.) to fill up more of them. I am 
copying them on sheets of legal cap and will send them in this 
form later, so that the names will be more legible for your use. 
Very few people refuse to sign. Many are very emphatic in 
expressing their disapproval of religious intolerance. Some 
say that they knew about the trouble, but are very much surprised
 to hear that our brethren were sentenced so severely. 
They think that it is outrageous. Some business and professional
 men say that they thank us for giving them a chance to 
sign the petition. 

May the dear Lord bless you all! And in hope that our 
dear brethren will now be privileged to serve many conventions 
this summer, we remain, with Christian love, 

Your sisters in Christ, M. A. and A. J. Gillespie. — Kans. 


NEW VOLUNTEER MATTER 


On March 27th the National Labor Tribune published 
a special supplement containing Brother Rutherford's sermon 
on 'The Wobld Has Ended" and other interesting matter. 
It has been thought well to use this two-page supplement as 
regular volunteer matter for 1919, and we have therefore 
placed an order with the Tribune for a considerable quantity 
of extra copies, whioh are being used for filling orders from 


the various ecclesias. We suggest that these Tribunes be 
distributed as quickly as possible, that the people may have 
this comforting message from the Lord's great prophecy. 
This issue of the Tribune has, of course, the same right of 
circulation as any other issue of ' that paper or of any other 
newspaper, thus eliminating all local restrictions which might 
apply to advertisements, hand bills, etc. 


SHALL BACK TOWERS BE REPUBLISHED? 


The thousand or more friends who have thus far written 
us in response to the suggestion in March 15th issue concerning
 the republishing of all the Towers for the past forty years 
in book form, manifest great enthusiasm over the proposition. 
Some have said that they would gladly take more than one 
set, as they indeed consider these a priceless legacy for posterity
 and expect to so use them. While we are equally 
anxious to serve the friends by having these back numbers republished
 as heretofore outlined, nevertheless we regret to advise
 that up to the moment of going to press with this issue 
we have not yet received a sufficient number of orders to 
justify undertaking it. The typesetting and plates alone will 
cost upwards of $40,000, besides the cost of paper, printing, 
binding, shipping, etc. It is obviously impossible, therefore, 
to publish these back issues in book form unless the demand 


warrants an edition of at least five thousand sets. We are 
merely informing you of the exact situation, and now it is 
for our readers to decide whether we shall or shall not proceed 
with the publication of this "priceless treasure." As previously
 announced, the full set will comprise seven volumes, of 
about 1000 pages each, same size pages as the present Watch 
Tower, and will contain all the Towebs throughout the entire
 harvest period, together with a complete alphabetical 
index which will refer instantly to every article, on whatever 
subject, from the pen of our beloved Pastor, back to the year 
1879, when The Watch Toweb began to be published. "The 
price quoted is $12 for the complete set of seven volumes, 
charges collect, contingent on a sufficient number of orders 
to justify a fair-sized edition. What is your pleasure, dear 
brethren ? * 


ONLY THREE NUMBERS NOW MISSING 


W T e find our file of old Towers is now practically complete, 
but we are still missing the following three issues, namely; 
the month of April, 1880; also January and March of the 
year 1881. We have confidence that some of the dear friends 
possess these old issues. We therefore request that our 


oldest readers look amongst their files, and if they have any 
or all the aforementioned issues we would very much Appreciate
 the loan of same, that we may make copies of them, 
thereby making our file complete from the beginning. They 
will be returned to you after they have served their purpose. 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY 1, 1919 


No. 9 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


anointing the false prophet 

As far back as 1880 Brother Russell, through the columns 
of The Watch Toweb, clearly interpreted the *'ten-horned 
beast/' the "two-horned beast" and the "image of the beast" 
mentioned in Revelation 13th chapter and elsewhere. He 
showed that in symbolic language a "beast" represents a 
government — not a purely civil government, but one having 
an ecclesiastical tinge; as for instance the 'Toeasts" of Daniel's 
vision, which are known to represent respectively the governments
 of Babylonia, Medo-Persia, Grecia and Rome. (Daniel 
2:37-44) The ten-horned beast of Revelation was interpreted 
by Brother Russell as representing the Papal government, 
which for a time ruled over all Europe — the politico-ecclesiastical
 Holy Roman Empire. Papacy still claims to have the 
right or authority to rule all nations as the representative 
or vice-gerent of Christ, as shown by its Catechism. Question 
No. 120 reads as follows: 

"Q. Why did Christ found the Church? 
A, Christ founded the Church to teach, govern, sanctify 
and save all men." 

Preceding questions show that by "the Church" is meant 
the Roman Catholic Church, of which "the Pope, the Bishop of 
Rome, is the visible head." This edition of the Catechism 
before ua is copyrighted 1885 and 1898, and bears the following
 endorsement: 'This Catechism ordered by the Third Plenary
 Council of Baltimore, having been diligently compiled and 
examined, is hereby approved. — James Gibbons, Archbishop oi 
Baltimore, Apostolic Delegate." 

We also quote from Father Phelan, of St. Louis, as published
 in the Western Watchman of June 27, 1913: 

"Tell us we are Catholics first and Americans or Englishmen
 afterwards; of course we are. Tell us, in the conflict 
between the church and the civil government we take the side 
of the Church; of course we do. . . . Why is it that the Pope 
has such tremendous power? Why, the Pope is the ruler of 
the world. All the emperors, all the kings, all the princes, 
all the presidents of the world are as these altar-boys of 
mine. The Pope is the ruler of the world." 

This very modern assumption of political authority on 
the part of Papacy is in close alignment with the Encyclical 
of Pope Leo XIII., issued on November 1st. 1885, in which he 
said: "All Catholics must make themselves felt as active 
elements in daily political life in the countries where they 
live. They must penetrate, wherever possible, in the administration
 of civil affairs." 


* [Resumption of this paragraph in this form, interrupted Aug. 15, 
1918.1 


(126-K4) 


[6424] 


May 1. 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(131 1,12) 


THE TWO HOBNED BEAST AND THE IMAGE 

After identifying the ten-horned beast as Papal Rome, 
Brother Russell explained that the two-horned beast of Revelation
 13 represented the church-nation of Great Britain and 
Ireland; for it also is a government which combines eeciesiasticism
 with civil power. The bishops of the church have 
seats in the British parliament, and the king is officiallyrecognized
 as the head of the church as well as of the nation. 

In 1846 A. D. the other Protestant denominations leagued 
together for the obvious reason of giving themselves more 
dignity and authority. This league was called *'The Evangelical
 Alliance," but for about 70 years it has been merely an 
image — lifeless, having no power. The Revelator, however, 
indicates that this lifeless image would receive vitality or 
power in the end of the Gospel age, sometime between the outpouring
 of the sixth and seventh plagues, and that its name 
would then be changed to that of "false prophet," We have 
seen this fulfilled. The vitalizing breath has already entered 
into the image, and it has already manifested its newly gained 
authority. But, like the new-born babe, it waxes stronger as 
time goes on. 

The Revelator shows that the vitalizing of the image was 
to come from the two-horned beast. A few years ago the 
Episcopal Church became friendly toward the Church Federation
 movement, and even permitted ministers of other denominations
 to enter its pulpit3. Commenting upon this, in 
The Watch Tower of November 15, 1913, Brother Russell 
said: 

"Perhaps this recognition of the image is all the vitalization
 the image needs, but we are inclined to expect more. 
For years the Episcopalians have proffered, re-ordination to 
the ministers of the different denominations represented in 
the Evangelical Alliance, and they still proffer it. We have 
been inclined to expect that the ministers would finally concede
 the point and accept a re-ordination at the hands of an 
Episcopal bishop." 

MINISTERS SEEK EPISCOPAL BE -ORDINATION 

Early last year certain Protestant ministers of the Evangelical
 Alliance, notably the leaders of the Congregational 
denomination, made overtures to the Episcopal House of 
Bishops then in session in New York City. Since then the 
movement has taken definite form; and now comes the report 
that twelve leading bishops and high churchmen of the Episcopal
 denomination and nine leading lights of the Congregational
 church have jointly formulated a canon to be presented
 at the triennial session of the General Convention of 
the Episcopal Church, to be held in Detroit this summer. 
The canon contains a series of "proposals for an approach 
toward unity," which have been agreed upon by the Episcopal
 bishops and the non-Episcopal ministers, the principal 
feature of which is that ordained clergymen of the Evangelical 
Alliance shall receive, in addition to the present ordination at 
the hands of an Episcopal bishop, and yet remain ministers in 
good standing with their own respective denominations. The 
significance of this revolutionary procedure is further emphasized
, following, as- it does, on the heels of the mission of the 
three Episcopal bishops to the Pope of Rome in behalf of 
church unity, as commented upon in our last issue. 

The canon on which the Episcopal and non-Episcopal ministers
 have agyeed, reads in part as follows: 

"In conferring or in accepting such ordination [Episcopal] 
neither the bishop ordaining nor the minister ordained should 
be understood to impugn thereby the efficacy of the minister's 
previous ministry. ... A minister so ordained may officiate 
in a diocese or missionary district of this church [Episcopal] 
when licensed by the ecclesiastical authority thereof, but he 
shall not become the rector or minister of any parish or congregation
 of this church [Episcopal]." 

The conditions upon which any member of the Evangelical 
Alliance may obtain re-ordination at the hands of an Episcopal
 bishop are outlined in the canon as follows: 

"At the time of his ordination the person to be ordained 
shall subscribe and make in the presence of the bishop a 
declaration that he believes the Holy Scriptures to be the 
Word of God; .... that in the ministry of baptism he will 
unfailingly baptize with water in the name of the Father and 
the Son and Holy Ghost; and that in the celebration of the 
Holy Communion he will invariably use elements of bread 
and wine, and will include in the service the words and acts 
of our Lord in the institution of the sacrament, the Lord's 
Prayer and the Apostles' or the Nicene Creed as the Bymbol of 
the faith of the holy Catholic Church: that when thereto 
invited by the bishop of the church [Episcopal] having jurisdiction
 in the place where he lives, he, will, unless unavoidably 
prevented, meet with such bishop for communion and for 
counsel and co-operation; and that he shall hold himself 


answerable to the bishop of this church [Episcopal] having 
jurisdiction in the place where he lives; or if there be no 
such bishop, to the presiding bishop of this church [EpiscoThe
 Congregationalists are not alone in making overtures 
for Episcopal re-ordination, and the bishops of the Church of 
England proffer it with no less enthusiasm than do their 
brethren of America and elsewhere. We quote the following 
London dispatch as published in the Philadelphia Public Ledger 
of March 27, 1919: 

"Definite proposals for a union of the Wesleyan Methodist 
Church with the Church of England are made by the Right 
Rev. Dr. Arthur F. W. Ingram, Bishop of London. The bishop 
suggests that Anglicans and Wesleyans should unite, because, 
he says, *No religious bodv was ever closer to the church than 
the Wesleyans.' Under this plan, bishops would be present 
at the ordinations of the Wesleyan Methodist Church, which 
would become an order within the Church of England, but 
would retain its own practices. Wesleyan pastors would, if 
they preferred, be ordained by their own bishops. When the 
principle of union is established, the Bishop of London would 
favor an exchange of pulpits." 

EPISCOPAL ASKS CATHOLIC TO PILL FTTLPIT 

Bishop David H. Greer, of the New York Diocese of the 
church unity has asked that a Roman Catholic priest be permitted
 to conduct one of the Holy Week services in the 
Cathedral of St. John the Divine. Thus the Episcopal church 
acts as "mediator" between the beast and the enlivened 
image, proffering to each a friendly hand. 

We quote from the N. Y. Tribune of March 31 : 

a I would gladly welcome a Catholic to take one of these 
services in the Cathedral," said Bishop Greer, "I feel friendly 
toward all the orthodox denominations, and believe that broad 
and generous sympathy should prevail throughout the church. 
I don't believe in breaking down the barriers of the church, 
but neither do I believe that they should be so high that you 
can't get them down or climb over them," 

When asked if the unity program would not tend to destroy
 the individuality of the various Protestant churches, 
and give a certain precedent to the Episcopal Church, Bishop 
Greer is reported to have replied: "Certainly not. None of 
the churches would lose its individuality. Precedents would 
be given to the episcopate — not to the Episcopal Church. It 
would mean the universal recognition of a historic order 
dating hack to apostolic times." 

All this is in fulfillment of the teachings of the Laodicean 
servant, Pastor Russell, who foretold from the Scriptures 
more than thirty-five years ago the course which all denominations
, including the Episcopal and Catholic churches, would 
take in the end of this age. We quote further from his 
statement in The Watch Tower of November 15th, 1913* 

"According to the old, but erroneous thought handed down 
for centuries, the bishops of the Church of England and of 
the Church of Rome are 'Apostolic Bishops,' or successors to 
the Apostles, according to the old theory of Apostolic Succession
. According to that same theory, no one on earth has one 
particle of right to teach and to preach except as those 'Apostolic
 Bishops shall grant their permission by laying on their 
hands. According to this rule, then, Methodists, Baptists, 
Lutherans, Presbyterians, and all such, are preaching without 
authority. When they talk about ordination they merely 
mean that each sect ordains its own ministers. The Evangelical
 Alliance is attempting to get around this difficulty and to 
have the sects recognize each other's ordination. The federation
 is building upon this general recognition of 'orthodoxy,* 
and is about to be given life, virility, power, dignity, by 
something which the Church of England will do for them 
which will recognize their ordination as ministers. 

"We may be sure that they will make the road to the 
preaching and teaching of the Gospel a very narrow one to 
all attempting to preach without their recognition and ordination
. These will be trying times upon us, and upon all who 
will refuse to worship the beast and his image, or to receive 
the mark of the beast upon his forehead or upon the hand.— 
Revelation 13:15-17." 

RELIGIONISTS' PROBLEMS INTENSIFYING 

An outstanding problem of "Church Christians" has 
always been, how to raise more money. Their perplexities are 
not decreasing as the days go by. Following we quote a few 
extracts from a booklet '"file Financial Resources of Methodism
," published recently by the Joint Centenary Committee 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church and the Methodist Episcopal
 Church, South. This booklet is an appeal for money, an 
artful, an efficient, a business-like appeal, but the same in 
substance as the old-time passing of the hat. 


[6425] 


(132 134) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


"The roost impressive thing about the Centenary is the 
size of it. Eighty millions for missions looks like a staggering
 task to a church that has never thought of missions 
except in nickels and dimes and pennies. This is a day of big 

things. 

* * # # # 

"A friend of mine found an Iowa farmer worth three 
quarters of a million dollars, in good and regular standing in 
the Methodist Episcopal Church, who was contenting himself 
with a gift of $25 a year for the current expenses of his local 
church and $10 a year for world benevolences. The Genten&ry, 
or some other good cause, will hav« to relieve such a brother 
of his money, or he is likely to lose his soul. It is the func^ 
tion of the Centenary to save men. 

"Another friend found a churph that was spending a quarter
 of a million dollars on a building enterprise for itself, but 


out of its membership of more than twelve hundred, more 
than nine hundred were not giving so much as a penny to save 
the world outside of their own community. 

"In the light of such facts, what is the use of singing, 'My 
all is on the altar, I am waiting for the fire'? The truth is, 
that after nineteen hundred years the program of Jesus has 
not been taken seriously by His followers. It is simply 
mockery to talk of consecration to God in the face of such a 
record. The church must either give up its little 'Me and my 
son John' policy and settle to a task commensurate with its 
commission and its resources, or quit as a world force and 
shrivel to the level of a second-class enterprise. 

"It is not a matter of wealth, but of willingness, upon 
which the success of the Centenary depends. We have the 
former; it is the latter that we lack and must create." 


THE HARVEST ENDED— WHAT SHALL FOLLOW? 

"Wait pat tenth/, therefore, brethren, till the coming of the Lord. Behold, the husbandman expects the precious fruit of the 
earth, lonittng patiently for it, till he receive the early and the latter harvest."— James 5:7, Diaglott. 

wheat into his barn. Both classes seem to be addressed in 
this epistle of St, James. 

THE "POOR" KOW CI*>SED 

As heretofore definitely set forth in The Watch To web, 
the harvest of the wheat class covered a period of forty years; 
that it had its beginning in 1878 with the resurrection of the 
sleeping saints; that thereafter the messengers under the 
direction of the Ghief Reaper went forth with the sickle of 
truth to gather the saints together who had made a covenant 
by sacrifice; that the forty-year period would end, and did 
end, in the Spring of 1918. We believe it is now a true saying
 that the harvest of the kingdom class is an accomplished 
fact, that all such are duly sealed and that the door is closed. 
(Z '19-108) In the Spring of 1918, in God's due time, the 
active work of the harvest w'as suddenly halted and the Ionglooked
-for persecution began. The Catholic and Protestant 
systems claim to be the church, and in these organizations 
there are doubtless many consecrated ones who, fearing persecutions
, do not obey the voice from heaven and "come out." 
(Revelation 18:4) The leaders and mighty men of the systems
 have coerced the fearful ones to remain within their 
goatfolds, and there they will remain until released in the 
great tribulation, 

St. James opens the fifth chapter of his epistle with the 
phrase, **Go to now, ye rich men." To whom are these words 
addressed? Manifestly to those who are opposed to the kingdom
 of righteousness — the kingdom of the Lord Jesus. (C-20) 
Brother Russell, in Volume IV, page 392, considered the "rich 
men" as applying to the banking interests of the world 
(notably Jewish bankers) but on more than one occasion he 
remarked that something else seemed to be implied, but was 
unable to suggest anything farther. If his admittedly partial 
explanation seems more satisfying to the reader than what 
is hereafter presented, well and good. To us it seems that 
there may be another application , and that from the ecclesiastical
 viewpoint. 

While there nre some men of great material wealth identified
 with the religionist systems of Christendom, and while 
it is true that some of these men have been instrumental 
in the operation of schemes working to the material detriment
 of their fellowmen, it is still more true that there have 
been spiritual riches entrusted to the custody of a class ot 
mighty ones in the spiritual field who have used such to the 
great detriment and oppression of the followers of Christ 
Jesus. It is not probable that the materially wealthy are the 
men exclusively referred to. As a class such have never been 
considered part of the church. Our thought is that the above 
quoted words of St. James apply specifically to the clergy, 
the leaders and mighty men of the church nominal, both 
Catholic and Protestant, and in support thereof we cite the 
following: 

The Jewish system wa3 an ecclesiastical system, dominated 
and controlled by priests, scribes, pharisees, leaders and 
mighty men. All Bible students are familiar with the Scriptural
 proofs that the Jewish system finds a parallel or counterpart
 in the ecclesiastical system, particularly at the close 
of the Gospel age. In the parable of Dive3 and Lazarus, the 
"rich man" has reference to the Jewish system, particularly 
the leaders or clergy of that system, because of their greater 
enlightenment and favors and corresponding responsibility. 
Applying the parallel, the "rich man" of the church nominal 
of the Gospel age must be the "clergy class," because of their 
greater favors and corresponding responsibility. 


Without doubt the most crucial testing time is now upon 
the church. The temptations are subtle. We believe the work 
of harvesting the members of the kingdom class is done, yet 
there is much to be accomplished before complete glorification 
of this class. The Scriptures clearly show that tests must 
follow. "Having done all, stand"; and while standing, remember
 that "judgment must begin at the house of God." It 
has begun. Judgment must shortly follow upon the great 
company, upon nominal Christendom, and upon the world. 

The tests now upon the church may be divided primarily 
as follows: (1) Tests of loyalty to the Lord at the cost of 
reputation, liberty, and even life itself; (£) cheerful endurance
 of such trying experiences aa our Father may permit to 
come; and (3) tests of love for God and the Lord Jesus, love 
for the brethren, and pity, compassionate love for all the poor 
groaning creation. And without doubt these tests are primarily 
for a threefold purpose, to wit: (a) of affording the privilege 
to the remaining members of the body to fill up that which 
is left behind of the sufferings of Christ ( Philippians 1:29; 
Colossians 1:24) : (b) to give a practical demonstration of the 
required cheerful endurance (Hebrews 10:36, 37) ; and (c) 
to perfect the royal priesthood that all the members thereof 
may in truth he sympathetic, and thus ^ qualified to deal 
properly with the people during the incoming age. 
GLORIFICATION OF THE COTE OH 
While these are primarily trials upon the saints, the 
Scriptures clearly show that there is to come a fiery, dc 
structive trial upon Christendom, particularly and peculiarly 
affecting the members thereof who have professed to love and 
serve the Lord, but who in truth and in fact have both by 
word and conduct, denied him. These fiery experiences will 
utterly destroy all ecclesiastical self-conceit, pride, ambition, 
arrogance, intolerance and persecution, and rid the earth of 
all the God- dishonoring systems which for past centuries have 
oppressed men under the guise and in the name of religion. 
The evidences are cumulative that the dread hour for Babylon
 is at hand, and it is with eagerness that the fully consecrated
 are standing, watching and waiting for the happening 
of these events, which are so closely connected with their 
own complete deliverance. St. James seems to have had this 
very time in mind, particularly when he wrote chapter five of 
his epistle to the church. Come now, let us consider together 
his words of inspired wisdom. 

To profit by the examination of any Scripture it must be 
determined who is speaking (or writing) and to whom the 
message is addressed. The opening words of the epistle show 
that it is James the bond-servant of God and of the Lord 
Jesus Christ who is writing. It is not probable that he would 
have addressed his message to the world; for Jehovah deals 
with the world only through the Mediator of the New 
Covenant. We therefore conclude that he is addressing those 
who claim to be pupils and followers of the Lord Jesus. He 
says: "To the twelve tribes which are scattered over the 
world" (Weymouth), meaning, as we understand it, the 
church as a Tvhele, including the faithful and the- unfaithful. 
The first part of chapter five we believe to be addressed to the 
unfaithful stewards. "Church" is often used as a generic 
term applying to the nominal as well as to the true church, 
(Z '16-345) The great Master definitely pointed out (Matthew
 13:24-30) that the church nominal throughout the age 
would contain both the true and the false — the wheat and the 
taxes — and that in the time of the harvest at the end of the 
age he would send forth his messengers to gather the tares 
and bind them in bundles for destruction and to gather the 


[6426] 


M\y 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(13-1 UM 


BCCLESIASTIOISM'S "RICH MEN" 

Again, the last epochal period of the church nominal is 
designated "the church in Laodicea," signifying that the 
angel or messenger to the church at that time would be one 
who would boldly stand for "justice for the people" and be 
against those who would "lord it over," dominate and control 
the church nominal at that time. That this has been literally 
fulfilled by Brother Russell, the readers of The Watch Towbit 
can well testify. And be it noted that this is the only epoch 
of the church nominal wherein its leaders, clergy and watchmen
 claim to be "rich and Tiave need of nothing." They are 
"lukewarm." not taking a firm, uncompromising position for 
or against the Lord, protending to teach the Word o-f God, 
yet denying the power thereof. While claiming to be Christians
, they reject the great ransom sacrifice and the resulting
 blessing? to mankind. They boast of their riches of knowledge
, claiming to have all the spiritual light that exists in 
the world. They count their flocks by the millions, saying, 
"We are rich as never before." For centuries the "Mother 
Harlot" has boasted of riches, her mighty ones claiming the 
sole right to interpret the Word of God; but in the Laodicean 
epoch the clergy of the daughter systems have joined her in 
such boasting (Revelation 17:4-6) and in the systematic oppression
 of the laborers in the harvest field. 

Further describing them St. James says: "Your [claimedl 
riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten." How 
do these words fit the mighty men of Babylon? They lit 
exactly. That there are two kinds of treasure our Lord 
showed when he said to his hearers: "Lay not up for yourselves
 treasures upon earth [the things cherished by human 
society as now constituted — -whether they be tangible things, 
such as material wealth, or whether they be intangible things, 
such as the emoluments, honors, and preferments of men, 
reputation, eU\] where moth and rust doth corrupt, and 
where thieves break through and steal. But lay up for yourselves
 treasures in heaven, [the things often disallowed of 
men but owned and cherished of God— character] where neither 
moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break 
through nor steal." — Matthew ft: 19, 20. 

Opportunity was given to lay up the incorruptible, heavenly
 treasure, but the ecclesiastical systems, particularly the 
clergy class, have preferred the earthly treasure. They have 
spurned the invitation to walk humbly and faithfully in the 
footsteps of Jesus and the apostles, but have doted on great 
buildings, costly furnishings, paid choirs, gorgeous robes, 
numerous followers, great drives for money and members, 
plaudits of men, political preferment, titles, sumptuous meals, 
ease and comfort. "They have grown fat, and they shine." 
To accomplish their purpose in laying up the earttily riches 
they "have preached falsely and have made themselves rulers 
by the same fraudulent means,'' and verily they have their 
reward. — Isaiah 56:10, 11; Jeremiah 5:24-31. 

Jesus warned against the riches which "moth and rust 
doth corrupt." To the clergy class St, James says: "Your 
riches are corrupted and your garments are motheaten." Dr. 
Strong renders the word corrupted as "to putrefy, to perish"; 
and truly -such riches are putrefied and are perishing. A 
motheaten garment is one full of holes, disclosing nakedness. 
The beautiful robe of Christ's righteousness is vitally essential 
to all who walk by faith with the Lord. Assuming to wear 
that beautiful robe, the nominal clergy class has neglected 
the precious garment, and now their covering is motheaten 
and their nakedness is exposed, nevertheless they boast of 
their riches. To sxich the Lord Jesus says: "Thou sayest: 
I am rich and increased with goods and have need of nothing
, and knowest not that thou art wTetched, and miserable 
and poor [spiritually] and blind and naked." — Revelation 
3:17. 

Furthermore St. James adds: "Your gold and silver is 
cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against 
you." Canker is a corroding rust that is destructive. Now 
the rusting of literal gold and silver would be no cause of 
God*& pronouncing a severe judgment against men. Our 
thought is that tbege words "gold and silver" apply spiritually
 to the divine truths committed into the custody of the 
church — truths which the clergy by neglect and wilful misrepresentation
 have permitted to become obscured as by corroding
 rust. Also many persons in the churches who once 
received the divine truths and entered the race for the divine 
or spirit nature have become cankered, rusted and corroded 
by reason of the wrongful teachings of the clergy and their 
improper example. Likewise the divine truth* so brightly, 
beautifully and wonderfully set forth in the Word of God, the 
clergy have permitted to become covered with the canker and 
rust of higher criticism, evolution and humanitarianism, until 


by reason thereof these truths are hidden from many honest 

minds who would have heeded the truth had they been taught. 

THE ItEAPERS AND THE HARVEST 

St. James adds that in the day of restitution "the rust 
of them shall be a witness against you and shall eat your 
flesh as it were Are." Silent but potent is the witness of 
the rust at this very hour. 

Then declares the Lord's servant (vs. 4): "Behold the 
hire of the laborers who have reaped down your fields, which 
is of you kept by fraud, crieth; and the cries of them which 
have reaped are entered into the ears of the Lord of armies." 
To apply these words exclusively to the owners of literal 
fields of grain seems hardly permissible. Many are the farmers
 who own their own fields, and nowadays they pay liberal 
wages to those who aid in the reaping time. The courts 
of the land are always open to compel any defrauder to pay, 
and in most jurisdictions, particularly in the United States, 
nothing is exempt from execution to pay wages duly earned. 
But when we consider the words of St. James from the ecclesiastical
 viewpoint, the entire question is clarified. The 
great Master said: "The field is the world; the good seed 
[wheatl are the children of the kingdom; the harvest is the 
end of the age; and the reapers are the messengers," Again, 
he said that at the end of the age he would send forth his 
messengers to gather his elect from one end of heaven (the 
ecclesiastical systems) to the other. (Matthew 13:37-43) 
The harvest time came? and true to his promise the Lord 
Jesus sent forth "that faithful and wise servant" who, together
 with other faithful ones during the forty years of the 
harvest, reaped the fields. Who, during that time, claimed to 
be owners of the field? The clergy, the "rich men"* themselves
, by their conduct answer: We are possessed of all 
spiritual wisdom, and to us has been committed the responsibility
 of looking out for the spiritual welfare of the world.* 
No one else is ordained to preach or teach. We are the 
watchmen of the flock, and we alone are entitled to the fleece. 

But did they engage in the reaping? No; they even denied 
the presence of the Master Reaper and the time of the harvest. 
Have the fields been reaped down, and if so by whom? Yes; 
by the grace p£ the Lord and under his guiding hand, the 
reaping has been done. Those completely consecrated unto* 
death, those who counted their lives not dear unto them, the 
humble, meek, patient, faithful ones were privileged to do 
the reaping. Many of them physically weak, yet strong in 
the Lord, went forth from house to house, day after day, 
thrusting in the precious sickle of truth; while other faithful
 ones freely used the sickle by handing the message promis 
cuously to all who would receive it and others by word oi 
mouth joyfully . proclaimed the .harvest message to all who 
had hearing ears, 

DEFRAUDED OF THEIR WAGES 

Were these laborers in the harvest field entitled to any 
hire or wage from the rulers in the ecclesiastical systems? 
Yes; they were, for the reason that these mighty men openly 
pretended to be the representatives of the Lord Jesus and 
to be owners of the' field. Do- we not read : "Owe no man 
anything but ta love one another^ for he that loveth another 
hath fulfilled the law'*? (Romans 13:8) Jesus specifically 
commanded his followers to love one another even as he loved 
us. That would mean that each one who claims to be a 
Christian owes it to his brother to love, encourage, comfort 
and help him. The faithful laborers in the harvest field expected
 to receive buffetings fiom the world; but they were 
justly entitled to receive from all who professed faith in 
Christ the wage of encouragement, comfort and love. Had 
the clergy paid their hire or wage, many of their congregations
 would have paid the reapers a like wage. 

But says St. James to these "rich men": "You have by 
resort to fraudulent means kept hack the just wage of the 
reaper." And how did they this? By fraudulently representing
 to the Christian and other peoples of the world that the 
Lord's "faithful and wise servant" and his co-laborers were 
not ordained to preach ffnd teach; that Ihey were ignorant, 
dishonest and vioious persons, yea, even enemies to the 'peoples
; afcd should be shunned and persecuted. Kotwithstandin
|, the loyal followers of the Master pushed on with their 
woTk of reaping the fields. Often tired, weary and footsore, 
despised of men and persecuted, tjiey toiled on, almost fainting
. Many times when a word of loving kindness and encouragement
 would have helped, it was not forthcoming. The 
bitter tears of sorrow often burned their cheeks; and they 
cried aloud, and "the cries of them are entered into the ears 
of the Lord of heavenly armies," who bides his own time for 
the dav of reckoning. 

* It is interesting in this connection to note l:iat tilt "church" 
claims to be *'the sole repository of Truth." 


[6427] 


(135-136) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Turning again to the same class of "rich men" St. James 
says: "Ye have lived in earthly pleasures, and been wanton 
even to the day of slaughter." This mean a that they have 
practised self-indulgence to the reckless and utter disregard 
of other Christians, continuing it even to the day of God's 
vengeance. God's prophet in terse language likewise describes 
them in Isaiah 56:10, saying, "His watchmen are blind; they 
are all ignorant, they are all dumb dog3, they cannot bark; 
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Yea, they are greedy 
dogs which can never have enough, and they are shepherds 
that cannot understand; they all look to thenr own way, 
every one for his gain, from his quarter." 

HERALDS OF THE XXKOTOX "KILLED" 

This company which the Lord calls hypocrites the Apostle 
charges with a grave crime, saying, "Ye have condemned and 
killed the just and he doth not resist you." Prior to the 
writing of this epistle by St. James, the clergy of the Jewish 
order had caused the Lord Jesus to be crucified. Moved by 
the same wicked designs, the prototype of the impure modern 
ecclesiastical harlot imprisoned and killed John the Baptist, 
a righteous man. John typified a class of faithful Christians 
who at the close of the Gospel age, because of loyalty to the 
Lord, are restrained of liberty and rendered useless, "Ye 
have condemned and killed" says St. James. The "rich men" 
of Babylon have persistently and unrelentingly persecuted and 
condemned the John class throughout the harvest time, and 
now they have caused some of them to be killed. "Killed" 
means to render inactive, helpless, or, useless. These opponents
 could not kill the new creature; but since the iiesh 
is the organism of the new creation while on earth, to render 
such useless or helpless is equivalent to killing Buch persons. 
The readers of The Watch Tower are familiar with the way 
in which this has been done during the past few months. 
"And he doth not resist vou." These words apply to John 
the Baptist, type and antitype. The work of the John class 
is to herald the message of the kingdom. To the extent this 
is prevented by the antitype of Herodias and Herod, to that 
extent is the antitypical John rendered helpless — killed — and 
that under the pretext of necessity. 

THE HOUB OF BBTBIBTTTIOir NEAE 

It is surely a fact that these things could not have been 
so clearly understood until the close of the harvest. And 
what may we expect to follow shortly? St. James answers: 
"Come now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries 
which will soon be upon you." (Weymouth) We paraphrase 
the language of St. James: 'Judgment began at the house 
of God, and now it shall shortly come to you. You have 
lived selfishly, in utter disregard of the rignts and welfare 
of the church of Christ. You have heaped up earthly riches, 
but these are now worthless. Your titles are empty and 
meaningless. The divine truths you have permitted to be 
covered and hid by a corroding rust. Your nakedness is apparent
 before God and man; you have defrauded the humble 
and faithful workers in the Lord's harvest; you could not 
feed God'B people, and you have conspired to prevent others 
from doing so. All these things are witness against you, 
condemning you, and they shall eat your flesh as it were fire.' 

Another prophet of Jehovah corroborates this testimony 
in that set forth in Ezekiel 34:3-12. In the 17th and 18th 
chapters of Revelation the Lord of the harvest vividly describes
 the fall of these evil systems, and the howling and 
weeping of the "rich men" thereof. The people once enlightened
 a a to the facts and motives of the evil systems will 
unite to complete her destruction and "shall eat her flesh 
and burn her with fire" (Revelation 17:16), and her "rich 
merchants [arrogant clergy] shall weep and mourn" (Revelation
 18:11), because the hour of retribution is at hand. Jehovah
 declares his determination to rise up to the prey and 
pour upon them his indignation (Zephaniah 3:8), and the 
Lord Jesus declares that this expressed indignation of Jehovah 
will be such as man has never before known, but it will be 
the last. 

GBEAT TEST NOW BEFOEE THE CHURCH 

All these things, it is declared, must transpire before the 
deliverance of man from the thraldom of sin, wickedness, 
persecution and death. St. Paul, having that fact in mind, 
wrote: "The whole creation groaneth and travaileth together
" waiting for that time and for the manifestation of the 
sons of God. 

The period of time elapsing between the close of the harvest
 of the kingdom class and the completed glorification of 
all the members of that class, of necessity must be a time 
of long-suffering and crucial testing. Babylon's complete destruction
 seems to be scheduled for about the same time. Let 
x\* therefore, beloved, be fortified against that time. To be 
forewarned means to be forearmed. Some will wonder why 


such prolonged suffering is permitted, and some will grow 
weary waiting for deliverance. Let all mark the appropriateness
 of St. James* words (vs. 7), "Be patient therefore, brethren
," which means, 'Endure cheerfully.' 

As an illustration, he cites the farmer waiting for his 
crops to mature, and adds: "Be ye also patient, stablish your 
hearts; for the coming of the Lord draweth nigh." The word 
"stablish" means to "turn resolutely in a- certain direction, 
and steadfastly hold that position " against all opposition." 
This admonition for steadfastness coming from St. James in 
this connection is proof conclusive that the conditions prevailing
 during the period of waiting after the end of the harvest
 will be such as will require the maximum degree of 
patience and steadfastness. St. Paul corroborates this conclusion
, saying, "Having done all, stand"; and in order to 
stand, the whole armor of God will be required. The Scriptures
 indicate that the great test must come to the church 
before Babylon's complete overthrow. 

The first primary test mentioned is that of loyalty to the 
Lord at the cost of liberty or life. The Scriptures show that 
God approves only the loyal. Disloyalty to the Lord because 
of the fear of man or of organizations could not be pleasing 
to him. Everyone begotten of the holy Spirit is commissioned 
to preach the message of the kingdom, Ecclesiasticism does 
not want that message given to the people. Particularly the 
"rich men" (lordly clergy) oppose the setting up of the kingdom
. 

The temptation may come to the Lord's people to reason 
thus: 'If I persist in telling the truth concerning the* kingdom
, I may offend ecclesiasticism and her agents, and as a 
consequence be deprived of liberty or life.' But the temptation
 need not be embraced. Let each one ask himself this 
question: 'Is it more profitable for me to have the approval 
and favor of ecclesiasticism or to have the approval of the 
Lord? It is impossible to have both. No man can serve two 
masters.' Let the questioner have in mind these words of 
wisdom, "The fear of man bringeth a snare, but whoso putteth 
his trust in the Lord shall be saie." (Proverbs 29:25) Loyalty
 to the Lord will always be rewarded; therefore let this 
be the criterion for determining all such points: 'What 
would the Lord have me do?' And after determining God's 
will, do it, leaving the consequences in his hands. Clearly St. 
James had in mind this test when he wrote (5:10): "Take, 
my brethren, the prophets, who have spoken in the name of 
of the Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of 
patience." That they might prove loyal and give a faithful 
witness, mark what they endured. 

"And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me 
to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephtha
; of David, also, and Samuel, and of the prophets; who 
through faith subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
 promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the 
violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness
 were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight 
the armies of the aliens. Women received their dead raised 
to life again; and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance
, that they might obtain a better resurrection; and 
others had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea, moreover
, of bonds and imprisonment; they were stoned, they 
were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword: 
they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; being 
destitute, afflicted, tormented (of whom the world was not 
worthy) ; they wandered in deserts and in mountains, and 
in dens and caves of the earth. And these all, having obtained
 a good report through faith, received not the promise; 
God having provided some better thing for us, that they without
 us should not be made perfect." — Hebrews 11:32-40. 

TESTS OF LOYALTY AHD PATIENCE 

Will God require a less degree of loyalty and faithfulness 
on the part of the kingdom class? If you believed it to be 
the Lord's will that you persist in telling the truth, would 
you heed his voice or heed the bluffing voice of ecclesiasticism? 
Let the one who would have the Lord's approval read and 
heed the words of "that wise and faithful servant," appearing
 in Volume III, page 231, paragraph 2: "And probably at 
this juncture the Elijah class, persisting in declaring the 
truth to the last, will suffer violence and pass into glory." 
Here is a test of loyalty to the Lord. It is not the province 
of The Watch Towek to tell any one what he shall or shall 
not do with reference to proclaiming the message. We can 
merely suggest; and we withdraw any statement in this journal
 heretofore made that may have appeared to nny reader 
to be in the nature of a command. Let **ach one be persuaded
 in his own mind what the Lord would have him do. 

Patience is suggested as another primary test now on. St. 
Paul says: "For 'ye have need of patience that after ye have 


[6428J 


May 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(137-138 


done the will of God ye might receive the promise." (Hebrews
 10:36) Have we done the will of God? If so, we have 
done all we can do with reference to making known his kingdom
; and if we are prevented from doing anything further, 
the responsibility rests upon the ones preventing us, and to 
the Lord such must in due time render account. And having 
done our full duty it i3 for us to stand calmly and cheerfully, 
and endure whatsoever experiences the Lord permits to come 
to us. "He that endureth to the end of the same shall be 
saved," were the words of the Lord Jesus relating to this hour. 
St. James had the same thing in mind when he wrote (vs. 
11) : "Behold, we count them happy which endure. Ye have 
heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the 
Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy." Did 
Job gain the Lord's approval by pandering to the coercion of 
Satan and his agents? He did not; neither can any one gain 
the approval of the Lord by so doing. Beloved brethren, here 
is a test of faithfulness and cheerful endurance for the Truth's 
sake. Who will stand on the Lord's side? But while so enduring
, do not swear by anything or anybody; but, says the 
Lord's servant (James 5:12), let your yea mean yes, and 
your nay mean no, without change or deviation and without 
complaint. a THIRD TEST UPON THE CHUECH 

Love for God and the Lord Jesus is another test now on. 
"If ye love me ye will keep my commandments" (John 
14:15) ; and this means that if our love will stand the test 
we will ascertain the will of God, and then do it, because we 
love him; and do it regardless of consequences. "Our God 
whom we serve is able to deliver us." 

Because God's people are made up of different characters, 
the final test will greatly involve love for the brethren. This 
test is now on. Some will murmur against another and judge 
his brother — a test of brotherly love. To those now sealed 
St. James says: "Murmur not against each other, brethren, 
that you be not judged; behold, the Judge is standing before 
the doors." (Verse 9, Diaglott) To illustrate, some brethren 
take a bold and firm stand for the message of the Lord and 
suffer ignominy for it, which ignominy attaches to all who 
are identified as companions with them. (Hebrews 10:33) 
Another murmurs against these brethren, saying, "Could not 
they have pursued a more moderate course, and thus shielded 
themselves and us from this ignominy?" St. James in substance
 replies: 'Don't murmur against your brethren, since 
you are not the judge. The Judge fthe Lord] stands now in 
your presence, and he will judge. Let each one be persuaded 
in his own mind, do what he conceives to be the Lord's will 
and leave the judging to the Lord.' If our love for the brethren
 stands the test, we must put into practice our test of laBt 
year: "Above all things have overspreading love among yourselves
, for love covers a multitude of defects." And again, 
"He that loveth his brother abideth in the light, and there 
is none occasion of stumbling in him." — 1 John 2:10. 

We must have perfect love for even our enemies, having 
always the desire to do good unto them when the Lord is 
pleased to grant the opportunity. Poor, blind and deluded 
creatures! Many of them think they are doing God service 
by persecuting the reapers who have labored in the harvest, 
while some are the willing tools of the "seed of the serpent" 
which is maliciously bent on bruising the heel of the "seed of 
promise." But, beloved, remember that it was a part of our 
covenant at consecration that we would drink of the cup which 
the Father pours for us. Only a pure heart can fulfil the 
exact terms of that consecration, and its exact fulfilment is 
requisite to membership in the kingdom. A pure heart includes
 love for even those who persecute ua; but it does not 
mean that for fear of offending or suffering we will yield to 
the whims and dictates of our enemies. Perfect love casteth 
out fear, and perfect love prompts its possessor to do the will 
of God (not the will of man) and do it with a cheerful, joyful
 heart. (1 John 5:3) The loyal, faithful, patient, and 
loving child of God will have his approval. The approval of 
God is the only thing now worth while. 
THE SUMMING UP 

Summing up the words of St. James, we see that foreknowing
 what would come to pass, God caused his bondservant
 to write to the church, to the intent that the members 
thereof might be encouraged as they approach the dark night. 
In other places in his Word God caused to be recorded the 
fact that there would arise wicked, persecuting ecclesiastical 
systems. He pictured them .by the wicked women, Jezebel, 
Herodias and Salome, while Ahab and Herod were used to 
picture the evil instruments that would execute the malicious 
vengeance of the systems; and he used Elijah and John the 
Baiptist to picture the class of loyal Christians who would be 
the victims of intolerance and persecution. 

Apparently the Lord designed this denunciation of St. 


VII.^39 


James to apply particularly to the popes, cardinals, archbishops
, bishops, doctors of divinity, and the clergy as a class 
in general (there being exceptions of course), who as the 
merchants of these unfaithful systems have dealt in Babylon's 
merchandise and, in their own estimation at least, have grown 
rich thereby. He tells them in no uncertain terms of their 
unfaithfulness; and shows how that in disregard of the obligation
 to serve the Lord they have served themselves, fleecing 
the sheep, living at ease from the profits thereof, and have 
done so in wanton, reckless and utter disregard of the rights 
of the Lord'3 children; that their own garments are falling 
to pieces and their nakedness is exposed; that they would not 
enter into the kingdom and have kept others from entering; 
that they not only refused to aid in the harvest field, but by 
fraud, deceit and misrepresentation have kept back from the 
laborers what they would have received from other Christians; 
and furthermore, that they have caused many of the harvest 
laborers to be persecuted, molested, arrested, imprisoned and 
killed (rendered inactive in the Lord's work), because of 
faithfully telling the truth concerning the Lord's kingdom 
and the restitution blessings coming to the human race. Moreover
, he tells these "rich men" that the divine truths which 
they assumed to handle they have suffered to become covered 
with canker and rust. All these things stand as strong witnesses
 against them. Wherefore, "Come now, ye rich men, 
weep and howl for the miseries shortly to come upon you." 
WHY THE TESTING NOW7 

The time has come when the Lord will reward them that 
fear his name and "destroy them that corrupt the earth" 
(Revelation 11:18); and just preceding the happening of the 
judgment upon the systems there will be a time of crucial 
testing to the church. 

But why should such trying experiences come upon the 
church now after the harvest is closed? It is because the 
graduating hour has come; and the Lord, being an exact 
economist, is using the means at hand to determine who will 
pass the final examinations. He is permitting the unholy systems
 to go the full length of the tether, that their wickedness 
may come to the full, that by their own testimony they shall 
be condemned and at the same time their wicked, persecuting 
acts can be utilized to give the needed experience to his 
saints. God's plan must be fulfilled exactly and completely. 
Suffering is made a condition precedent to entering into the 
kingdom. • "It is given to you [as a privilege] not only to 
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, but to suffer for his sake." 
(Philippians 1:29) The Lord Jesus left behind him certain 
sufferings for the body members to fill up, as a privilege to 
the body. (Colossian3 1:24) Hence the fulfilment of these 
requirements is one of the primary reasons for the tests now 
upon the church. 

While it is true that the harvest work is closed, yet there 
is doubtless a gleaning work that will continue for a while. 
That is to say, some who were consecrated and in a waiting 
attitude may be selected to take the place of others who have 
fallen out of the race since the Spring of 1918. Such may 
yet be gathered in. But when Babylon's fall is complete, 
many thousands of consecrated Christians within her wall3 
will flee out and seek the message of truth. The Scriptures 
clearly indicate that this satisfying portion will be given to 
them by some members of the kingdom class, and that great 
numbers of these "foolish virgins" will be gathered to the 
Lord. OTHER WORK TO BE DONE 

After the harvest is done the saints are particularly admonished
 to be patient until full deliverance is come. Patience 
means cheerful endurance of fiery trials, usually resulting 
from injustice on the part of some one. Patience is an element
 of character which must be possessed by the overcomer. 
How could we prove to the Lord or to ourselves that we can 
cheerfully endure hardships and fiery experiences resulting 
from injustice unless we be subjected to such fiery experiences
? Therefore the fiery trials afford the opportunity for 
a practical demonstration of cheerful endurance. Hence the 
second reason for such experiences is apparent. But may not 
these experiences cause some to fall away ? Undoubtedly. 
God knows who will be shaken and who will stand firmly. 
"Everything that can be shaken will be shaken." "The kingdom
 of heaven is at hand!" 

We are now approaching the general assembly of the 
church of the firstborn. Full warning of the events immediately
 preceding that great hour is given by the Lord through 
St. Paul, who wrote: "Whose voice then shook the earth; 
but now he hath promised, saying, Yet once more I shake 
not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, Yet once 
more, signifieth the removing of those things that are shaken, 
as of things that are made, that those things which cannot 
be shaken may remain. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom 

[6429] 


(138-142) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


riTTSIU'RGlT, Pa. 


which cannot be moved, let us have grace, whereby we mayserve
 God acceptably with reverence and godly fear." (Hebrews
 12:26-28) To realize the hour in which we are living 
means to appreciate fully the present trials of the saints. 

The priesthood in glory is the priesthood after the order 
of Melchizedek, a priest upon his throne; — the royal priesthood
. It is made up of Jesus the Head and 144,000 underpriests
, all the members of which must be perfected before 
the priesthood is finally complete. It is written of the Lord 
Jesus, the Head, that he was made perfect through suffering. 
"Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things 
which he suffered." (Hebrews 2:10; 5:8) The under members
 of the royal priesthood can be perfected in no way aside 
from suffering as Christians. (1 Peter 4:12-14) Some suffer 
from vile slander, libel, and persecution; others suffer as 
convicts as it were in prison; while others suffer by reason 
of their companionship with and love for and support of such, 
—Hebrews 10:33. 

"PERFECTED THROUGH SUFFERING" 

Even Jesus, the perfect One, passed through fiery trials 
and persecutions that he might be able to sympathize with 
the poor race of mankind. Of him it 13 written: "Wherefore 
in all things it behooved him to be made like unto his brethren
, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest 
in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for tne 
sins of the people; for in that he himself hath suffered being
 tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted." 
(Hebrews 2:17, 18) How could one be so well qualified to 
sympathize with the sorrows and weaknesses and needs of 
those who are restrained in prison as to be there with them 
as one of them for a time? How could one be qualified to 
mete out justice tempered with mercy to those of the world 
during the period of reconciliation without tasting of their 
bitter experiences? 

Ah, beloved in the Lord, when the wicked systems have 
perished from the earth, when all the clouds of sorrow and 
weeping have flown away, when the Sun of Righteousness 
shines forth in resplendent glory upon mankind, then we shall 
have a keener appreciation of the wisdom and love of God 
in permitting U3 to suffer even as malefactors for a little while. 
And, thanks be to God, that glad day of rejoicing is about at 
hand. "For yet a little while, and* he that shall come will 
come and will not tarry." But doubts will arise in the minds 
of some as to whether or not these things at present experienced
 are evidences of the nearness of the kingdom. Some 


will be inclined to murmur against, find fault with and judge 
their brothers. Some will be inclined, because of fear of 
Babylon, to take a more moderate and compromising course, 
and will become impatient. But to all such we say, Take 
heed to the words of the Master and his inspired servants: 
"In patience possess ye your souls"; "he that shall eiulure 
to the end, the same shall be saved" (Luke 21:19; Matthew 
24:13) ; and "Remember \\e call those blessed who endure."-— 
James 5:11, Weymouth. 

After St. Paul had endured many hardships and a long 
term in prison, he wrote to the Philippians the sweetest of 
all his epistles. Shall we suppose he rejoiced and gave thanks 
to God for permitting him to be imprisoned for telling tin 1 
truth? We surely think he did. It was in that prison at 
Rome he wrote: "Now I would have you know, brethren, that 
what I have gone through ha^ turned out to the furtherance 
of the good news rather than otherwise. And thus it lias Income
 notorious among all the imperial guards and everywhere
, that it is for the sake of Christ that T am a prisoner; 
and the greater part of the brethren, made confident in tin* 
Lord through my imprisonment, now speak of God's message 
without fear, more boldly than e\er" (Weymouth). lie then 
also wrote: "Rejoice in the Lord alway*; and again T say, 
Rejoice." And so now we can --ay, Thanks he to God for all 
of our experiences, both the bitter and the sweet! The bitter 
experiences now will greatly increase our longing for home, 
while preparing u* for that home; and sweeter beyond outfondest
 dreams will it he when A\e reach there. 

"We shall see and be like Jesu-> 

By and by, by and by; 
To himself he will receive us, 

By and by, by and by; 
Then with joy we will fulfil 
All God's blessed holy will, 
And adore and praise him still, 

By and by, by and by. 

"Yes, our tears shall all cease flowing, 

By and by, by and by; 
And with power we shall be showing 

By and by, by and by — 
All the wealth of grace dhine, 
All the depths of wisdom's mine, 
Making truth and virtue shine, 

By and by, by and by." 


REPENTANCE 

[This article, with the exception of the following paragraph, was a reprint of article entitled, * 'God's Pity for the Heathen," 

published in issue of March 15, 1911, which please see.] 
A great fish captured near Miami, Fla., a few years ago, This great sea monster is still on exhibition. It has been 
had within its stomach another fish weighing 1500 pounds. shown in various cities, and seen by thousands of people. 

FAITH: WHAT IT IS AND WHAT IT DOES 


[Tim article was a reprint of that entitled, 

1913, 
There U a lamp whose steady light 
Guides the poor traveler in the night. 
'Tis God's own Word! Its beaming ray 
Can turn a midnight into day. 

There is a storehouse of rich fare. 
Supplied with plenty and to spare. 
J Tis God's own Word! It spreads a fea^t 
For every hungering, thirsting guest. 

There is a chart whose tracings show 
The onward course when tempests blow. 


'The Ancient Worthies/' published in jsmjc of February l.">, 
which please see.] 

'Tis God's own Word! There, there is found 
Direction for the homeward hound. 

There is a tree whose leaves impart 
Health to the burdened, contrite heart. 
? Tis God's own Word! Jt euros of sin, 
And makes the guilty conscience clean. 

Give me this lamp to light my road; 
This storehouse for my daily food; 
Give me this chart for life's rousrh sea; 
These healing leaves, this heavenly tree. 


OBEDIENCE A TEST OF DISCIPLESHIP 

[This article \va« a reprint of that entitled, "Take lleed How Ye Hear," published in issue of March lo. H)06, uhi.-h plea-e -w. | 

CONCERNING THE BACK TOWERS IN BOOK FORM 


Although there has been a very generous response to our 
notice in last issue concerning the reprinting of all the back 
issues of The Watch Tower in book form, we have to report 
that to date only about 2500 sets have been ordered, whereas 
it will require an edition of at least 5,000 sets to make the 
matter worth while. We have no doubt but that most of the, 
classes will want at least twice as many sets as they have 
thus far informed us of, hut until they advise us accordingly 
we will l>e unable to proceed. Owing to the great bulk of 
matter, it will require considerable time to set it up in type 
and make electroplates. For this reason we suggest that 

[643 


every reader, immediately upon receipt of this notice, decide 
whether he expects to order a set of these back Towers. Then 
sit down and drop us a post card AT ONCE, if you want 
them. Do not send us any money as yet. Merely c«y, 'T will 
take a set ot hack Townts in l»ook form if tke\ are published
 " As previously announced, the price of ihe whole m'I 
{seven volumes), which will contain a reprint of all Towm 
ai tides for the past forty years, with complete index, will he 
♦^12, charge* collect, provided we receive requests for at lea-d 
5.000 sets. 

0] 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., MAY 15, 1919 


No. 10 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


"For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the 
whole creation growneth and travaklcth in pain together 
have the first-fruits of the spirit, even ice ourselves 
towit, the redemption of our 

Watchers in Zlon are eager for each additional evidence of 
the fulfillment of prophecy relative to the bringing in of the 
kingdom of our Lord. It is a self-evident fact that the whole 
creation is groaning and travailing in pain now under the great 
load they are carrying, and hoping for some, deliverance from 
that load. The desire of all men is for full liberty, happiness 
and life everlasting. They really desire the kingdom of the 
Lord, but they do not know that* his kingdom will satisfy the 
desire of all nations. Many are the theories of men in good 
faith advanced, each Iheory put forth with confidence that it 
will bring the desire of all nations; but these are destined to 
failure. None but the Christian, however, can understand why 
such schemes must fail, and the Christian makes himself exceedingly
 unpopular in the world at this time because he tries 
to point out the reason why human schemes will not succeed. 
Yet, realizing his God-given privilege, he continues to hold 
forth the real hope of Messiah's kingdom. 

The great world-war has opened the eyes of man to the fact 
that the old order of things has passed away and thai it is 
time for something new. Many of the less selfish are going 
forward with schemes for the establishment of the new order, 
that greater blessings may be enjoyed. Every noble thought is 
to be commended, and everyone who is honestly seeking for the 
betterment of his fellow-man should be treated with consideration
; and while we sympathize- fully with the desire of the 
world to have relief from present burdens and to enjoy blessings
 of liberty, happiness and life, yet we cannot give wholehearted
 co-operation to their plans, because we know they are 
not the right ones for the accomplishment of "the desire of 
all nations.' 3 However, as we see these various schemes unfold 
we witness in them the fulfillment of prophecy, bespeaking the 
near approach of the great kingdom of Messiah. To the student
 of the divine plan it is easy to understand why there are 
so many theories and why these are in conflict in large measures
 with each other. 

SATAN* THE ARCH-ENEMY 

The arch-enemy of mankind is Satan, and hence he seeks to 
thwart every movement toward righteousness. It has ever 
been his purpose to keep the peoples under his control. Dominion
 he has always aspired to, and since he usurped the dominion
 of earth he has sought to maintain it. It is quite reasonable
 to conclude that he would try desperately to hold that 
dominion. Since we have reached the end of the old order 
greater light lias come to all people, and particularly to those 
who are students 6f the divine Word. This greater light exposes
 Satan, and every device looking toward righteousness 
tends to weaken his hold upon mankind. Therefore he sees 
his kingdom tottering and is using various deceptions to keep 
the people still under his control. His method has always been 
to use fraud and deception, and to inject into the human mind 
thoughts that would accomplish his purpose, whether wholly, 
against the interests of mankind or not. He well knows that 
Messiah's kingdom means the triumph of the "seed of promise
"; hence we may expect that Satan has more or less part 
in all human projects. He is a wily foe, a pastmaster in politics
. He places one class against the other and controls both. 
He incites the radicals to extreme action against the capitalists
, and the capitalists to a radical position against the laborers
. Having been able to control mankind largely through 
the influence of the clergy, he lines the prominent and influential
 among them up with the capitalist class. But if the 
various classes of mankind would only turn to the divine Word 
for instruction they would learn that the interest of one is the 
interest of all, and that Satan is the enemy of all. The 
clergy have pretended to be teachers of the divine Word, but 
having really ignored its teachings of mercy and love and being
 blind guides they have led all whom they could influence 
into the ditch. This is evidence in proof that Satan's kingdom 
is nearing the end and that the Lord's kingdom is at hand. 
EARTHQUAKES, FAMINES, PESTILENCES 
Answering the question propounded to him by the disciples
 a? to what would be proof of the passing of the old order 
and the coming in of the new, Jesus said: "Nation shall rise 
against nation and kingdom against kingdom [in a general 
Avar'l great earthquakes [symbolically meaning revolution] in 
divers places, and famines and pestilences." (Luke 21:10} One 
need not be a prophetic student to note the fulfillment of this 
prophetic statement of the Lord. For four years the greatest 
war of all time has ravished the nations and kingdoms of the 


manifestation of the sons of God. For we Jcn-oiv that the 
until now. And not only they, but ourselves also, which 
groan within ourselves, toaiting for the adoption, 
body."— Romans 8:19, 22, 23. 

earth, and has brought about a condition the like of which the 
world has never known. Moreover famines have followed in 
the wake of the war. The public press announces that every 
nation of Europe has a great food shortage, and from three 
hundred millions to four hundred millions of people face starvation
 unless America can furnish the food. 

A great pestilence has swept the earth during the last 
twelve months. Tt is announced that the four years war claimed
 victims to the number of nine million persons, while the 
pestilence of influenza claimed twelve million victims in a few 
months, and this was not confined to the Avar zone, but has 
spread over all nations of earth. Even in the northernmost 
parts whole tribes of the Esquimos have perished from this 
dread disease. 

And now the world is threatened with another pestilence 
called lethargic encephalitis or epidemic coma — 'frequently, 
though improperly called "sleeping sickness." We would not 
be surprised if before another year the pestilence will be greater 
than it was in the year past. We say this not for the purpose
 of discouraging anyone, but rather that we might be encouraged
 to see that such are the fulfillments of the prophetic 
utterances of the great Master, bespeaking a better day near 
at hand. 

KINGDOM OF HEAVEK AT HAND 

In view of these facts should we not expect the other part 
of this prophecy to be fulfilled, and if we see it in the course 
of fulfillment should it not strengthen our faith that the old 
order is ended and the new order is coming in, and that the 
kingdom of Heaven is at hand? Jesus, in this connection, 
mentioned revolution as one of the evidences. Revolutions are 
of two kinds: bloody, or those which result in great destruction
 of human life and property ; and bloodless, or those which 
by peaceful means overturn the old order and establish a new 
and supposedly better order. That the latter type of revolution
 has been going on without general public knowledge we 
have strong proof by what has transpired in recent months 
in the State of North Dakota. Here a revolution brought 
about by peaceful means has. fully upset the old or selfish 
order, and it is to be noted that while it was in process of development
 its opponents bitterly fought every step. The Literary
 Digest of March t 29th, 1919, discussing this revolution in 
Korth Dakota Bays: 

"Less than four years ago, when the sense of economic 
grievance that rankled in the hearts of North Dakota's farmers
 had been fanned to a flame by the refusal of the legislature
 to establish a state-owned terminal grain-elevator, a man 
named Arthur C. Townley jumped into a small, hired automobile
 and began by a farm-to*farm canvass the organization of 
the Non-Pa ftisan League. For months the old line politicians 
regarded this 'Flivver campaign* as a joke, but today they see 
Mr. Town ley's league of farmers grown to a membership of 
more than 200,000 with a political organization in thirteen 
states, representation in the United States Congress, and completely
 in control of North Dakota's government. Moreover — 
and it is this that is attracting the attention of the whole country
 to the Flickertail state-^before it adjourned in February, 
the North Dakota legislature at Bismarck enacted a series of 
laws which friends and foes agree are revolutionary. 'The 
farmers of North Dakota,' declares the Fargo Oourier-News, a 
N on -Partisan League daily, 'have proved that revolution can 
be wrought by peaceful means, and, more than any other. body 
of men in this world, they have taught the folly of revolution 
by bloodshed.' By this vindication of democracy, argues the 
Courier-Netvs, 'North Dakota has proved its right to be designated
 as the most American of all the United States.' A 
popular assertion among the Non-Partisans, according to a Bismarck
 correspondent of the St. Paul Dispatch, is that 'it's the 
greatest little revolution since 1776'; and this correspondent, 
who seems to think that the farmers will have a disillusioned 
awakening from their dream of a political Utopia, at least 
agrees that their future is now in the hands of 'the most revolutionary
 political machine that ever gained complete autocratic
 control of legislative affairs in any state in the Union.' 
A Bismarck correspondent of the Boston Herald describes the 
Non-Partisan League's program as 'the most interesting, and 
perhaps the most important, .political and Bocial movement now 
visible in the United States'; and he adds that its opponents 
believe it to be *a disguised campaign for state and national 
socialism.' The same correspondent quotes one of the League 
leaders as saying: 


[6431] 


(147-148) 


(148-149) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


KOBTH DAKOTA TAKES LEAD 


North Dakota is the first state in the Union to profit 
intelligently by the lessons of the Great War and to prepare 
a constructive program that paves the way for the next great 
political and economic development in civilization, the extension
 of democracy into industry. 

" 'Consequently North Dakota wil] be the first state to 
strike its stride, long before the rest of the states, while they 
are still faltering through with haphazard and ineffective readjustment
 measures, and this program promises to make this 
state the most stable and contented, as well as the most prosperous
, commonwealth in America.' 

"But if North Dakota's adventure in government represents 
a revolution, remarks the Chicago Post, it is 'a revolution of 
the bourgeoisie/ because 'in no sense can the land-owning farmers
, who have very definite property interests and to a limited 
extent are employers of labor, be considered proletarians.' 
What North Dakota now has is 'an agrarian dictatorship,' remarks
 the Boston Globe, which reminds us, however, that the 
State is '90 per cent agricultural, with no manufactures, and 
with only one city of 20,000 inhabitants.' In the same paper 
we find this illuminating comment on the situation: 

" 'A somewhat conservative Boston ian who often enthuses 
about Middle-Westerners came home the other day with a 
glowing story of North Dakota. "They are Socialists out there, 
aren't they?' inquired a dubious friend. 'Socialists? No! No!' 
he replied. 'Socialists are improvident persons who are simplv
 talkers spouting ideals. These are money-making farmers 
who are going ahead and doing things!' 

"Conditions which place the farmers in the saddle and in 
complete control, adds The Globe, mean 'a rather emphatic revolution
,' because 'North Dakota not long ago knew a railroad 
dictatorship, which operated not only through the transportation
 system organized by James J. Hill, but indirectly through 
a string of banks organized in every town, partly for banking 
and partly for politics.' Turning again to the Fargo CourierNews
, we read: 

"'No people faced a more discouraging prospect than the 
people of North Dakota four years ago. A great political machine
 was firmly established in the state; courts and legislature
 alike did the bidding of absentee masters; they were fortified
 behind a constitution that had been cunningly drawn 
with the one purpose of making change practically impossible. 
If the demand of the Bolsheviki for direct action and a class 
dictatorship had ever been justified, surely it would have been 
in North Dakota four years ago. 

"'But the farmers decided to bring about their revolution 
throiigh due course of law. They met obstacles enough to 
daunt the most indomitable. When they won the election, 
they found the courts against them; and always in the background
 was the almost insurmountable obstacle of a constitution
 that had been made as nearly unamendable as possible. 
Men less determined would have given way, as every previous 
reform movement in every other State has done. But not the 
men of North Dakota. Opposition made them only the more 
determined, and they would not admit defeat.' 

"Ultimately the constitution was amended and all difficulties
 overcome. The* final victory, this League organ goes on to 
say, 'proved that to American democracy all things are possible
'; but it also proved the value of 'leadership and discipline
/ for which 'credit goes to Arthur C. Townley more than 
to any other.' And in another issue it remarks suggestively: 
r And may it not prove that the leadership for the great work 
of accomplishing a bloodless and peaceful revolution for Ameriica
 is being trained in North Dakota today?' Mr. Townley, 
originator and president of the League, is described by a Boston
 Herald correspondent as 'a tall, quiet man, whom not in a 
thousand years would any observer pick out as a leader of 
men.' " 

EDEN NOT YET 

While doubtless this revolution in North Dakota has 
brought about some changes for the better, it cannot ultimately
 succeed in the sense of producing an idealistic condition
. Already much opposition is manifest against it, and 
factional differences are developing among its executives which 
will no doubt result unhappily for the movement. We quote 
further from The Literary? Digest of the same date: 

"In a number of North Dakota papers we still find vigorous
 opposition to what the Fargo Forum calls the Non-Partisan 
League's 'Socialist gang rule.' The Forum is insistent that 
much of this radical program must be submitted to the direct
 verdict of the people in a referendum. According to this 
paper, 'the fight is far from hopeless'; and it sees in the gathering
 of the referendum petitions an opportunitv for 'the first 
well-organized campaign of education ever undertaken against 


[6432] 


the League propaganda'. 'Some of these measures undoubtedly 
will be referended,' says the Bismarch Tribune, which remarks 
that 'sanity will come only when the farmer realizes that an 
Ldemc condition cannot be brought about by the panaceas 
proposed'. And the Grand Forks Herald submits these points 
for consideration: 

" 'The State of North Dakota lias no experience in any of 
the important lines of activity to which it is now committed. 
Its officials, and the unofficial dictators who instruct the officials
 in their actions, are unable to point to the experience 
of- any other State, province, or nation in these matters under 
conditions like ours that such experience may be accepted as 
safe guidance for us. And, for the financing of these enterprises
, all of which are purely experimental, so f\ar as we are 
concerned, provision has been made for the raising of funds 
amounting to some thirty million dollars. For such a state as 
Pennsylvania or New York that would not be a large sum 
with which to experiment. For North Dakota it means $40 
for every man, woman and child in the State, or $200 for the 
average family of five. 

"'Back of this system of experimentation is the most 
tyrannical and dictatorial spirit that has ever gained the 
ascendancy in an American state. The Non-Partisan League 
movement is often described as a 'People's movement*. That 
description is false. The League is organized from the top. 
Such officers as it has had have been appointed specifically 
in accordance with the will of its chief organizer, and its 
policies have been formulated by him, and by him transmitted 
to his subordinates and such of the general membership as has 
been deemed proper from time to time, not for consideration, 
hut for immediate execution. The rule of Mr, Townley over 
a certain section of the people of North Dakota is as autocratic
 as is the rule of Lenine over a certain group of people 
in Russia. 

" 'North Dakota takes its plunge into Socialism under conditions
 which are not comfortable or reassuring.' " 
DESTBTTCTIVE REVOLUTION 
Russia has experienced a different kind of revolution, according
 to the public press. There has been great destruction 
of property and human life. Whether these reports truly 
represent conditions or not, we are unable to judge, yet it must 
be quite evident that the conditions prevailing in Russia are 
anything but idealistic. The Russian revolution overthrew 
aristocracy and overthrew ecclesiasticism because the clergv 
were united with the aristocracy. The Scriptures clearly indicate
 that such conditions would prevail and that it mi<*ht 
have been prevented had the clergy honestly sought to teach 
the people the Lord's Word, not taking selfish sides with either 
party, but pointing all to the kingdom of Messiah. But, alas, 
they have failed to do this. 

The New York Times of March 24th, 1919, and other 
metropolitan papers, carry a full page advertisement by the 
Christian Herald under large headlines: "Is Bolshevism Coming
 to A.meriea?" In the fore-ground is a hideous looking 
monster in the form of a man, having in one hand a dagger 
and in the other a fire brand. Under his feet are being 
trampled many human beings, and as he rushes through the 
land destruction follows in his wake. This advertisement of 
The Christian Herald defines Bolshevism in these words: 

"Bolshevism is not the sudden violence of passion let loose 
— but organized violence, violence deliberately adopted as the 
most effective way of righting social wrongs— that is the essential
 spirit of Bolshevism. 

"Kill — burn— wipe the whole slate bare; begin civilization 
over again;— that is the terrible slogan the Bolshevists are 
passing from country to country." 

This same advertisement then suggests a preventive of 
Bolshevism, saying: 

"Farsighted men and women know that there is only one 
way^ to make America safe from Bolshevism. 

"Rational hours, good wages, a comfortable material environment
—these things are necessary, but these things alone 
will not do it. There are great masses of people whom these 
things aloue will not satisfy today. 

"The thing they are seeking is a new spirit of industry ; 
a spirit that will recognize and respect the personality of each 
man, so that each man may have freedom for self-expression 
through his work. . . . The new relations thnt are developing
 between employers and workers — the constructive new 
measures that are being worked out by big labor leaders and 
big industrial managers. The Christian Herald is taking up 
the questions that industry must solve in the light of Christianity
. 

^'Articles by men like John WanamaJcer, with his vast 
business experience and wide religious interests: William G. 
McAdoo, former secretary of the Treasury and Director of 


May 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(149-150) 


Railroads; William B. Wilson, Secretary of Labor; Frank A. 
Vanderlip, President of the National City Bank of New York; 
Frederic C. Howe, U. S. Commissioner of Immigration. These 
are some of the means by which the Christian Herald is interpreting
 Christianity as the great reconstructing force in modern 
industry." 

HUMAN SCHEMES INADEQUATE 

We have nothing to say against the great men mentioned by 
The Christian Herald, but below we call attention to a prophecy 
relating to this time which shows that the scheme suggested 
by the Christian Herald must fail. It might be suggested that 
it would be difficult to induce the radical element to believe that 
the great financiers of the land are really interested in their 
welfare from a Christian standpoint. The experience in Russia
 shows that it would be even more difficult to convince 
a proletariat that the modern clergy has suddenly become so 
deeply interested in the people's welfare from the Christian 
standpoint. God foretold the conditions now prevailing, and 
used Israel as an example. The words spoken by his prophet 
Jeremiah applied to Israel, and apply with greater force to 
nominal spiritual Israel — ecclesiasticism of today, which the 
Christian Herald represents. 

When Jesus was on this earth he taught his followers to 
keep themselves separate from the world and to pursue the 
single policy of preaching Messiah's kingdom. The class for 
which the Christian Herald stands claims to represent Christ 
on earth and offers its interpretation of Christ as the remedy 
for the menace that threatens the nation. In other words it 
has departed from the teachings of the great Master. To such 
the Lord said: "For my [professed] people have committed 
two evils: [1] they have forsaken me, the fountain of living 
waters and [2] hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that 
can hold no water." (Jeremiah 2:13) The living waters 
here are symbolic of the true message of Messiah's kingdom, 
which nominal Christendom has forsaken and which the Lord 
charges as the first offense or evil committed, and the hewing 
out of new cisterns symbolically meaning doctrines or new 
schemes which they have brought forward as a substitute for 
Messiah's kingdom. Herein we see the fine hand of the Adversary
 playing his political game by overreaching those who 
profess to be the followers of Christ to cause them to substitute
 human device for that of the Lord, and the Scriptures 
spell but one thing for all such schemes — failure! 
CHURCHES DEMAND MONET AND LIFE 

The New York Times of March 22nd, 1919, carries a six 
column advertisement of the Presbyterian churches of Greater 
New York, likewise calling attention to the threatened menace 
of Bolshevism, suggesting as a remedy the nominal church 
and its scheme for curing human ills. Among other things 
it says: 

<r The church demands not your money or your life, but 
your money and your life; give them both tomorrow.*' 

The lowly Nazarene whom they claim to follow demanded 
neither money nor life, but invited a full consecration to him 
and to righteousness, and obedience to his laws. Thus we 
see that this church system has likewise fallen a victim to the 
same error as mentioned above in the prophecy of Jeremiah. 

In every church denomination, Catholic and Protestant, 
are to be found many good Christian people, but the course 
pursued by many of their leaders, the clergy, has not been 
such as to* inspire confidence in their suggested remedies. Nor 
does the class of people out of which Bolshevists are made 
incline one to be led by them. The Lord repeatedly states in 
his Word that their forsaking of his plan and adopting of manmade
 schemes is an abomination in his sight and that their 
plans Bhall not prosper; as we read: "For the pastors are become
 brutish and have not sought the Lord: therefore they 
shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be scattered." — 
Jeremiah 10:21. 

Our thought is that such men as Mr. Rockefeller, Mr. McAdoo
 and others of that character are able to do much more 
good toward establishing a peaceful condition alone, than 
could be done with the aid of the clergy, that play double with 
the people. The mission of the Christian is to represent 
Christ faithfully, as his ambassador. (2 Corinthians 5 .'20) As 
ambassadors of Christ we cannot with impunity ignore his 
method for blessing mankind and adopt a man-made scheme 
and then expect to receive his favor. 

JEWISH AND GOSPEL AGES PARALLEL 

The world is face to face with a great calamityr and it is 
the solemn duty of everyone to do what he can to alleviate 
the suffering incident to that calamity. We find the experiences 
at the close of the Jewish age being re-enacted now at the close 
of tie Gospel age; and it was an unfaithful clergy at that 
time which brought the indignation of the Lord upon that 


people. If the clergy of today would do real good, let them 
walk after the Master and call upon the people to follow his 
teachings. Let them openly and publicly acknowledge that 
they have taught false doctrines contrary to the Word of 
God, and that they have led the people into error; let them 
sincerely and fully repent of their wrong-doing and humbly 
ask God for forgiveness, and then let them sincerely and completely
 withdraw from politics and all alliances with worldly 
systems, wholly consecrate themselves to the Lord, and henceforth
 teach his Word and nothing else and thereby promote 
peace and love among all peoples. Thus doing, their influence 
would be for good, and the radical element would be more inclined
 to listen to their advice. The Lord God will not bless 
the efforts of an unfaithful ministry. 

THE TEUE BEMEDT 
Without doubt the great mass of mankind, capitalists and 
those who make up the ranks of labor, rich and poor, earnestly 
desire peace, happiness, liberty and life. The Lord has a perfect
 and exact remedy for them. When the perfect man was in 
Eden he enjoyed all these blessings. Because of his disobedience
 of God's law he lost them. He was sentenced to 
death, which sentence carried with it all the iraperfectiona 
to which man has fallen heir. But God then promised to 
develop a seed, through which seed a blessing should come 
to all mankind. All nations, kindreds and peoples of earth 
shall be blessed with an opportunity for liberty, happiness and 
life everlasting. St. Paul shows us that this promised seed 
is Christ. (Galatians 3:27-29); that the Christ is composed
 of Jesus and also the members of his body. The selection
 of this seed began at the Jordan when Jesus consecrated 
himself to do the Father's special will. It was necessary for 
him to die and rise from the dead to provide the great ransom
 price which would redeem mankind from the penalties 
of death that fell upon Adam and his offspring. Rising from 
the tomb he ascended into heaven and presented the merit of 
that sacrifice to Jehovah in satisfaction of justice on behalf 
of all who should come to Jehovah throughout the Gospel 
age, trusting in the merit of that sacrifice. 

At Pentecost the members of his body composing a part of 
this promised seed began to be chosen. The disciples were 
there begotten by the spirit of Jehovah to the divine nature, 
and down through the Gospel age some have been selected, 
here a few and there a few. Jesus taught his followers that 
they should await his coming, and while waiting their mission 
would be to preach the glad tidings to the meek and to point 
them to his kingdom as the only remedy for human ills. To 
all such he said: "When ye pray say, "Thy kingdom come; 
thy will be done on earth as in heaven." 

"SEASONS OF BEFBESHINO" 
All the Lord's apostles pointed to the second coming of 
the Lord and mark it as a day of blessing for mankind. St. 
Paul referring to that time said : "God hath appointed a day 
in which he will judge the world in righteousness." {Acts 
17:31) The Apostle Peter describes it as a time of refreshing
, when restitution blessings should be offered to all mankind
, which blessings God foretold through the mouth of all 
his holy prophets. All the prophets from Samuel to Malachi 
foretold the coming of that day and St. Paul distinctly informs
 us that all these things were written aforetime for the 
benefit of those who are living in the very time in which we 
now find ourselves. (Romans 15:4) Jesus, in his great 
prophecy, foretold the falling away of the clergy and the teaching
 of false doctrines. He foretold the troublesome condition 
we now see upon the earth, and then showed that his kingdom 
alone would bring the desired blessings to the people. The 
prophet said: "He will shake all nations and [then] the desire
 of all nations shall come." (Haggai 2:7) The shaking 
process is on now. War, revolution, etc., constitute the shaking
 "Then [at the time] Michael will stand up, the great prince 
that standeth for the children of thy people." — Daniel 12:1. 

What a wonderful opportunity the clergy are missing by 
not heeding the Word of the Lord and telling the people now 
how they can have their desire — peace, happiness, plenty, 
liberty, and life everlasting. Instead of doing that, many of 
them engage in the persecution of humble Christians who once 
were members of their flock and who are striving in their feeble 
way to announce the incoming of Messiah's kingdom. Jesus 
foretold that Buch would be another evidence of the setting up 
of the new order.— Luke 21:12,13. 

JEWS BETTTEimrO TO PALESTINE 
As a further evidence of the -setting up of his kingdom, 
Jesus cited the tegathering of Israel to Palestine. (Matthew 
24:32-34) The prophet Jeremiah also mentioned this same 
thing. (Jeremiah 16:14-18) Since Palestine was wrested from 
the Mohammedans by Great Britain and her allies there has 


VIJ. — 40 


[64331 


(150-156) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


been a great influx of Jews to Palestine. The Zion Commonwealth
, Inc., affiliated with and controlled by The Zionists Organization
 of America, is forming a Jewish state in Palestine. 
We quote from the preamble of the constitution of the Zion 
Commonwealth as follows: 

"We, the members and shareholders of the Zion Commonwealth
, Inc., have organized and established this company for 
the purpose of aiding, in the settlement of Jews in Palestine, 
and of securing for our members and their descendants righta, 
interests and privileges in lands occupied by the Zion Commonwealth
, Inc., to the end that social justice, in harmony with 
the ideals of the prophets of Israel may be the corner-stone of 
the Jewish commonwealth in Zion." 

We also quote the following item from the March issue 
of The Mucabbean, a Zionist organ: 


"JEWISH HBGIEA TO PALESTINE" 
"News has filtered Hito Paris of a great Jewish migration 
across hundreds of miles of hostile country toward Palestine. 
A million and a half Jews, it is reported, are moving toward 
the Promised Land. Great caravans of men, women and children
, carrying their belongings are trekking toward the sea. 
The migration it is said is being conducted in a manner similar 
to the exodus of the Jews from the land of Pharaoh." 

"Be patient therefore brethren." The Lord is at hand, 
and daily the evidences are increasing that his kingdom is being
 put in order. He foretold that Christians living in the 
earth at this time would be put to severe tests which would 
try every man's work by fire as to what sort it is, tea ting our 
faith, loyalty, patience and love for the brethren. "In your 
patience possess ye your souls. 3 ' Lift up your heads and rejoice
, for our deliverance draweth nigh! 


MEMORIAL SUPPER REPORTS 


Sunday evening, April 13th, after sundown, ecclesias of the 
I. B. S* A. in many parts of the world gathered to observe 
the Memorial of the antitypical Passover, which our Lord established
 on the eve of his death. The experiences through 
which the Lord's people had gone during the past year— some 
personally and some representatively — only served to lend additional
 solemnity to the occasion and to constitute encouragement
 that we, by the Lord's grace, are following his steps. Our 
steps themselves are not perfect, and cannot be so long as we 
have only imperfect feet with which to walk, but that they are 
turned in the right direction seems evident because of the 
world's dislike for us. "^Marvel not if the world hate you ; ye 
know that it hated me before it hated you." So comforts us 
our Master, 


Loudon, Enff 893 

Brooklyn, N. Y 739 

Chicago, 111. (Polish) 706 

Lob Angeles, Calif 620 

Chicago, 111 605 

Pittsburgh. Pa 540 

Boston, Mass 477 

Cleveland. Ohio 417 

Detroit, Mich 367 

Philadelphia, Pa 807 

St. Louis* Mo 295 

Toronto, Ont 276 

Winnipeg, Man 271 

Vancouver. B. C 270 

Washington, D. C 226 

Minneapolis, Minn 221 

Port of Spain. Trin 214 

Baltimore. Md 211 

Seattle. Wash 210 

San Antonio, Tex 209 

Buffalo* N. Y 208 

Cincinnati, Ohio 202 

Indianapolis, Ind 201 

Columbus, Ohio 194 

Denver, Colo 172 

Oakland, Calif 171 

Portland, Ore 159 

San Francisco, Calif 157 

Roseland, III. (Chicago) 156 

Edinburgh. Scot . . . < 155 

Brooklyn, N. Y. (colored) . .150 

Dayton. Ohio 147 

Spokane, Wash 143 

Kansas City. Mo 126 

Oldham. En* 120 

Toledo, Ohio 120 

Leeds, Eng 118 

Tacoma, Wash 116 

Oklahoma City, Okla 112 

Lancaster, Pa 112 

Louisville, Ky . ♦ 107 

Milwaukee. Wis 106 

Georgetown. B. G 104 


Worcester, Mass 100 

St. Joseph, Mo 97 

Houston, Tex 93 

Binghamton. N. Y 91 

San Diego, Calif 90 

St. Paul, Minn 90 

Richmond, Va 90 

Grand Rapids, Mich 81 

Omaha, Neb 81 

Edmonton, Alta 80 

Bridgetown, Barbados 79 

Allentown, Pa 77 

Paterson. N. J 76 

Youngstown, Ohio 7G 

Jacksonville. Fla 76 

Scranton, Pa 7 5 

Providence, R. 1 7" 

Reading, Pa 72 

Everett, Wash 72 

Erie. Pa 70 

Sharon, Pa 70 

Wichita, Kans 70 

Hamilton, Ont 60 

Calgary, Alta 67 

York. Pa 60 

Victoria, B. C 6h 

Rockford, 111 G~> 

Birmingham, Ala 6 r i 

New Brighton. Pa 6 1 

Brownsville, Pa 1 

Paris. Prance 64 

Santa Ana. Calif 63 

Rochester, N, Y 6 ,J ! 

AUoona, Pa 61 

JackBOn. Mich 60 

Duquesne, Pa 60 

Fresno, Calif 59 

Panama. R. P 59 

Tampa, Fla 59 

Dallas, Tex 58 

Memphis, Tenn 58 

New Haven, Conn 57 

London, Ont 57 


Apparently most of the Lord's dear ones with whom we are 
in touch realize that we are now treading the most precarious 
ground that faith was ever called upon to walk. It is beset 
with dangers not so much from without as from within ourselves
 — dangers of fear of man on the one hand and of rashness 
and foolhardiness on the other. The richest blessings will 
doubtless go to those who can sing, as expressive of the true 
desire of their hearts: 

"Go, then, earthly name and treasure; 
Come, reproach, and scorn, and pain; 
In thy service pain is pleasure, 
With thy favor loss is gain." 

We append a list of all classes which have thus far reported
 an attendance of thirty or more : 


Watertown, N. Y 56 

Pes Moines, la 55 

Pasadena, Calif 55 

Terra Hante, Ind 55 

Lewistown, Pa 54 

Norfolk, Va 54 

Bay City, Mich 54 

Duuith, Mich 54 

Topeka. Kans 51 

Wilmington. Del 53 

Swamijscott, Maes 50 

Auburn. Ind 50 

Lima, Ohio 50 

Aurora, 111 49 

Tulsa. Okla 49 

At'anta. Ga 49 

Cumberland. Md 48 

Calmar, Alta 47 

Medicine Hat, Alta 47 

San Jose, Calif 47 

Wheeling, W. Va 47 

Hartford. Conn 47 

Buffalo. N Y. (Italian) 46 

Mattoon, 111 45 

Passaic. N. J 45 

Longr Beach. Calif 45 

Niagara Falls. N. Y 45 

Lincoln. Ent? 45 

Bridgeport. Conn 43 

Altrinrham. Kng 43 

Danville, 111 42 

Fall River. Maps 42 

Port Huron. M ich 42 

Champaign. Til 41 

Canton, Ohio 41 

Linton, Ind 41 

Warren, Ohio 41 

Kalamazoo, Mich 40 

Johnstown, Pa 40 

Greenock, Scot 39 

Sacramento, Calif 39 

Camden, N J 39 

Springfield, Mo 39 


Nashville, Tenn 39 

Butter, Pa 38 

Brockton, Mass 88 

Lincoln, Nob 88 

Timn, Ohio 88 

East Liverpool, Ohio 87 

Jopiin. Mo 37 

South Bond, Ind 37 

Cristobal. C % 36 

Paso Robles. Calif 36 

Brazil, Ind 36 

East St. Lonta. Ill 36 

Eaeton, Pa 36 

Wollaston Masa 35 

New Castle. Pa 34 

Kentville, N. S 34 

lola. Kans 34 

Wilkes Barre. Pa 34 

Kingston, N. Y 33 

Newark, N. J 33 

Syracuse, N. Y 33 

Pottstown. Pa 33 

Evansville, Ind 33 

Knoxville, Tenn 33 

Jamestown, N. Y 33 

Riverside, Calif 32 

T*,nawanda. N Y 32 

Fort Wayne, Ind 32 

BurlinEtnn, Wash 32 

Chatham Ont 32 

Boise. Ida 31 

Watorbury, Conn 31 

Stamford. Conn 31 

Marion, Ohio 81 

Sioux Citv, la 31 

Spnnfffirid, Til 31 

Portsmouth, Ohn 30 

Clens Palls N. Y 30 


Brandon, Man 
Forth Worth. Tex. 
Abilene. Kans . . 
Now Orleans. La . 
Belvidere, 111. . . 


30 
30 
30 
30 
30 


THE CROSS OF CHRIST 


[Tim article was a reprint of those entitled, "Christ Crucified." and "Consecrated But Not Crucified," published 

issue of August, 1887, which please see.] 


LESSONS RESPECTING PRAYER 


[This lesson was a reprint of that entitled, 


'Pray Without Ceasing and Humbly," published in the i«sue of August 15, 
1006, which please =oe.l 


DETAILS CONCERNING PERSECUTIONS 


Readers of The Watch Tower are requested to send us a 
statement in detail of the arrest, persecution, ill-treatment, 
etc., by any agents or pretended agents of the Department of 
Justice in connection with or growing out of the distribution 
of "The Finished Mystery." Also details are requested of 


any ill-treatment at the hands of ambitious preachers or other 
f ana ties. Whore convenient put the matter in the form of an 
affidavit and mail to this office, marking the envelope "Publicity 
Department." 


16484] 


INTERESTING LETTERS 


AN APPEAL FROM HOLLAND 

Dear Brethren in Christ oxib Lord: 

I have been longing all this time to write you a word of 
heartfelt sympathy, but was detained by my utter littleness 
and nothingness. As I am begged to forward 'the enclosed letter
, you will allow me to put in a word or two of simple love 
and thankfulness to express my feelings. I need not tell you 
that we (few as we are in Holland} have been living mentally 
with you, and have anxiously, prayerfully and trustfully followed
 all proceedings, knowing that not a hair falls on the 
earth without God's will; and that this will is almighty, allwise
 and full of loving kindness for all his children. Most 
especially is his love boundless for his chosen and 'Very elect" 
ones, for those modelling and perfecting the Great Workman 
takes the utmost care and works it out according to his own 
good will, using at different times his different instruments. Yet 
the child of God, member of the body of Christ, at all times 
knows that whatsoever befalls him, he is carried on the mighty 
wings of his Father's love and that all things work out good 
for the royal priesthood, nay, even, that it could not be obtained
 in any other way; and under all circumstances, this 
faith fills his heart with the peace of God that passes all understanding
. "Simply trusting; that is all." How it makes men 
and all human difficulties dwindle; for, thank God, further no 
man can reach ! 

We in Holland feel a little lost as regards literature. We 
literally have none at present. We were to have Volume 1 reedited
, but circumstances put a stop to it before the^ work began
. If there be any possibility for help, kindly think of us. 
If it be God's will, the Photo-Drama will be shown in Holland. 
We rejoice greatly, but are very sorry that we have not Volume 
1 to work it up. But God's arm is not shortened, and he knows 
our wants. 

I hope that you are well where you are. God's presence is 
with you everywhere; and with him all things are put in the 
divine light and brighten up wonderfully. As my parting 
greeting, I will give Psalm 23, and with it may fulness of 
gladness and strength for all circumstances be with you. 

Your aged Sister, J. Kropff. — Holland. 

4 'COME OVER TO MACEDONIA AND HELP US*' 
To the Directors of the I. B. S. A.: 

A copy of Volume 5 of the Studies in the Scriptures, published
 by your highly esteemed Society, came by chance into 
my possession lately; and having carefully examined the contents
 thereof, I take my pen to assure you that few such religious
 writings have hitherto been published, enlightening the 
mind of man clearly in regard to the only true God and our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who has come to save the world from sin, 
and supporting the souls of men in the moral flower-bed of 
God. Your highly esteemed Society is worthy of hearty congratulations
 and of abundant blessings from above, that it may 
quickly spread throughout the ^.ve continents of the world all 
these up-to-date volumes, published for the spiritual benefit of 
the whole race of man. 

And I, the humble Levite of the Highest, prompted by a 
desire for spiritual benefit, take the greatest of pleasure in asking
 you that, moved by Christian goodness, will send me by 
the next mail all the volumes published in Greek, as well as 
"What Say the Scriptures about Hell?" and "What Say the 
Scriptures about the Presence of Christ?" "The Tabernncle 
in the Wilderness," and something on the three subjects of 
Passover, Baptism and the Sabbath of the New Creation, and 
other published tracts, upon the receipt of which I will 
promptly remit their price. 

With good hope that t your kind hearts will be nobly disposed
 to send me willingly and promptly the said books, so 
beneficial to the soul, I remain, with numberless thanks in 
advance to you and through you to your highly esteemed 
Society. 

The priest. John ITatzedemetriou. — Macedonia, Greece. 

TIME CORROBORATIONS IN THE TABERNACLE? 

Dear Brethren in the Lord: 

My heart has been recently refreshed and my faith strengthened
 by a careful study of the Tabernacle of the Wilderness 
and the vision of the Sanctuary of Ezekiel from the standpoint 
of the Scripture symbolism of numbers and of Bible Chronology. 
Many tests are upon the church and more will doubtless follow
. Perhaps one of these is or will be along the line of the 
chronology of the plan. Some fresh corroborations or confirmations
 along this line may therefore prove very helpful 
in enabling some to "stand" in these days of transition from 
the first to the second phase of the time of trouble. — Matthew 
24:21; T>aniel 12:1. 


About three years ago a brother in Demarara, British 
Guiana, pointed out that by using the sacred Pyramid cubit 
of 25 Pyramid inches some interesting corroborations of timeperiods
 of the plan are apparently indicated in the posts and 
linen curtain around the Tabernacle court, the entire length 
of which is 280 cubits or 7000 inches, representing the period 
of time from "Paradise Lost" to ''Paradise Regained." The 
date of the fall of Adam and Eve into sin he showed to be 
indicated by the post at the left hand side of the court gate. 
Measuring from that point, he showed the true date of the 
birth of the Savior to be indicated at the northwest corner 
post; and that the date 2874 A. D. is indicated by the post at 
the right hand side of the gate into the court. This led me to 
look for other time corroborations in the Tabernacle and also 
in the great Sanctuarj T of Ezekiel. 

The Sacred Cubit 

Since the corroborations herein presented are based upon 
the cubit of 25 inches, it may be well to present some of the 
reasons for believing that the true sacred cubit of the Old 
Testament is 25 inches in length. When one consults the 
various authorities on the subject of the **cubit" used by the 
various nations of old, he soon finds that they differ widely, 
even as to the length of the cubit used by the Hebrew's. The 
reason for this is that no one has as yet discovered anything 
that would indicate accurately and without any question as to 
the lengths of the cubits of the nations of antiquity. There 
is one exception to this statement, for in the Great Pyramid 
of Egypt the cubit and lower standards of length used in the 
construction of the entire building are indicated accurately 
and plainly in several different parts. On this subject of the 
true length of the sacred cubit we quote from Dr. Seiss's 
"Miracle in Stone/' page 63, as follows: 

"Some have doubted whether the Jews, either before or after 
the Exodus, ever had any special cubit of this kind. But that 
they had, and that the same was a divinely given and authorized
 length of measure, is so clearly deducible from the Scriptures
 and Jewish writings in general that there ought to be no 
question about it. Sir Isaac Newton (1642-1727), in his 'Dissertation
 on the Cubits*, has brought this out so conclusively 
as to leave hut litth* el^e to he desired. That the Hebrews had a 
peculiar and sacred cubit wholly separate from all other cubits, 
and that it was the even ten-millionth part of the semi-axis of 
the earth, we may accept and hold on the authority of one of 
the greatest minds and one of the most thorough and competent 
investigators of such matters that has illuminated our modern 
times. 

"And these sublime earth commensu rating standards of 
length are precisely set forth in the Great Pyramid. Whether 
the practical working measure was in general the EgyptoBabylonian
 cubit of about 20 to 21 inches or any other makes 
no difference. The evidences are clear that a cubit of 25.026 
of our inches was in the minds of the architects, and meant 
by them to be most significantly emphasized. 

"Captain Tracy has pointed out that the Pyramid's earthcorn
 mensurated cubit is exhibited on the boss of the granite 
leaf [in the Ante-Chamber] divided into fives, for it is just 
one-fifth of its width. We have the earth -commensurated inch 
and cubit exhibited together five times five of the one constituting
 the other. This boss again is just one of these inches 
aside from the center of the block [of 48 in. in length] on 
which it is, and the distance from its center to the eastern end 
of that block in its groove is just one cubit of 25 of these 
inches. Rev. Glover re-examined this boss in 1874 and says: 
'I find it most fairly confirmatory of the entire of the sacred 
cubit and its divisions, giving the inch elevation and the five 
inch span with an inch base for the side slope; on the boss 
itself is no indication whatever of any irregularity in its 
shape.' " 

This cubit of 25 inches is also indicated in the lower end 
of the Grand Gallery. The distance from its lower north wall 
on the floor line to a point opposite the line of the north wall 
of the "weH" is exactly 25 sacred or pyramid inches. Again, 
ft is memorialized in the Queen's Chamber on its east wall. 
In this wall is the "niche", the middle line of which is exactly 
25 of these inches to the right of the middle of this east wall. 
This suggests that the sacred cubit will be the standard of 
measurement of restored humanity after the thousand years as 
well as during the thousand years of restoration, even as it is 
now revealed to the Church, represented in the Ante-Chamber 
and in the Grand Gallery. As this 25 inch cubit thus exhibited
 in "God's Stone Witness" is the only one of which we 
have any accurate knowledge and since Jehovah is the architect 
of the Great Pyramid and therefore also of its cubit, we may 
safety conclude that the cubit of 25 inches is the ancient sacred 
cubit of the Hebrews, used by Noah in the construction of the 

C«435] (158) 


(159) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


ark, by the architects of the Great Pyramid, by Moses in the 
construction of the Tabernacle, by Solomon when he built the 
great Temple, and by the "man of brass" when he measured 
the Sanctuary for Ezekiel. (Ezekiel 40:3, 4, 5) Note that he 
calls it a cubit — a handbreadth longer than usual/* (Leeaer) 
See diagrams in Vol. 3, pp. 352, 371. 

In the Great Pyramid an inch represents a vear; also in 
the measurements of the Tabernacle and the temples. To 
this rule, however, there are a few exceptions. In the Great 
Pyramid, in one* instance, a cubit represents a day, the length 
of one side of the square base being 365^ cubits, which is the 
number of days in a year; so also there are a few exceptions in 
the corroborations in the Tabernacle and the Temples, to which 
we may call attention later. 

COBROBORATIOIVS IN THE TABERNACLE OF THE WILDERNESS 





Aft*ar+ 


A 


\ 


* 


' > jf. ' - 


/ 


\ 


V^ 




! \ / 

• ° X 


/ 


\ 


■ L v ■ • 


/ \ i- 


— ^ 


The accompanying diagrams of the Tabernacle and of God's 
Great Rest Day of 7000 years illustrate some of the corroborations
 in connection with the Tabernacle. 

(1) In connection tvith the Posts and Linen Curtain around 

the Court: 

The dimensions of the Tabernacle are given in the 26th 
and 27th chapters of Exodus. It will be seen that the entire 
length of the curtain around the court from one side of the 
gate to the other side of it is exactly 7000 inches and therefore
 represents the 7000 years from "Paradise Lost" to "Paradise
 Regained"-— 1000 years beyond 1874, Please note also 
that the^ date of 1874 A. D. is marked by the post on north 
wall which stands directly opposite the center of the brazen 
altar (which primarily represents the sacrifice of the Savior 
at his first advent), thus closely associating both advents. 
The date (at the southwest corner) B. C. 1251, comes within 
the judgeship of Jair (Judges 10:3) whose name means "Jehovah
 enlightens." Jair had 30 sons, all prominent men and 
rulers of cities, thus seeming to typify Christ and the church, 
who shall enlighten and judge the world in due time, when 
Jehovah shall restore also the earthly "judges as at the first." 
(Isaiah 1:26) This is right in line with the date B. C. 626 
(at the middle post of the western side), which date marks 
the year of the last typical Jubilee and the centre of Jehovah'g 
llest I>ay. How wonderful is the symmetry of God's great plan. 

(2) In the Curtains covering the Tabernacle: 
In Exodus 26:1-3 is found the length and width of the various
 strips or curtains which covered the Holy and Most Holy. 
The entire length of the ten curtains is 280 cubits, or 7000 
inches — the first five coupled together, measuring 140 cubits or 
3500 inches, and the 9econd set of five coupled together, measuring
 the same. Also note the width of the ten curtains is 40 
cubits or 1000 inches. The curtains being hung over the Holy 
and Most Holy would seem to represent the plan of God aa it 
relates to Christ and his church; and these curtain measurements
 being right in line with those of the curtain around the 
court would suggest that God's plan stands related to man 
who lost his original perfect home, and to whom it shall be restored
 at the end of 7000 years (the curtain length) through 
Christ and the church. This 7000 year period is divided into 
two equal parts of 3500 years each, as illustrated by the two 
sets of curtains. The work of restoration will embrace 1000. 
years — the curtain width. 

The date of the second advent (A. D. 1874) is further corroborated
 by the distance from the court gate to the center of 
the Most Holy, which is 75 cubits or 1875 inches. This represents
 the exact number of years from the advent of Jesus in 
the flesh in B. C. 2 (see Vol. II, page 54) to the Second Advent
 of the Lord from heaven" as a spirit being, invisible to 
mortal eyes, in A. D. 1874—1 Corinthians 15:47. 

T3) On the brazen altar of the Tabernacle: The dimensions 
of the brazen altar, expressed in cubits, were 5 x 5 x :?. The 
diagonal across the top was seven cubits and the diagonal of 
each side was 5.83 cubita. Keeping in mind these dimension* 
the following interesting applications may be made: 
30 years of the life of Jesus as a man: Sum of length and 
breadth of the top of the altar i 5 plus 5 cubits ) ph H the 
perimeter {distance around) of the top (r>+.>+r> + >>) 
equals 30 cubits, representing these years. 
-*y*fl7+ :i /l> years of hU ministry and sacrifice: Distance from the center
 of the top to any one of the four corners (half of 7) 
£-H J» 3% cubits. Thus we have four corroborations of these 

very important years of his life in cubits. 

•*C4JM 33 % . vears °f hia entire life: Sum of 30+3% cubits, or 33% 
years. 

1000 years of blessing for the world of mankind through the 
sacrifice of Christ (and incidentally of the church) : Sum 
of perimeter of the base of the altar (5+5+5+5) plus 
the perimeter of the top (5+5+5+5) equals 40 cubits, or 
1000 inches — an inch for a year. 

2 B C. to 1915 A. D, This is a period of 1916 years from the 
birth of the Savior of the world to one year after the ending
 of the "Times of the Gentiles", i. e., the fall of 1915, 
the parallel of the fall of 70 A. D., when Jerusalem was destroyed
 by Titus and the great dispersion of the Jews began
. The year 1915 had been the year of expectation for 
the great blessing of God to begin to come upon the world 
of mankind; and blessings indeed began that year, blessings 
in disguise as a result of the world war, just 40 years after 
1875 (the end of the Jubilee Cycle of 2500 years) and just 
10 years before 1925 when the blessings in" full will come, 
after a complete period of waiting and longing by the 
"groaning creation". 

Sum of perimeter of top of Altar (5+5+5+5) 

equals 20. cubits 

Sum of length and breadth through center of 

top equals io. cubits 

Sum of 8 diagonals in 4 sides (8 x 5.83) equals 46.64 cubita 

Total 76.G4 cubits 

76.64x25 inches equal 1916 in., or 1916 years of the above 
period. 

How refreshing to our minds and hearts to note anew 
through the witness of the brazen altar of the Tabernacle that 
through the 30 years of Jesus' life aa a perfect man, and 
thiough his sacrifice of 3% years, a great blessing is to come 
to the poor groaning creation during a period of 1000 years. 
(4) In the Holy and in the Most Holy: 

(a) Sum of perimeters of the vails equals 10+10 + 10+10, 
or 40 cubita. 

(b) Sum of length of two side-walls of the Holy equals 
20+20, or 40 cubits. 

(c) Sum of height of first vail (10), plus length of ceiling
 (20), plus height of second vail (10) equals 40 
cubits, or 1000 inches, in the Holy. 

(cl) The perimeters of the floor, the ceiling, and of each 
of the 4 walls in the Most Holy equal 10+10+10+10 
or 40 cubits, or 1000 inchea, each. 
Thus there are four distinct measurements of 40 cubita, or 
1000 inches, in the Holy and six in the Most Holy, each testifying
 to the teachings of the Bible that througli those who 
make their calling and election sure in the Holy and enter under 
the second vail into the Most Holy of glory, honor, and immortality
, there will come a special era of blessing of 1000 
years. "And they shall be priests of God and of Christ and 
shall reign with him a thousand years."— Revelation 20:6. 
Yours in the service of the Lord. E. L. Docket.— Pa. 


[6436] 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE 1, 1919 


No. 13 


WHO WILL GAIN THE VICTORY? 

"For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose 

heart is perfect toward him," — 2 Chronicles 16:9. 


When the words of thia text were written the new creation 
was unknown, except to Jehovah. He had made provision 
therefor in his plan before the foundation of the world. The 
prophets of old diligently inquired concerning this plan, but it 
was not hia due time to reveal it. The angels of heaven 
searched and desired to look into it, but to them also was it 
hidden. It has pleased the Lord to disclose the various features
 of his plan from time to time to members of the new 
creation. "The path of the just is as the shining light, that 
shineth more and more unto the perfect day." (Proverbs 4:18) 
With light comes responsibility, therefore corresponding tests 
and trying experiences. 

The words of our text were spoken by Hanani, the seer, 
to Asa, king of Judah, neither of whom had opportunity to 
become members of the new creation, because they lived and 
died before the beginning of the church class. The words of 
the text, however, announce a fixed principle or governing law 
of conduct which Jehovah has arranged for the benefit of all 
of his intelligent creatures with whom he deals. His governing
 laws of conduct or principles do not change, because God 
is unchangeable. (Malachi 3:6; James 1:17) Jehovah dealt 
with the people of Judah and Israel for many centuries, and 
used them to make types and pictures and illustrations for the 
benefit of others who should follow after. As St. Paul puts 
it, all these things occurred to them typically and were written 
for our admonition upon whom the ends of the ages have 
come. — 1 Corinthians 10:11, Diaglott. 

Clearly, then, the principle or governing law of conduct 
announced in this text applies to the members of the new 
creation and we may read the text as words spoken directly 
to the church. This is indeed an exceeding great and precious 
promise to the new creation. What does it mean to the Christian
? It means almighty wisdom enlisted in one's behalf. It 
means almighty power pledged to one's help and protection. It 
means to be the object of boundless love. To the saint who 
realizes and appreciates the import of this promise it is a 
great comfort of heart. 

PERILOUS TIMES 
Through the Scriptures, and through the instruction the 
Lord has given the church at the hands of his "wise and 
faithful servant," we have been again and again warned 
against the times of peril which would accompany the overthrow
 of Satan's empire and the setting up of Messiah's kingdom
. During the entire period of the selection of the church 
the saints have suffered many trials and hardships, but the 
Lord has permitted them all for a good purpose. 

It was the great Master who said that in the last days 
of the church's earthly pilgrimage the way would be fraught 
with many fiery trials, which would test the patient endurance
 of each one to the utmost. He further said that those 
who in patience possess their souls and cheerfully endure unto 
the end shall be saved — such will gain the victory. "He that 
endureth unto the end the same shall be saved." (Matthew 
24:13) Thus he indicated that, while the trials and experiences
 would be severe, yet to those who would patiently endure
 he would manifest his presence, his aid, his comfort and 
strength. 

OTJE ENEMIES 
If we inquire, Who are our enemies, the answer is. They 
are legion. Our arch-enemy, however, is Satan the devil. In 
fact he is the great enemy of mankind. It is true that he 
often advocates what seems to be a righteous cause, yet his 
real purpose is ever and always evil. He often masquerades 
under a robe of righteousness, which cloak hides his wicked 
purpose. He has ever put forth error for truth, attempting to 
make the truth appear as though it were error and error as 
though it were truth. Many have seen the effects of his 
regime and have looked forward to a better time, but have 
not known the real cause nor the divine remedy. The poet 
thus expresses it: 

"Truth forever on the scaffold; 
Wrong forever on the throne. 
But that scaffold sways the future, 
And within the dim unknown 
Stands the form of Christ the Savior, 
Keeping watch around his own." 

Because wrong has so long triumphed over truth, millions 
have fallen in despair. They have not appreciated the cause 
of the battle and what will be the result. But the Christian 
who has been privileged to see and appreciate God's plan and 


who has watched the unfolding of it in recent years sees a 
reason for this conflict and sees the certain victory in it and 
rejoices in hope for the blessings that are coming not only 
to the church, but to all mankind. 

Wrong is represented in Satan, the Prince of Darkness, 
and right is personified by Christ Jesus, the great Light that 
lighteth every man that cometh into the uorld. When Jehovah
 expelled Adam and Eve from Eden he bpoke to Satan, who 
had deceived Mother E,ve and caused the downfall of man, 
paying: "I will put enmity between thee [Satan! and the 
woman, between thy seed and her seed, and it shall bruise 
thy head and thou shalt bruise his heel." This statement of 
Jehovah seems plainly to indicate that until Satan's overthrow 
there will be constant warfare between him and his agencies 
and all the agencies of light employed to the glory of God 
and to the spreading of his Word. 

OOD AN ECONOMIST 

The Scriptures show that Satan uses many agencies or 
instruments for carrying out his purposes. He is a wily and 
subtle foe, and his course is calculated to deceive all, and 
will deceive all except the "elect". The "seed of Satan", as 
the Lord most clearly showed, is ecclesiasticism, led by a dishonest
 clergy. (John 8:44) It was so in the days when 
Jesus was on the earth in the flesh. It is so now when Christ 
is present gathering unto him his "jewels". The "seed of the 
woman'' is the "seed of promise" — the offspring of the Abrahamic
 (Sarah) covenant, which is the Christ, Jesus and the 
church, his body. (Galatians 3:1(1, 20) By and through this 
seed God has promised to bless all the families of the earth. 
Before the blessing comes, however, this seed must bruise the 
head of the serpent, Satan. It must put wrong, on the scaffold
 and lift the truth to its proper elevation. 

God is a great economist. He causes the wrong of others 
to result finally to his own glory and to the good of those that 
love him. While he is not the author of evil he permits it, 
■ultimately overruling the final result for good. By permitting 
evil he has allowed Satan to manifest the wicked depths of a 
totally depraved character, and has demonstrated to men and 
angels the baneful effects of sin. Those who have fought on 
the side of right and truth, who have fought valiantly and 
faithfully to develop a character pleasing to the Lord, and 
continue thus to the end of their course, have the promise^ of 
the great reward of an abundant entrance into the everlasting 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 

It was evident that Satan thought the promised seed 
which was to bruise his head was a natural seed, hence he 
sought to destroy everyone who seemed to him a possible seed. 
He caused the murder of Abel. When God had made promise 
to Abraham that he should have a son Satan connived at the 
debauchery of Abraham's wife that he might thwart GooVb 
purpose. When the promise came to David and he was 
anointed king, Satan vainly endeavored to destroy him. When 
Mary had conceived by the power of the holy spirit and was 
looking forward to the birth of the man-child Jesus, Satan 
sought to have her put to death under the terms of the Mosaic
 law. 

SATAN AND OUR LORD 

When Jesus had emerged from the wilderness after his 
forty days fast and Satan recognized that he was the^ promised 
seed*, he sought by various means to destroy him. God 
thwarted all Satan's purposes, but when Jesus was crucified 
Satan probably thought he had accomplished his purpose. He 
must have been disappointed and chagrined when Jesus arose 
from the dead. Evidently Satan then first began to recognize
 the fact that the promised seed, "the seed of the woman," 
is the Christ, head and body. This is proven by the fact that 
throughout the Xrospel age the adversary has endeavored by 
various means to destroy the church — the faithful followers of 
the Master. 

St. Peter gave warning to the church, his words seemingly
 written for the very close of its earthly career: "Be 
sober, be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a 
roaring lion walketh about seeking whom he may devour, whom 
resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same afflictions 
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world". (1 
Peter 5:8, 9) The Apostle emphasizes the word "sober", 
meaning to be calm, possessing sobriety of mind. He further 
calls attention to the desirability of being vigilant in our 
watching, and ' of conducting our resistance of Satan with 
steadfastness in the faith — "the faith once delivered to the 
saints." It follows that one who takes an opposite course 


[6437] 


(163) 


(164165) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


would be in greater danger of being overcome by the adversary
. 

While Satan is the arch-enemy, he haa many allies; namely, 
the fallen angels. We have long been advised that these 
would exercise greater power near the end of the church's 
earthly career. Addressing himself especially to the church 
of this time St. Paul says: "Finally, my brethren, be strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might. For ours is not 
a conflict with [mere] flesh and blood, but with despotisms 
and empires, the forces that govern and control this dark 
world, the spiritual hosts of evil arrayed against us in the 
heavenly warfare." — Ephesians 6:10-12, Wey. 

The organism of the new creature this side the vail is 
the body of flesh which we early recognized to he an enemy 
of the new creature ; "for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, 
and the spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary one 
to the other, so that ye cannot do the things that ye would." 
(Galatians 5:17) "But I see another law in my members warring
 against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
 to the law of sin which is in my members." — Romans 
7:23. OTHEE ENEMIES OF THE NEW CREATURE 

Another enemy of the new creature is the world — the spirit 
or disposition controlling those of the world with which the 
new creature must come in contact. The world is in darkness 
because under the control of the prince of this world. Darkness 
hates the light, and particularly hates the children of the light. 
Therefore, those who, either knowingly or unknowingly, are 
aligned with the adversary hate the followers of Jesus. "Marvel
 not if the world hate you; ye know that it hated me before
 it hated you." (John 15:18) It is not to be expected 
that those who are controlled by hate would conduct a warfare
 along honorable lines. The adversary uses such persons 
as instruments to war against the "seed of promise. n Such 
put darkness for light and light for darkness, choosing to 
misrepresent the children of the light, even when telling the 
truth would 'better serve the purposes of the adversary, 

Nor do evil spirits and the world constitute all the enemies 
of the new creature. Our Lord warned us that we might expect
 foes from among ourselves. We read: "A man's foes 
shall be they of his own household;" evidently meaning that 
those of the household of faith would find enemies therein. 
Such were Simon Magus and Diotrephes. St. Paul called attention
 to the fact that lie was in peril from false brethren. 
AH these foes are brought against the new creature, and Satan 
directing the warfare, attacks from many quarters. His method
 is frequently to inject into the mind evil thoughts, attempting
 to turn the Christian to a course of evil; again he 
often attempts so to magnify the Christian's own weaknesses 
before him that he will become discouraged and give up the 
fight. At another time he will pamper to and foster the 
spirit of pride, ambition, desire to be applauded by others; 
and by this means lead some away into the paths of error and 
darkness. If one does not love the truth for the truth's sake, 
and love it above anything of the earth, he will very likely 
stumble into strong delusion, that he should believe a lie. 

SPEAKING PERVERSE THINGS 

St. Paul called before him the elders at Ephesus and gave 
them special warning concerning the wiles of the adversary. 
"Of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things 
to draw away disciples after them." (Acts 20:30) The church 
had particular warning of this very thing through The Watch 
Towkr in one of the last articles written by the Laodicean 
messenger. — Z'lC p. 327. 

Knowing well the methods of the adversary and his devices
, knowing the constant effort to destroy* "the seed^ of 
promise," it is to be expected that he would use every possible 
means to divide the Lord's sheep, to scatter them, to stir up 
strife among them, and divert their attention from the great 
prize of the high calling and put them in such a condition that 
they could not' win it. Commenting upon this subject Brother 
Russell in 2 '09 p. 283 said: 

"We may be sure that as the Adversary specially opposed 
the Lord, so he marks out and specially assaults the faithful 
members of his body, and the greater their prominence the 
more severe would naturally be the attack. We are not ignorant
 of his devices, nor of the fact that we wrestle not 
against flesh and blood merely, but against wicked spirits in 
influential positions. Without divine" assistance surely all 
would be led captives at his will, misled, ensnared by him who 
puts darkness for light and endeavors to show the light to 
be darkness. Our thought is that for the testing of this hour 
the Lord permits Satan to come very close to the tempted, 
so that the slightest inclination of their hearts toward evil 
would quickly put them in contact with the influence of the 
Adversary." 


Bitterness and love are diametrically opposed to each 
other; ambition and humility are opposites. Unless love prevails
 there cannot be a clear vision of the truth (Oolossians 
2:1-3); and where the root of bitterness springs up from 
any cause many may be thereby defiled. {Hebrews 12:15) The 
Apostle seems to indicate that where there is a lack of humility
 God would withdraw his protecting power; "for God 
resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the humble." It ia not 
for us to judge the cause of one's deflection. We can only 
judge from the spirit manifested as to whether or not one ia 
pursuing the truly Christian course. 

Perversion means a turning from the truth, a misapplication
 of the truth. Speaking perverse things means to misconstrue
 or misapply the truth. The Apostle, as above stated, 
warned us that there would arise within the church thoae 
who would speak perverse things, drawing away disciples after 
them. 

"STANDFAST" BIBLE STUDENTS 

Our attention has been called to a pamphlet entitled "The 
Ship" and purporting to be a discourse by one who was formerly
 a pilgrim in the service of the Society. For convenience
 we designate this former pilgrim as "Brother H." Our 
purpose in calling attention to this is not for controversy, but 
in the hope tliat we may enable some who have been disturbed 
to regain a proper equilibrium. As a pretext for turning 
aside, serious objection is taken to certain articles appearing 
in The Watch Tower of May 15th and June 1st, 1918. We 
quote from said pamphlet: 

"The June 1st Tower came into my hands with the infernal 
article [from the infernal region — Satan and his hosts] and 
I shuddered more than ever. ... I don't believe in intuition, 
that belongs to Jehovah, but something came to my mind just 
that instant — the ship fpoken of in the 27th chapter of Acts. 
It came almost the day' that I got Tower No. 2, objectionable 
article No. 2." 

Who injected this thought into the mind of Brother H? 
The apostle tells us that therfe are but two masters, the Evil 
One and our Lord. Brother H. then states that he reached 
the conclusion that the Lord had cast off the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society and The Watch Tower, and called 
upon everyone to leave it and go with him, declaring that anyone
 who did not obey his call would be deprived of the glories 
of the kingdom. Quoting him: 

"Because God has made a statement that we can't disobey, 
'Oome out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her 
sins', and that pertains to the I. B. S. A. just as much as it 
does to the nominal church, because they are doing the very 
selfsame thing that the nominal church is doing." 
THE SOCIETY THE SHIP? 

Hunting for some Scriptural grounds upon which to base 
his conclusion, the brother takes the 27th chapter of Acts 
relating the experiences of St. Paul, while being taken by Bhip 
as a prisoner to Rome, and attempts to make a typical application
 of this account. He states that the ship typified or 
represented the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, He 
says: "The only reason that we apply the ship and make the 
application we do is because it fits." Brother H. further cites 
Matthew 14:22-24 in proof that the Society is represented by 
a ship, saying: 

"Matthew 14:22 I believe was meant by the Lord to represent
 the same ship that was meant in the 27th chapter of 
Acts, namely, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, and 
T know why Jesu-. constrained them to come into it." 

Clearlyhere is a fulfillment of St. Paul's statement: ''Of 
your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things to 
draw away disciples after them." All who recognize Brother 
Russell as the messenger to the Ijaodicean church, will, we 
believe, prefer to take his interpretation as against that of 
any other brother in the truth ; for we recognize that the 
fx>rd would be more likely to direct through his specially 
chosen servant an interpretation of the Scriptures than he 
would to give this direction through another, Brother Russell
, in treating Matthew 14:22-24, stated that the ship represents
 the church as a whole, and that being true it could 
not represent a corporation organized for the purpose of carrying
 on a religious work. Wc .quote Brother Russell as follows
 : 

"But the boat and the twelve toiling rower*, and the <*tonn 
and darkness of the night all picture still more perfectly the 
experiences of the Lord's people as a whole — not the experiences
 of a sectarian church, but the experiences of the one 
true church of which the Lord U the head, the 'church of 
the first born whose names are written in heaven.' This true 
church has indeed had a stormy time since parting with her 
Lord, who ascended to the Father. The darkness came down 
upon them — the darkness of error and superstition; and the 


[6438] 


June 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(166-167) 


great* Adversary, through the Antichrist and many less Antichrists
, has aroused all through this Gospel age a great storm 
against the Lord's faithful/'— Z '00 pp. 185, 186; Z '01 p. 
H8. OCCASION FOR REFLECTION 

This perversion or misapplication of Scripture by Brother 
H. should of itself be sufficient to enable every thoughtful student
 of God's Word to see that the brother is certainly taking 
a wrong course; and the further we examine his remarks 
the more we are convinced that he has been overreached by 
some influence other than that of the Master. For instance, 
when the ship in which St. Paul and the other prisoners were 
being conveyed to Italy stuck fast on the sand and the hinder 
part was broken off, he says that this represented the destruction
 of the Society and its being cast off by the Lord, 
and that this occurred in the Spring of 1918. 

One proof of the wrongful interpretation is that the Society
 still exists and the Lord is continuing to use it to give 
witness to the truth. Now it follows that if the Society was 
pictured by the ship, those in the Society or closely allied with 
it would be pictured by the 276 souls in the ship. Brother H. 
states that all in the ship who escaped and afterwards got to 
shore because they were strong swimmers represent those who, 
together with himself and others, have withdrawn their allegiance
 to the Society and have designated themselves as 
* 'Stand fast Christians." We hardly believe that any careful 
Bible student would want to agree that this interpretation is 
correct ; for Paul, Luke and Ari starch us were the only ones on 
that ship who made any pretense of being Christians, and according
 to Brother Russell's interpretation of this same event 
all the others on the ship were of fluch a swinish disposition 
and character that they were in no attitude to receive the message
 of the truth, and for this reason St. Paul and his companions
 did not attempt to preach the Gospel to them. See 
Watch Towek 1903, p. 175. 

We quote Brother H.: 

"Now comes the final thought — they all got to land. Who 
are these all? They are the loyal standfast Bible students 
who are willing to go through water — anything — to get to 
land, and the Bible says that all got to land; so when we 
shake hands tonight I am going to believe that everyone of 
you who shakes hands with me tonight is going to get to 
land." 

These few citations indicate what perverse things have been 
used to draw aside several of the Lord's dear sheep, some of 
whom, we are glad to say, have seen the error of their way and 
have returned to follow after the Lord. We pray that others 
may do likewise, if that be his holy will. 

NO RTJLE LAID DOWN BY US 

The pretext for Brother H. and a few other prominent 
brethren taking the course they have was the publication in 
The Watch Tower of May 15th and that of June 1st, 1918, 
of a statement relative to Liberty Bonds. All of us recognize 
that no doctrinal question was here involved. It was a time 
of great stress; the government was calling upon the people 
to lend their money; many friends thought that they should 
do it; others thought that they should not. Had the Society 
attempted to make a fast rule that anyone should or should 
not buy bonds then there might have been an occasion for protest
, but nothing of this nature was ever suggested. On the 
contrary the position of the Society is clearly summed up in 
the following quotation from May' 15th Watch Toweb above 
mentioned : 

"The Association has no power to direct members thereof 
with reference to buying Liberty Bonds. It certainly will 
not and has not advised anyone to refuse to buy Liberty 
Bonds. That is an individual matter which each one must 
determine for himself according to his ability. The Association
 believes in supporting the government in every way it 
can [meaning conscientiously, of course; all Christians are 
law-abiding] and each one should do so according to his 
ability and his conscience." 

The June 1st, 1918, Towek merely explains that a person 
should be governed by his conscience, and that his conscience 
today might preclude him from doing what tomorrow he could 
conscientiously do after having a clearer and better understanding
 of a subject. There was not one word in that article 
to the effect that anyone in the Society ehould purchase bonds 
or refrain from purchasing them. The Watoh Toweb would 
consider that beyond its province, to tell anyone what he 
should or should not do. It has never followed that policy; 
and it is to be hoped it never will. 

EDITORS NOT INFALLIBLE 

The question discussed was not a vital one to Christian 
character development, nor vital to one in making his calling 
and election sure. But let us suppose for the sake of argument
 that it was vital, involving a vital doctrine, and that 
The Watch Toweb stated it improperly. Should then anyone
 arrogate to himself the authority to determine whether 
or not the Lord had cast off the Society as an instrument for 
his use because members of the editorial committee had made 
an erroneous statement? Suppose The Watch Toweb was 
entirely wrong on this point. Would it not bave been the 
spirit of the Master for the other brother to call the attention
 of the editorial committee to the error and ask for a cor* 
rection instead of pursuing the course he did? That seems to 
be the Apostle's direction in Galatians 0:1. 

We here mention the fact that Brother Russell, who edited 
The Toweb from its inception until his death, occasionally 
made misstatements concerning such vital doctrines as the sin 
offering, application of the ransom price, the covenants, the 
Mediator, etc., and almost each time some prominent eldei 
withdrew and took the position that the Lord had cast off 
his Bervant, notwithstanding the Lord continued to use him. 

Probably it would be better to have said nothing in The 
Watch Toweb about Liberty Bonds, probably a mistake was 
made ; but if so we are quite sure there was no intention of 
wrong-doing, and we believe tjie Lord would overrule under 
such circumstances any or all mistakes to the blessing of all 
who are properly exercised by the experiences that come to 
them by reason of the mistake even as he hag done in respect 
to the treatment of the Covenants, etc., in the past. We recall
 that from time to time, as shown from The Watch Towek, 
there have been those who arose among us perverting and misapplying
 Scriptures or the construction of them as given in 
The Watch Toweb, and that these have usually drawn some 
followers after them. A good answer to all suoh we find in 
the words of Brother Russell relative to those in antagonism 
to certain other statements in The Toweb which led to their 
withdrawal from the Society. He said in the issue for February
 1st, 1909: 

"To this end let it be noticed that the split is coming from 
thoee who oppose the Vow. They are not opposing an attempt
 to force it upon them, for no suoh attempt has been 
made. Thsy are opposing this feature of present truth, trying
 to hinder others from taking the vow, forcing an issue 
on the subject and arousing, so far as their influence goes, 
an evil, malicious spirit antagonistic to the Vow and the 
channel through which it came. To this end circulars are 
being printed and scattered abroad to prejudice and poison 
the minds of all who will come under the influence. As there 
are but two masters, which are these serving? Our ques* 
tion is not, Which do they say they are serving, nor Which 
do they think they are serving? We say to God's people, 
Judge for yourselves what sort of spirit is this which is 
seeking to cause division amongst the followers of Christ, 
and that is willing to hint all manner of evil and to surmise 
and to backbite. We do not believe this is the spirit of Christ. 
By their fruits ye shall know them. . . . We are firmly 
convinced that they are serving the cause of the Adversary — 
ignorantly. We are sorry for them; we pray for them." 

HOT7B OP TEMPTATION HEBE 

Truly the great hour of temptation is upon the church. 
Who shall be able to stand? (Malachi 3:2, 3) The Scriptures
 tell us that the angel of the Lord encampeth around 
about them that reverence him, for their deliverance or protection
. They intimate also that Satan and the fallen angels are 
very desirous of invading our hearts and minds and bodies with 
evil suggestions. To a greater or lesser extent we must surely 
believe that divine providence, through the human will, has 
raised a considerable barrier for the protection of the natural 
man from evil spirits. Otherwise, surely through evil promptings
 and oppositions, the world, centuries since, would have 
gone mad. 

We may be sure, however, that as the adversary especially
 opposed the Lord, so he marks out and specially assaults 
the members of the body, and the greater their prominence the 
more severe would naturally be file attack. Without divine 
assistance surely all would be made captive at hh will — misled, 
ensnared by him who puts darkness for light and endeavors to 
show the light to be darkness. Seeing, then, that we are encompassed
 about by suoh a great host of enemies; towit, Satan
, the evil spirits, our own imperfect flesh, the spirit of the 
world and other evil instruments, and observing our own imperfections
 and weaknesses; we cry unto the Lord: How shall 
we ever be able to overcome our adversaries and gain the 
victory that will admit us to thy glorious presence? We at 
once realize our own insufficiency and sweetly comes to us the 
comfort of our text, 'I will make myself strong in your behalf,' 
and we know that if the 'Lord be for us none can prevail 
against us. 


[6439] 


(167-168) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PITTSBURGH, PA. 


CONDITIONS OF HELP 

The Lord does not eay he will manifest this strength in our 
behalf unconditionally, out he does say he will show himself 
strong in behalf of them whose hearts are perfect toward him. 
Had he stated that his strength would be manifested for us 
only provided we could Bpeak and write properly and without 
mistakes, then all of us would fail. Had the condition been 
that our conduct must be perfect, or even our thoughts perfect
, again we would fail. The condition he does require for 
all who will be able to stand in this hour of fiery testing is 
that such must have a pure, perfect heart. Thus realizing, we 
cry: "Create within me a clean heart, O God, and renew a 
right spirit within me." (Pfealm 51:10) The heart is the 
seat of the affections. To have a pure heart means to have a 
pure, holy desire and intention to do the Father's will, a sincere
 desire to be led by him through our Master. It finds expression
 in the words, "I delight to do thy will, O my God; 
yea, thy law is written within my heart": (Psalm 40:8) The 
poet has beautifully expressed it: 

"If clearer vision thou impart, 
Grateful and glad my soul shall be; 

But, oh, to have a purer heart 
Is more to me, is more to me." 

When we come to the Lord and offer ourselves in full consecration
, having been accepted b^ him and adopted ae a son, 
he says to us, "My son, give me thine heart." (Proverbs 23:26) 
When we give him our hearts, we give him all. We set our 
affections on things pertaining to' the heavenly kingdom and 
not on things of the earth. This means an unreserved, an unconditional
 giving to our heavenly Father our undivided love. 
It means we have adopted the words of the Master: "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy 
soul, with all thy strength and with all thy mind/ 5 At the 
hour of coming to the Lord the heart is not perfect. It requires
 time for this. Jesus said: "Sanctify them through thy 
truth; thy Word is truth." It means, then, that the new 
creature must grow in knowledge and in appreciation of the 
divine character and plan, and it means that this growth shall 
increase his love for the Father. A perfect heart means a pure 
heart toward God and the Lord Jesus, toward the brethren, 
toward the world, including our enemies. It means that if we 
love God we shall know him. We cannot love him without 
knowing him. It means that we shall prize his love and approval
 above the love and approval of any other. 
A MISNOMER 

The name taken by Brother H. and those who follow after 
him, seems to be inconsistent. Their position is that the Lord 
has forsaken the Society; that the Society is broken up, and 
that only those who flee from it and make desperate efforts to 
reach the land can reach the kingdom at all. And yet they 
designate themselves as "Standfast Bible Students," seemingly 
a misnomer. That a misguided brother has arisen and perverted
 some of the Scriptures is quite clear; that he has 
drawn away other disciples after him is also admitted; that 
such have abandoned the Society, for a time at least, seems to 
be true. The fact that St. Paul prophesied that of "your own 
selves men shall arise speaking perverse things to draw disciples
 after them" would seem of itself to indicate that that 
from which they turn away, the body of Christians from 
which they turn, are the very ones that are pleasing to the 
Lord. 

St. Pai.1 says: "Therefore, brethren, stand fast and hold 
the traditions [doctrines, instructions] which you have been 
taught, whether by word or our epistle. 3 ' Brother H. and his 
followers admit that the great doctrinal truths relative to the 
ransom, which is the keynote of all Christian faith, the doctrines
 of the sin offering, the covenants and mystery, etc., 
are taught by the apostles and by the word of the Lord's 
servant to the Laodicean church, and that for more than forty 
years the Society has been used as the channel through which 
this message has been brought. And now since the Society 
has not deviated one jot or tittle from these great fundamental 
doctrines, but is still holding fast thereto, would it not seem 
to a reasonable mind that the one who would flee away and 
call to others to flee with him would be disobeying the Apostles
' injunction last above quoted? As to whether or not the 
Lord has abandoned the Society, would it not be well to leave 
that judgment to the Lord himself? 

OTTB GOAL 18 CHRIST 

The only thing worth while is the kingdom. Having enlisted
 under the banner of our King, our chief purpose is to 
be victors in the fight and have his approval and be received 
into the kingdom. Everything else is in comparison unworthy 
of consideration. Knowing that this is the Christian's goal, the 


chief purpose of the enemy is to prevent him from being a 
victor and being forever with the Lord Jesus Christ in glory. 
Through the Revelator the great Master tells us that the closing
 experiences of the church will mark a deadly conflict between
 the Lamb and the Beast, ajid that the Lamb will be 
victorious, and that in this great victory there will be with 
him certain ones; namely, the called, chosen and faithful. 
Beast symbolizes governing power exercised over the people 
in a beastly manner. The Beast of Revelation 17:11 means 
the dominant ecclesiastical systems exercising, directly or indirectly
, persecuting power under the semblance of legal authority
 and using that power to restrain, persecute, imprison 
or kill those who are the true followers of Christ as prospective
 members of his body — the "seed of promise." 

That this conflict has been on for some time and is now 
on, is quite clear; and since this is one of the instruments used 
by the adversary in his attempt to destroy the seed of promise, 
we may expect him to employ every means or device to turn 
aside those who are running for the prize. By suggesting to 
the mind certain thoughts, he opens the way to accomplish his 
desired end. Let us remember that the mind is the battleground
, and that "the heart" is merely an expression referring 
to that portion of the mind having to do with the atFections. 
BITTERNESS. PRIDE, AMBITION. FEAR 

The Scriptures show that several things are used by the 
adversary as hindrances which, if yielded to by the runners in 
the race course, will prove to be of gravest danger unless recovery
 and speedy victory is had. These instruments are: bitterness
 of heart, pride, ambition, and fear. Anyone who is 
overcome by any of these hindrances cannot be with the Lord 
in his final victory over Satan and his emissaries. The new 
creature has no cause to fear if he abides close to the Lord. 
The promise of our text is that the strength of the Lord will 
be manifested in his behalf. What then could men or demons, 
or the adversary or anyone else do unto him if the Lord's 
power is engaged in his behalf? One who permits fear to have 
a dwelling* place in his heart will be led to take a compromising
 position with regard to the Lord and his service. 

Such a position would show a degree of unfaithfulness to 
the Lord and would also show a lack of purity of heart, hence 
would deprive such a one of the benefit of the Lord's strength 
in the hour of great need. For the one who holds to the 
promises and trusts implicitly in the Lord there is no occasion
 for fear, "For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
 again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption 
whereby ye cry Abba, Father." (Romans 8:15) Here the 
Apostle shows a complete and abiding confidence in the Lord. 
And as for such, none can separate them from the Lord. 
(Romans 8:35-39) He who has a pure heart will not fear. 
* There is no fear in love, but perfect love casteth out fear; 
because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect
 in love." — 1 John 4:1&. 

Pride and selfish ambition are an abomination, and he who 
permits them to have an indwelling in his heart could not have 
the pure heart required to guarantee that the strength of the 
Lord be used in his behalf in time of stress. Where there is 
pride and ambition one's consecration vow unto the Lord is 
largely forgotten and the soul is lifted up unto vanity. 

Bitterness of heart from any cause drives out love, and 
without unfeigned love there can be no purity of heart. "Looking
 diligently, lest any man fail of the grace of God; lest 
any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby 
many be defiled." Compare also Hebrews 12:14, 15; Oolossians
 2:1-3, Diaglott. 

CLEAN HANDS AND PURE HEARTS 

The question asked by the Psalmist, clearly in behalf of 
the church, seems here appropriate: "Who shall ascend into 
the hill of the Lord, and who shall stand in his holy place? 
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart, who hath not 
lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall 
receive the blessing of the Lord and righteousness from the 
God of his salvation." (Psalm 24:3-5) Without a pure heart 
no one can have clean hands. And he who lifts up his soul 
to vanity, that is, lacks meekness, humility and aspires to be 
greater and wiser in the eyes of others, he" who has sworn deceitfully
, who has made a consecration to be fully submissive 
to the Lord and then abandons it, such cannot "have a pure 
heart. The test of a pure heart, therefore, is a test of perfect 
love; and perfect love toward God means a joyful submission 
to his holy will. There can be no division of our highest love 
between God and any creature. Our love for him must be supreme
. It must be such that will enable us to strive above 
all things else to please him. Such love will prompt us to dare 
to do anything in his service which we recognizee to be according
 to his holy will. It means that where opportunity for ser- 


[6440] 


June 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(167-178) 


vice is open, there will we delight to go at any cost. It means 
that we would be anxious to glorify his name at all times 
and to remain steadfastly devoted to him and his Word at all 
coat of honor, fame, reputation or of life itself. For this 
proves our love of God if we keep his commandments with a 
joyous heart. 

OTHEB TESTS 

In order to maintain this purity of heart we must love the 
brethren, because that is the commandment to the new creation
. "This is my commandment, That ye love one another as 
I have loved you" (John 15:12) This purity of heart toward
 the brethren will mean sacrifice of ourselves in their behalf
. It will mean rendering justice to the brethren. It will 
mean watching for opportunities to do them good, and shunning
 everything that would have a tendency to do them evil. 
"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth 
through the spirit unto unfeigned love of the brethren, see that 
ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." 

If we fail in this test of intense love for the brethren to 
the extent of gladly laying down our lives for them, then we 
fail in our purity of heart toward God. "Hereby perceive we 
the love of God, because Christ laid down his life for us; 
and we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren." **My 
little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but 
in deed and in truth." "But whoso keepeth his Word, in him 
is the love of God perfected." Hereby we know that we are 
in him, 

Purity of heart will prevent us from searching out the defects
 in the brethren and magnifying them. On the contrary, 
the pure in heart will seek to cover the defects of his brethren 
with the mantle of love. (I Peter 4:8} Long ago we were 
warned that "one of the final and most searching tests that 
would come to the church and the one under which probably 
most of those awakened and armed will fall, will be love for 
the brethren." (Z '99, p. 88) Again, Jesus said that in the 
hour of final tests injustice would abound, causing the love of 
many to wax cold. "And then shall many be offended, and shall 
betray one another and shall hate one another." — Matthew 24: 
10-12. 

It is easy, therefore, to see that the victory is not with 
the wise, nor with the mighty, nor the strong, nor necessarily 
with those who have shone forth in prominent places while in 
the flesh ; but the victory will be with those who are pure of 
heart. In the great and final conflict now on, soon the Lamb 


will be completely and forever victorious over Satan and all his 
emissaries. The Scriptures indicate that some start in the battle
 having been called and chosen, and have fought valiantly 
for a time, then prove unfaithful. Those who stand with him 
in the holy place, complete victors, wearing the crown of life, 
will be the faithful, the loyal in heart, the true the pure in 
heart, those who love him and the Father supremely and who 
have willingly and joyfully followed the Lamb whithersoever 
he led them. "Keep thine heart with all diligence, for out of 
it are the issues of life.' 1 

THE ISSUE LIFE OB DEATH 

The great question, or great issue now at stake for everyone
 who is fighting the good fight of faith, is the issue of life 
or death; and the one who gains this victory, who has the 
issue determined beneficially to him, will be the one who has 
diligently kept his own heart pure. He cannot win this fight 
alone, but the Lord will win it for him; for "the eyes of the 
Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth to show his 
strength in behalf of them whose hearts are perfect toward 
him." This class that, with the Lamb," triumphs over the 
beast will be the members of the victorious High Priest, and 
will be used of the Lord to establish and maintain righteousness
 in the earth. 

For six thousand years truth has been on the scaffold and 
wrong upon the throne. Christ Jesus at Calvary lighted the 
torch of truth among his followers, endowed them with his 
spirit, and sent them forth with the startling announcement: 
"Ye are the light of the world." Satan throughout the age has 
diligently sought to debauch the church, to inject wrongful 
thoughts into the minds of its members, and to poison their 
hearts. Satan has used many instruments, enemies of the new 
creation, and in the name of religion the most cruel and 
wicked deeds have been done against them. The Lord could 
have prevented this. He permitted it for a purpose. Soon now 
all the suffering will be over, and there will be no more opportunity
 to participate in it. Those who abide now patiently, 
cheerfully and faithfully in the Lord will be the ones to be 
victors, and then he will take truth off the scaffold and place 
it forever on the throne and the faithful will share in the work 
with him. These will have the oportunity, with Christ, of undoing
 what Satan has done and beyond that, blessing and uplifting
 mankind. And above all these things, in the ages to 
come they will be the special recipients of God's favor, for 
the Lord has spoken it. — Ephesians 2:7. 


COMING CONVENTIONS 


Throughout the war considerable restriction was encountered
 in one direction and another to the holding of Conventions. 
Especially did these restrictions affect friends residing in Canada
 and for a time cut them off from the services of traveling 
speakers from this side the border. No doubt they have been 
ably exhorted and stimulated to greater faith and love by faithful
 Canadian brethren, and doubtless, too, all feel that the 
hand of the Lord has been manifested in ways which would 
have been impossible had not trying circumstances existed. 

Now, however, that some measure of communication is 
opened up across the border we believe all will rejoice at the 
prospect of a series of General Conventions intended to give 
opportunity to the majority of the friends in Western Canada 
and the States to assemble for seasons of spiritual rest and 
refreshment. All of the General Conventions named below are 
expected to be addressed by Brother Rutherford and one or 
more of the other seven brethren recently released from prison 
at Atlanta — as well as by other experienced and capable speakers
. 

The Local Conventions listed below will be addressed by 
two or more Pilgrim brethren and experience has often shown 
such gatherings to be means of grace and encouragement hardly
 less notable than the larger assemblies. 

Probably no urging is necessary on our part; for all surely 
recognize the desirability of Christian fellowship and of the 
discourses on Scriptural doctrine and ethics. But we do remind
 the friends that the most sacred thing we have on earth 
is God's word, and that word dwells in the hearts and lives of 
his people — "Ye are the light of the world." 
GEKEEAL CONVENTIONS 

St. Paul., Minn., June 18-22. A five-day General Convention
 is being arranged for at the Twin Cities and the Metropolitan
 Opera House, St. Paul, has been engaged for all the 
sessions. Address H. B. Morrison, 987 Laurel Ave., St. Paul, 
Minn., for further details. 

Wintopeg Man., June 19-22. Four days will be spent in 
Convention here. For further information address Convention
 Committee, 143 Donald Street, 

Calgary, Alta., June 24-26. American friends planning to 
attend this gathering of the Lord's people may communicate 
with E». Bennett, 810 Third Ave., East. 

Vancouver, B. C, June 28-July 1, The friends at Vancouver
 expect a large number of friends from the American 
side. Those planning to attend can secure information from 
S. A. Carter, 620 Seventeenth Ave., West. 

Other General Conventions will, if the Lord permit, be 
held at Seattle, Wash., July 3-6; Spokane, Wash., July 
8-10; Portland, Ore., July 11-13; I>enver, Oolo., July 17-20. 
Details in next issue. 

LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

Binghamton, N. Y., June 27-29. There will be a convention
 at Binghimton on the above dates. The friends are 
prepared to take care of a large number of visitors, and expect
 a goodly attendance. Several Pilgrims and one of the 
released brethren will speak. Address all communications to 
W. M. Moore, 38 Mason Ave. 

■San Antonio, Tex., June 27-29, All sessions will be held 
in the regular meeting place, 117% North Floris Street. For 
further information write to T. A. Black, 612 Avenue C. 

Local Conventions in July as follows: Erie, Pa., July 
3-6; Los Angeles, Calif., July 4-6; Rochester, N. Y., July 
4-6; Kalamazoo, Mjoh., July 4-6; St. Louis, Mo., July 4-6. 
Details later. 


"THY SHIELD AND THY REWARD" 

[This article was a reprint of that publiahed in issue of Sept. 15. 1895, ■which please see.] 

[6441] 


"THE GREATEST OF THESE IS LOVE' 


June 22. — 1 Cobinthians 13. 
[This article was a reprint of that published in the iasue of June I, 1909, with extracts from previous articles on the 

same subject.] 

RESPONSE TO GOD'S LOVE 

June 29. — Philippians 3:7-14. 
high social and political positions accounted by the apostle as unworthy to be retained in comparison to the priviLEGE
 OF WINNING CHRIST AND BEING FOUND IN HIM— FELLOWSHIP IN CHRIST'S SUFFERINGS — PURSUING ALONG THE 
NARROW WAY NOT ALREADY PERFECT — THE PRIZE OF THE HIGH CALLING. 


"/ will praise thee, O Lord my God, 

One of the things winch gives interest to the writings of 
the Apostle Paul is the fact that they breathe forth the very 
spirit of the writer. There is nothing artificial about them; 
for the Apostle either had lived through or was in process of 
living through all of his own teachings on the Christian life. 

His letter to the church at Philippi is unique, not merely 
that it was written from his Roman prison, for that was also 
true of some of his other epistles, but in its spirit of tender 
fellowship with and solicitation for the welfare of the Philippian
 brethren. No word of censure is anywhere noted in all 
the letter, but he does compliment them, perhaps most of all 
in that he speaks freely of the most advanced Christian experiences
.— Chs. 1:21,20; 2:3; 3:15; 4:8. 

Our today's lesson begins with the statement: "But what 
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ" — i. e. 
the things which T once looked upon as marks of distinction 
in the social and ecclesiastical world I have come to look upon 
as lost, and not only lost but happily so. The external privileges
 which Saul had had were in the nature of correct circumcision
, the earliest of church rites, of membership in the 
most honored race on the face of the earth, and of one of the 
two most honored tribes of that race, of clean Hebrew blood, 
of scrupulous religiosity, of being a thorough-going and entirely
 respectable reactionary — he persecuted the church — of 
blamelessness in such righteousness as could be produced under 
the Law. 

Certainly this is no mean list of advantages. No mention 
is here made of wealth, but many things imply that he was 
at least above the average in that respect t else he would hardly 
have had all the advantages of schooling under Gamaliel 
which he did have. Considerable color is lent to this view 
by the hope of Felix, that money would be given him by Paul 
for his release from the prison at Csesarea. — Acts 24:26. 
LOSS AND GAIN IN CHBIST 

Even after a review of the things which Christ had cost 
him the Apostle felt that he was happy not only because there 
were losses in the past but was happy and perfectly willing to 
have those losses continue to the end, because he realized that 
unspeakable treasures of wisdom and knowledge, unthinkable
 heights of honor and distinction, and unsearchable depths 
of religious experience lay before him, if he could but enjoy 
the priceless privilege of acquaintanceship with Christ Jesus, 
his Master. — Philippians 3:8. 

All the losses which the Apostle had encountered were encountered
 because of his connection with the despised Jesus. 
But he did not waste time and energy repining over the loss 
of things which he had once gladly foregone. So far from 
having this attitude, he looked upon all those worldly advantages
 of the past as mere refuse — things which did administer
 something to life at one time, but the usefulness of 
which had been exhausted and which had better be gotten 
rid of than retained. One serious trouble with many Christian 
people is spiritual constipation — the retention of those things 
which have long since ceased to give sustenance. 

The privilege of winning Christ, or the final anointing and 
installation into office, of being found among those who have 
been made meet for the inheritance for the saints in light, is 
a goal for the attainment of which no personal sacrifice can 
be too great, no zeal too warm. Elsewhere the same Apostle 
says: "What we now suffer I count as nothing in comparison 
with the glory which is soon to be manifested in us." 
RIGHTEOUSNESS OF GOD BY FAITH 

The form ali stic righteousness which the Apostle had had 
as a Jew by virtue of his conformity to the ceremonial demands
 of the Law did not help him to gain everlasting life. 
That typical arrangement of the Law which seemed reasonably
 to promise life eternal, was found, when actual attempt 
was made to attain the life, to condemn one to death because 
of the Jew's inability to meet the demands of Jehovah as expressed
 in the Law, (Romans 7:10) But God, the same God 
who established and maintained the dignity of his justice by 
manifesting its unchangeability through the Law Covenant, 
also introduced a way of mercy through Christ Jesus his Son. 
His beloved Son gave himself in furtherance of the Father's 

(171-173) [6442] 


tvith my whole heart" — Psalm 86:12. 
purpose as a ransom price for the sin of Adam and hi3 children
. He finished his sacrificial course on Calvary, ascended 
on high and "purged our sins" by the presentation of his 
merit on behalf of the church, which included not only the 
Apostle Paul, but also all other apostles and every other one 
who has come to God through Christ during this Gospel age. 

This provision included the Apostle for the same reason 
that it includes others; because he believed in God's arrangement
 for redemption through Christ and in response to that 
faith God counted him as acceptable through Christ — Christ 
making such legal satisfaction for him as he was unable to 
make for himself, because of an imperfect or unbalanced 
character. Perhaps' no words can express this great central 
truth more clearly than those of the Apostle himself in Romans
 5:18: "As by the offence of one, judgment came upon 
all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness^ of one 
the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life." ^ 

Thus peace is brought to the consecrated follower of Chriat 
(RomanB 5:1) who disavows his own righteousness as having 
any saving merit, and looks to Jesus, the author and finisher 
of his faith; for, "the just shall live by faith." (Romans 
1:17) "For on the ground of obedience to the Law no man 
living will be declared righteous before him. The Law simply 
brings the sure knowledge of sin. But now righteousness 
coming from God has been brought to light apart from the 
Law, both the Law and prophets bearing witness to it — the 
righteousness coming from God, which depends on faith in 
Jesus Christ and extends to all who believe."— Romans 3:20-22. 

The Apostle knew that the Pharisees, of which sect he was 
a member, were the most punctiliously religious, the most 
scrupulously moral people tnat ever trod the earth; yet our 
Lord had said of them that they were "hypocrites," "whited 
sepulchers," "brood of vipers", and "of their father the devil." 
No wonder the Apostle cheerfully forewent whatever righteousness
 he may have had as a Pharisee and even more cheerfuly
 accepted God's gracious arrangement through Christ. 

Of course, none but Jews were ever subject to the Law 
Covenant; but the remainder of the believers of this age have 
been obliged to come to God through Christ Jesus, because 
first, "There is none righteous, no not one," and second, because
 no man can come unto the Father but by the Anointed. 
Those who have thus come have "ceased from [their] own 
works, as God did from his." They have ceased to believe 
in the effectiveness of human theories of self-perfection. 
THE RESURRECTION OF THE DEAD 

All the words from the middle of the eighth verse to the 
end of the ninth are parenthetical, so that the hopes of the 
tenth verse really furnish the groundwork for his willingness 
to suffer the loss of all things. He was willing to undergo 
deprivations of any temporal character if only he could know 
Christ better, and experience his dynamic resurrection unto 
glory, honor and immortality. This exalted resurrection is obtainable
 only in case we participate in his sufferings, and are 
conformed to his sacrificial death. — 2 Timothy 2:12. 

Another view of this tenth verse is that "it constitutes a 
brief outline of the Apostle's course from the very start of 
his Christian experiences. He, "not disobedient to the 
heavenly vision'" had cheerfully given up his previous standing
 as a Pharisee and probably a member of the Sanhedrin, 
that he might know the wonderful Christ who had appeared 
to him in the way toward Damascus shining above the brightness
 of the sun at noonday. The power tint pould thu* moot 
and strike him blind was well worth knowing. But it wa* 
not mere acquaintanceship with him that was desired; the 
acquaintanceship brought knowledge of the fact^ that certain 
advantages might accrue from the work of Chri-t Jesus, especially
 from his resurrection, for "he was raided for our 
justification." To be brought into a state of acceptability before
 God was all that was ever hoped for under the Law, 
and here it was to be had for the confident asking— bought 
by the precious blood of Christ. — 1 Peter 1:18, 19. 

An acquaintanceship with the love which prompted Jehovah 
to devise this benign plan for justification unto life, and acquaintanceship
 with the love of our Lord Jesus which 


Junb 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(173-174) 


prompted him to give himself in death on our behalf in furtherance
 of the Father's design, stimulates in us a desire to 
make some return. We begin to feel that as Christ died for 
us we ought also to lay down our lives for Christ's brethren; 
and when we begin to "follow thi3 holy impulse, under the direction
 of his Word, we begin to share in his sufferings, 
moderately at first, but in proportion to our zeal and opportunities
 our fellowship in his sufferings becomes more keen 
and our consecrated walk in the narrow way brings us more 
and more fully into contact with the fire which destroys 
our human hopes, aims, and ambitions; and finally we may 
follow our Lord under the second vail into the holiest of all, 
and attain to the first and most honorable resurrection of 
the dead. — Revelation 20:5, 6. 

NOT ALREADY PERFECT 

But though such were the high aspirations of the Apostle, 
he disclaims having already participated in that glorious 
change. Elsewhere he does indicate that faithful followers of 
the Lord live a resurrection life now, have already been raised 
to walk in newness of life (see also Oolossians 3:1), yet that 
newness is only very fragmentary, since we have only an imperfect
 organism. "When that which is perfect is come, then 
that which is fragmentary shall be supplanted" by the fulness
 of him that filleth all in all. 

The perfectness referred to in the twelfth verse is evidently 
different from that mentioned in the fifteenth verse of the same 
chapter: the former is manifestly connected with the first 
resurrection, when that which is sown in weakness is raised 
in power, when that which is sown in dishonor is raised in 
glory. But in the latter instance reference is had to maturity 
of Christian character, a state of high development and sturdiness
 in growth. The Apostle knew he was not elected in the 
final sense of that word, but be was busily engaged in doing 
his part so that he might win in the election for which he 
had been nominated by Christ Jesus. 

The absence of any "cock-sureness" on the part of the Lord's 
most honored Apostle can well be a lesson for us all, and can 
well give us assurance in following him, even as he followed 
Christ. He did not arrogantly assume that everything must 
be all right for him since he was an Apostle. So far from 
that attitude of mind, he was submerged in the spirit of love 
and devotion, and in working out his own salvation with conscientious
 caution and self-distrust, being energized in will and 
stimulated in work by God. — Philippians 2:12. 

The prize, the grand consummation of all bis hopes and 
strivings, was ever before Brother Paul's mind. What was 
glorious enough for God to offer him was glorious enough 
for him to look forward to with keen expectation. It was a 
steady view of that reward which made his temporal losses 
seem so insignificant. Because that prize of joint-heir ship with 


Christ seemed to him worthy of every effort which he could 
possibly put- forth he ceased to allow side issues and the 
ephemeral things of life to have any dominating influence over 
him. True, he had to give some attention to provision for the 
body, but such provision was not with the end in view of mere 
personal gratification — all those things were consecrated means 
to a sanctified end. 

THE MARK AND THE PRIZE 

The things behind were not forgotten in the ordinary sense 
of that word, because the Apostle remembered them sufficiently
 well to enumerate some of his former advantages, 
but they were forgotten in the sense that they were discarded 
and no longer allowed to dictate his course of action. Just 
one thing stood out in the zealous Apostle's life and that was 
'the being with Christ', which was far better than anything 
else. — Philippians 1:23, Diaglott. 

The fourteenth verse of our lesson has occasionally given 
rise to some confusion because of the unfortunateness of the 
King James wording. It has been associated in the minds of 
some with the picture of a modern race course, as made use 
of in the sixth volume of Scripture Studies. (F. 187) No 
citation is there given to this text and it is not necessary to 
suppose that it was meant, merely because a similarity of 
language is employed. 

The literal Greek text is very simple and understandable. 
It reads: "According to a mark I pursue towards the prize 
of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." In other words, 
in this text, the mark is the course over which the runner 
pursues, but the prize is the* object of his striving, and not 
the mark. Either thought, however, is helpful and probably 
the Apostle would not object to his words being made use of 
in either way, but our only knowledge of w T hat he really meant 
is by what he said. The grammatical structure of "according
* to a mark" is identical with that of our Master's 
words: "According to thy faith be it unto thee." 

The word translated "press" does not mean press in the 
sense of squeeze, or push down, but rather with the meaning of 
pursue, or press on. The work or course along which the 
Apostle was pursuing was the narrow way, because it is the 
only way that leads to the life, the prize of immortality. He 
was not trying to reach that glorious station by moralistic 
or humanitarian roads, however smooth or respectable they 
may have appeared to be; for he well knew that his Lord 
and Forerunner had said: "Many will say to me in that day, 
Master, Master, have we not prophesied in thy name, and in 
thy name expelled demons, and in thy name performed many 
mighty works? And then I will tell them plainly, I never did 
recognize you; begone from me, you that work lawlessly" — 
regardless of and even contrary to mv instructions. — Matthew 
7:22, Luke 6:46. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


"THE LORD KHOWETH THEM THAT ARE HIS" 

Dear Sib: 

For some time I have been most interested in the teachings 
of Pastor Russell, and have read the first volume of "The 
Divine Plan of the Ages" or "Millennial Dawn," but would 

like to have the whole set from No. 1 to No I do not 

know if this is the same as Studies in the Scbiftures. ' I 
see that there are six of these. Will you please send me "The 
Divine Plan," complete, and advise me the price, which I will 
forward in one payment or more. I am engaged in missionary
 work, and have food and raiment, but little money — none 
from the work. If you still have a copy of the Bible Students
 Monthly, Vol. 8, No. 5, I should much like one, also 
any other papers whereby I could get to know more about 
Pastor Russell's teachings, his followers, etc. If it is not 
too discourteous, I woxild so much like to know why some 
of Pa stor Russell's followers were cast into prison a few 
months ago. 

May God keep us from being bound to "doctrines," but also 
from being led away from the fundamental truths of the 
Bible! Surely what we need is a baptism of the Holy Spirit. 

YourB in the King's service, 

Mrs. Alice Van Emmebik-Cleverly. — Java. 

"FOLLOW THOtJ ME" 
My Dear Brethren: 

I have just finished reading the May 1st Tower, and I beg 
just enough of your valuable time to express to you my sincerest
 appreciation of your kind services to God's dear IsraeL 

All along the way I have earnestly, yet soberly and calmly 
encouraged head and heart loyalty to the Watch Tower, because
 of the multitudinous evidences we have that it is the 


Lord's channel still, just as effectually as ever; and now comes 
the May 1st issue which is the best ever. 

Oh, how could any one reject its wholesome and timely 
food! How we look forward to its coming as a means of 
sweet communion with the Lord, a wise counsel in perplexity, 
a fortification in battle, and a mighty Tower of strength in 
times of weakness! Daily, yea many times do we bear you 
up to our Father's presence that you may have heavenly wisdom
 and guidance to feed the dear flock of God; and how it 
rejoices our hearts to see our prayers answered in a manner 
that far transcends our loftiest expectations! 

If we should repudiate such wholesome food, would it not 
indicate a greatly impaired spiritual digestion on our part? 
I think it would. There is an old adage which says: "When 
the mouse is glutted no flour tastes sweet." To me this 
plainly represents some of our former dear friends, who 
through an apparent feeling of self-complacency, think it no 
longer necessary to feast with us at the Lord's table. Of 
course, our Master would say as in times of old, "What is 
that to thee, follow thou me." And indeed, we do so gladly. 
We can pray for them, and then leave it all in our Father^ 
hands, for he knowefch best. 

Be assured, dear brethren, there are many who have never 
bowed the knee to the idols so astutely erected by misguided 
brethren in our day. More and more do the many friends all 
over this country appreciate your very efficient services in this 
capacity. We are sure that the secret of your success lies In 
the fact that "God is with you." And we all want to stay 
with you and the Lord. Truly our recent experiences have 
proven that our safety as new creatures depends upon our 
staying with the Lord and his arrangement. 

May the dear Lord richly bless your hearts too, as you so 


[6443] 


(174-163) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


greatly water and refreshen others, I beg to remain lovingly 
and sincerely, your brother in him. 

A. J. Eshixman. — Pilgrim, 
FROM A WAR CAMP IH FRANCE 

[The following letter addressed by a soldier to his mother 
has been handed to us.] 
Dear Mother: — 

A few days ago there happened something here that made 
me very happy and of which I must tell you. A German 
engineer (prisoner) here in our mess hall had a picture in 
his hand. I made occasion to see what the picture was, and 
to my surprise I found it to be none other than a picture of 
Pastor Russell. The prisoner could talk English a little — 
sufficiently to make ourselves understood. I asked him what 
he thought of Pastor Russell, and he replied: "Oh, he is my 
pastor"! I then asked him if he had any of the volumes. 
He replied by holding up six fingers — meaning Volumes I to 
VI inclusive. I then asked him what the German government
 thought of Pastor Russell. He responded : "No good ; 
they say he is a seducer of the people." 

I then found that he did not know Pastor Russell was dead. 
He had been drafted into the German army at the outbreak 
of the war and had not heard about it. When I told him of 
the Pastor's death he nearly cried. I next told him about 
the seventh volume, and of the imprisonment of Brother 
Rutherford and the other officers of the Society on account 
of it. He knew nothing about it, and said he thought it 
strange that such things could occur in America. He said he 
would try to get the volume through some of his brethren. He 
was compelled to leave shortly thereafter, and as he departed 
from me he was on the verge of tears. I thought I would tell 
you of this strange experience; perhaps many of the friends 
would like to know of it. 

Just received two new Towers. Will read them tonight by 
candle light. Much love, 

Bernard L. Porter (A. E. F. ) —France. 

KEPT ABLE THROUGH GOD'S GRACE 
Dear Felix>w Workers: 

Please find enclosed my personal check of , which 

please use to help forward the above named work. 

Dear friends, I fully sympathize with you in the many trying
 difficulties of your calling. The road to the kingdom is 
fraught with deep perplexities, trials and difficulties for us 
all, but the final is all glorious. The Watch Tower comes to 
us each half month bringing comfort, instruction and encouragement
 j so we praise God daily for what you do for us and 
that His work is placed in such good hands. 

Dear friends, we know that it is only through the grace 
of an infinite God that you are kept able to do your great 
work, so we remember you daily at his august throne. 

Your sister in His service, Mrs. S. A. Owens. — Pa* 
EXPECTATIONS MORE THAN REALIZED 
Dear Brethren: 

We enclose herewith 550 more petitions. This makes in all 
from our section a total of 3650, which much more than exceeds
 our expectations. We greatly rejoice in the privilege 
of joining with others in doing this wonderful work! 

Much Christian love and sincere prayers for your guidance. 
Yours in Him, Ariel H. Hemphill. — Mo. 
APPRECIATING RECENT SERVICE 
Dear Brethren: 

I have just finished reading for the fourth time, the grand 
article in the May 1st Tower "The Harvest Ended," and 
greatly appreciate the enlargement of thought associated with 
the words of the fifth chapter of James a« applicable particularly
 at this time. 

What carefulness of thought, word and action should permeate
 our lives in the realization of the coming events that 
will shortly sift out such as have not used the past opportunities
 judiciously, or do not fight vigilantly in the battle 
raging now. 

It is sad to see that, no doubt, many have surrendered to 
the enemy Fear — though it may be under the cover of some 
other pretext. 

In the realization of our own weaknesses, and as we by 
faith lay hold upon the many promises precious to those who 
endeavor loyally to exercise faith, we are strengthened by the 
Apostle's words : "When I am weak, then am I strong," in the 
Lord. 

Our class has faithfully circulated "The World has Ended" 
Labor Tribune edition, and we have had the joy of receiving 
some encouraging comments from some of our citizens. 

Praying the Lord's continued guiding hand over our mutual
 service, and rich blessings upon the dear ones at the 
Watch Tower office, and especially upon the dear brethren 
that have suffered and are yet suffering in bonds for the word 
of God, I am yours in the sweet bond of Christian love, 

N. A. Linderbero. — Minn. 
MANY ENJOYED PETITION WORE 
Dear Brethren: 

Greetings in the name of our Lord and King! 
I am sending my petition sheet. I have labored earnestly 
and at every opportunity with this to secure all that I possibly
 could. I am sure it has been a wonderful witnessing of 
the truth. We did quite well until some of our opponents 
warned the people that they would get into trouble if they 
signed the petitions. But we secured quite a number of names 
after that. 

Yes, we have received a blessing as we noticed many questions
 asked concerning the truth and they have inquired about 
books and tracts. 

We are glad to have had this opportunity of witnessing to 
the truth and believe we would have missed a blessing had 
we not worked with tracts and petitions. With much Christion
 love, I remain, Your sister in his service, 

Harriet A. Doak. — la. 
Dear Beloved Brethren: 

Greetings in the name of our blessed King and Master ! 
Our class is rejoicing that the dear brethren who were in 
Atlanta are back in the office once more; truly God is good. 
(Surely it is a great privilege to serve the King of Kings that 
knows no defeat! 

Enclosed you will find another filled petition list, and we 
have another list about half filled, mostly business people's 
signatures on the latter. They are signing quite readily here, 
the big majority being willing to lend their aid by signing. 

It will surely arouse the interest of many people ; thus God 
/can make the wrath of man to praise him. Let us continue 
the good work by the Lord's grace. How badly the world 
needs the truth; and if this will help some of them to get it, 
we should not hesitate to take advantage of this opportunity 
to get the glorious message before them. 

May the Lord continue to guide and direct you in doing 
his will, blessing your efforts to serve him. 

With much Christian love, Your sister in the blessed hope, 

Ethel Thornburo. — Mont. 
Dear Brethren : 

Christian Greetings! Enclosed find petition sheet which 
I am very glad to send, but would have liked to send more. 

£ did certainly enjoy the privilege of doing something in 
the service of our brethren and also of bringing the people's 
attention to our Lord's wonderful blessings to come in due 
time to all the groaning creation. 

I leceived many blessings and did have the privilege of 
loaning one First Volume to some people who were very 
much awake to the condition of the churches. Surely it is 
more blessed to give than to receive; and may the blessings 
of the Lord be with you all in the daya to come. 

Your sister by his grace. Miss Emma Miller. — Mass. 


CONVICTIONS 

We clip the following item from page 1, of The Brooklyn 
Eagle, of May 15, 1919: 

"RusseUite Verdict Reversed by Appeal; * Trial was Unfair* 
"Circuit Court Criticises Judge Howe's Conduct 

"Judges Ward, Rogers and Manton of the United States 
Circuit Court of Appeals for the New York Federal District 
today reversed the convictions of the leaders of Russellism, 
who were found guilty last June before Judge Harland B. 
Howe of Vermont, sitting in Brooklyn, of conspiring to obstruct
 the draft, discourage enlistment and foment insurrection
 and insubordination among the armed forces of the 
Nation. 

"The decision holds that the attitude of Judge Howe was 


REVERSED 

unfair in his treatment of the witnesses, Mrs. Mabel Campbell
, Mrs. Agnes Hudgings and her husband, William F. Hudgings
. . . . Inasmuch as the decision sustains the legitimacy 
of the claim of the Russellites that their organization, which 
forbids members to kill, entitled its members to exemption from 
active service with the Army, there seems little likelihood that 
the leaders of the cult will ever again be placed on trial. 
Federal Attorney James D. Bell refused to say whether he 
contemplates a retrial of the case. . . . All served nine months 
before they were recently released on bail, granted by the 
United States Supreme Court on application of Jesse Fuller, 
Jr., and Frederick Sparks, of counsel. . . . 

"Judge Martin T. Manton dissented from the majority 


[6444] 


June 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(179-160) 


opinion, which was written by Judge Henry G. Ward. . . . Referring
 to the treatment of the witnesses, Mrs. Campbell, Mrs. 
Hudgings and Hudgings, the decision says: 

" 'We think that the attitude of the court in regard to the 
testimony of these three witnesses and the action it took in 
the presence of the jury in the case of the witness William 


F. Hudgings was most prejudicial to the defendants. It was 
very likely to intimidate witnesses subsequently called, to pre* 
judice the jurors against the defendants and to make them 
think that the court was satisfied of the defendants' guilt. 
What a judge may say to the contrary on such an occasion 
may not necessarily prevent such consequences.' " 


Vol. XL 


PITTSBURGH, PA., JUNE 15, 1919 


No. 12 


GOD'S COVENANTS 

''Let them curse, but 

Clear understanding of every feature of God's plan, while 
desirable, is not necessarily essential to our blessing thereunder
. Most of us believed in the precious blood of Christ 
and were justified freely thereby from all things when we did 
not at all understand the philosophy of the atonement — even 
as the majority of Christian people do not understand it now, 
While increasing knowledge did not bring increasing justification
, it did bring increased appreciation, devotion and love, 
together with greater opportunities for harmony and co-operation
 with Cod's purposes, as those purposes were better understood
. 

Likewise a clear appreciation of God's covenants is important
 and valuable to the Christian. In the knowledge of 
these he possesses the key to the understanding of the entire 
plan of God. That which we believe the Lord has allowed 
us to see more distinctly than most Christians is manifestly 
our duty and privilege to lay before the household of faith. 

The Apostle's statement that God "will have all men to 
be saved and to come to a knowledge of the truth," together 
with the inspired allusion to God's disposition quoted at the 
head of this column, shows us that the heavenly Father prefers
 to bless, rather than to curse. But for the maintenance 
of justice, the stabilizing attribute of God's character, he 
will curse, or remove the blessings already possessed or remove
 the opportunity for additional blessings, if favors already
 shown are unappreciated and unused. 

Adam, God's perfect earthly image, was fairly engulfed 
in divine blessings. He was perfect socially, mentally, morally
, and physically; more than this he had a perfect environment
 and perfect dominion. He was the climax of all 
Jehovah's wonderful creative work on earth and was included 
in the general statement of approval: "And God saw everything
 that he had made, and, behold it was very good." Thus 
"God blessed them" by making every arrangement for their 
well-being and happiness. 

HOME TIES BBOKEK 

But man disobeyed God and so severed the bond of fellowship
 and communion between them, the tacit agreement between
 man and his Maker to render mutual love and appreciation
. God's blessing or favor was withdrawn, and since 
only "in his favor is life" (Psalm 30:5), the curse or disfavor
 of Jehovah rested upon Adam. (Genesis 3:19) What 
now? Could nothing in the shape of divine blessing be looked 
forward to as the disobedient pair were driven from their 
home in Eden? Ye3, there was a glimmer of hope given in 
the curse upon the serpent: "it [the seed of Eve] shall bruise 
thy head." (Geneeds 3:15) It must have been humiliating 
to Adam, who should have been the head, to have his only ray 
of hope expressed in God's communication to the serpent, and 
that in a promise where his own name was not even mentioned
 ; but the realization of that fact could not have been 
half as humiliating as the consciousness of the utter ingratitude
 with which he had treated the benign providences of his 
Maker. 

Adam's failure to keep God's law had cut himself and his 
race off from divine favor and placed them under divine sentence
; and nothing that man could do would restore that favor
. The initiative toward reconciliation must come from 
God, if at all; and God's covenants are his statements of his 
proposition for a reconciliation, and indicate how, with whom, 
and by whom it shall be accomplished. 

COVENANT, JOS ABBAN0EMENT OR CONTRACT 

Before taking up a review of God's three most prominent 
covenants we will perhaps do well to bring clearly to mind 
the meanings of the important terms used, especially the 
words of Covenant and Mediator. 

The word in the Greek which is translated covenant or 
testament is diatheekee and is derived from die, thoroughly, 
and theh-o, to place. From this we get the thought of disposition
, arrangement, bequest, testament, or covenant. Professor 
Younir <rives "arrangement, covenant"; Strong's Concordance 
gives "disposition, i. e., (specifically) a contract (especially a 
devisory will)" The English word covenant is probably well 
understood, but a few citations will not be out of pla^e: 


AND BLESSINGS 

bless thou."— -Psailm 109:28. 

Covenant; an agreement entered into by two or more parties
. A written agreement between parties under seal. Standard
 Dictionary. 

Covenant; A written contract under seal; "covenant" is 
frequent in religious usage, as "contract" is in law and business
. Fernald Synonyms. 

Covenant; A covenant is usually a national and public 
transaction; a solemn engagement on the one hand and faith 
in that engagement on the other, enter into the nature of a 
covenant. Crabb's Synonymes. 

Covenant; A mutual contract or agreement of two or more 
persons to do or to refrain from doing some act. In general 
(law), an agreement under a seal. In Biblical usage, the 
free promise of God, generally, though not always, expressly 
accompanied by the requirement of fulfillment of certain conditions
 on the part of man. Century Dictionary. 

A contract or covenant may be unilateral, i. e. onesided, 
or bilateral, i. e. two-sided. A covenant may be conditional, 
or unconditional. Where a covenant is conditional each contracting
 party is bound to fulfill certain conditions, and a 
mediator is appointed to see that each keeps his covenant. 
Where a covenant is unconditional, no mediator is necessary. 

Mediator; (Greek meseetees) middleman. Young's Concordance
. 

Mediator; a go-between, i. e. (simply) an internunciator, 
(by implication) a Teconciler. Strong's Concordance. 

The Greek word means simply a betweener, but is used in 
the Scriptures for one who interposes between parties at variance
 in order to reconcile them or to see that justice is done 
to both parties. 

THE OATH-BOUND COVENANT 



"Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy 
country and from thy kindred and from thy father's house, 
into a land that I will show thee; and I will make of thee a 
great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; 
and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless them that bless 
thee, and curse him that curseth thee; and in thee shall all 
the families of the earth be blessed."-— Genesis 12:1-3. 

Any blessing ever coming to any human being comes as a 
fruitage of that promise. On this point we quote from The 
Watch Towke of June 1st, 1010. page 169, first column: 

"The Abrahamic Covenant is an all-embracing arrangement
. Everything that God has done and will yet do for our 
race is included in that Abrahamic Covenant. " . . . All kindreds
 and families of the earth will be blessed by the privilege
 or opportunity of becoming children of Abraham, children 
of God, whom Abraham represented in a figure. *I have made 
thee a father of many nations' (Genesis 17:5; Romans 4:17) , 
said the Lord to Abraham. These will be blessed under the 
New Covenant, an arrangement whereby the Abrahamic Covenant
 will be fulfilled as relates to Israel and to all. The 
Abrahamic Covenant, then, embraces all the other covenants, 
those covenants being merely different features of God's arrangements
 by which the work implied in the great Abrahamic 
Covenant or promise is to be accomplished." 

The original covenant, or promise, includes all that its 
added, or dependent covenants include in the way of blessing; 
while the latter constitute but proper and reasonable limitations
 and regulations by which the blessings may become everlasting
 to all the worthy. 

Little is said of Abraham prior to God's making the covvrr
— 40 


[6445] 


(180-181) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


enant with him, but we may suppose that he was a man ot 
honest heart, who had already manifested a strong faith in 
God. While Abraham was living in the land of the Chaldeans
, God called him out from his relatives and friends, and 
directed him to go to the land of Canaan, where he would 
make him a great nation, promising further that, should he 
do so, in his seed all the families of the earth should be 
blessed, Abraham was called the friend of God, and God 
made this revelation to him. It was something to which 
faith could hold, but which could not be had from any other 
standpoint. This covenant was a definite declaration of 
God's benevolent intentions toward humanity in general, and 
of the fact that it had pleased him to select Abraham's posterity
 as the line through which he purposed to communicate
 the great and much needed blessing. 

THIS PROMISE UNCONDITIONAL 

There were no conditions to the promise, but there was 
a certain condition for Abraham to fulfil before that promise
 would be bound to Abraham's family — and that condition
 was that Abraham move into a land which God would 
show him. In a comparatively short time that single condition
 was fulfilled; thereafter all taught of God would 
know to look for the Messianic blessing through Abraham's 
seed. To make the promise more -sure, if that were possible
, God confirmed his word on the subject by his oath; 
thus giving two unshakable foundations for faith in the integrity
 of this wonderful promise. Seven times, in one form 
or another, was this promise reiterated to Abraham. — Hebrews
 6:13-18; Genesis 22:16-18. 

Abraham no doubt wondered at times how God intended 
to fulfill his covenant, seeing that the Canaanites continued 
to live in the land of Canaan while he was never more than 
a sojourner in it. God's promise concerning his "seed" 
seemed also to fail; and after many years when Isaac was 
born, he proved to be only a type, a living picture of the 
true "seed", through whom the promise of great prominence 
and world-wide influence and blessings was to be fulfilled. 

Now God did not" make his plan because of Abraham; but 
he merely made known his predetermined purpose to faithful
 Abraham, and chose his family as the one through which 
Messiah should be sent for the accomplishment of that plan. 
The plan itself, we are told, was predetermined from the 
foundation of the world. (Ephesians 1:4) Abraham's obedience
 manifested his faith; and his continuance in Canaan 
marked the continuance of his faith. — TTeb. 11:15. 

THE LAW COVENANT 

"The [Abrahamic] covenant, that was confirmed before nt 
God in Christ, the Law [covenant], which was four hundred 
and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should mafcf 

the promise of none effect Wherefore then [serveth] 

the Law? It was added because of transgressions, till the 
seed should come to whom the promise was made." — Gal. 
3:17-19. 

Four hundred and thirty years after making the covenant
 with Abraham, God revealed another feature of his 
plan. When bringing Abraham's posterity out of Egyptian 
slavery to establish them in the promised land of Canaan, 
he brought them to Mount Sinai and there entered into a 
national covenant with them, known as the Law Covenant. 

As a basis for this covenant or contract ten commandments
 were miraculously written upon two tables of stone, 
and subsequent elaborations given in the shape of many 
statutes, stipulating how the ten commandments were to be 
applied to their daily lives. God appointed Moses the mediator
 between himself and the people of Israel, to ratify the 
covenant and in his name to promise the people escape from 
death and from evil or blight, upon condition of their living 
up to the requirements of the Law; as it is written: "The 
man that doeth them shall live in them." — Galatians 3:12; 
Leviticus 18:5; 26:3-11, 14-44. 

Hoping that the long deferred blessing of the original 
promise was now to he fulfilled, Israel readily assented to the 
terms of this Law Covenant and said: "All that the Lord 
hath spoken we will do," (Exodus 1#t8; 24:3, 7} And no 
doubt they honestly intended full obedience, which they then 
considered to be a possible thing. Moses, fulfilling his part, 
ratified the covenant on behalf of God and the people, by 
sprinkling the blood of the sacrifice on the people and on the 
tables of the law, saying, "This is the blood of the covenant 
which God hath enjoined unto you", that is, the blood by 
which you and God are joined in covenant. — Hebrews 9:19, 
20; Exodus 24:8. 

THE PURPOSE OT THE LAW 

Israel's experierce of tribulation and bondage in Egypt 
was probably necessary to prepare them for God's great propo- 

[64 


sition — that they should keep the Law and as a reward have 
life everlasting. Israel rejoiced in this manifestation of divine
 preference for them, more than for all the nations of the 
earth. And if honor from Almighty God has made some of the 
Jewish people at times to appear proud and arrogant, let us 
not forget that "to err is human— to forgive, divine," Perhaps 
if we had been in their stead, our imperfections would similarly
 display th^selves. 

But not "a Jew kept the law perfectly. When they attempted
 to keep it they were disappointed. They failed; because
 the Law, of God is the full measure of a perfect man's 
ability, and the Jews, like othe: men, being imperfect, found 
that they had undertaken an impossibility. Not a Jew, therefore
, gained eternal life during the first year — not one. But 
God, foreknowing this, had made preparation for the atonement
 day every year, so that the people might continue to 
strive to attain eternal life under relatively favorable conditions
. The morning of each new atonement day found the 
original Adamic sentence of death again upon them. Each 
atonement dav; evening found that sentence typically satisfied 
and opportunity for another year guaranteed to them as a 
nation. But year after year, century after century, they 
failed, and discouragement took the place of hope. 

But if God knew all the time that they could not keep 
the Law in such a way as to win life, the trophy of the law, 
why did he let them enter into the covenant at all? Before 
this question is answered it must be seen that the Jews were 
not disadvantaged in any way, even though they died because 
of their inability to keep the Law. When thus condemned to 
death by the terms of the Law which they thought was going 
to give them life (Romans 7:10), they 'were no more dead 
than the rest of mankind; they were merely in another 
ward of the great prison house of death. 

The purpose of the Law, then, was educational, to teach 
the Jews and all mankind (1} the majesty and unchangeableness
 of divine justice, for prior to the "giving of the Law 
there was no standard of righteousness in the world; (2) two 
other lessons closely associated; (a) that man needs better 
sacrifices than those of bulls and goats to take away sin; (b), 
that without the shedding of blood there is no means of justification
 in God's sight; (3) to show the Jews their own sinfulness
 and unworthiness to be the "seed" through which God 
would bless all mankind; (4) to assure Israel that the promised
 seed would be a perfect man, able to keep all the requirements
 of the Law Covenant perfectly, as our Lord Jesus 
alone was able to do ; (5) to prepare Israel, who had learned 
the lesson of their own shortcomings, to expect Messiah's 
birth out of the usual way, that his freedom from Adamic 
condemnation and weakness might be apparent; (6) to set 
forth in types and allegories some wonderful lessons illustrative
 of great divine principles of truth and righteousness — 
lessons which were beneficial to the Jewish nation, have been 
to the Gospel church and in time shall be to all the world; 
(7) to demonstrate to all the absolute necessity for the Redeemer
 and his mediatorial work for mankind (Acts 4:12); 
and forever to stop evolutionists, higher critics and a!l from 
saying: "We could have obtained life and perfection by our 
own efforts, if granted the opportunity," 

The blessings thoy got were instructive in their nature 
(Romans 3:1, 2) but did not bring them everlasting life. 
Hence they were not in a position to become, as they had 
hoped, a national Messiah, a national seed of Abraham, for the 
blessing of all the nations. 

For a time God gave them judges, then kings; but these 
were unable to accomplish the great things hoped for. But 
through the prophets the promise of a personal Messiah was 
made. One who should be of the lineage of David, a great 
king, but far greater than the great, wise, and rich Solomon. 
Messiah would be David's son and yet David's Lord. (Psalm 
110:1; Matthew 22:42-44) Here, as God had intended, Israel 
began to get the thought of a personal Messiah, a king of 
glory, who would use their nation as his instrumentality for 
the conquering of the world, when every knee should bow and 
every tongue confess to the glory of God. 

JESUS, THE JXTST ONE 

Our Lord Jesus could and did fulfill the terms of the Law 
Covenant. All those commands and demands he summed up 
in the words, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and 
with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thyself/* (Luke 10:27) 
Our Lord was able to love God supremely and his neighbor 
justly because of his absolute perfection, because his life was 
not derived from the polluted Adamic fountain but miraculously
 transferred from his previous, glorious spirit existence
 with the Father before the world was. Thus could it be 
•said of him that he was "holy, harmless, un defiled and separate 

46] 


Junt 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(181-182) 


from sinners". But while demonstrating by his obedience 
his right to all that the law offered, Jesus was proving himself
 obedient to a special sacrificial obligation which he had 
taken upon himself, in accordance with the divine will, for 
the joint purpose of redeeming mankind and of showing himself
 worthy for an unparalleled exaltation of nature to the 
divine plane itself, which God purposed as a reward for his 
obedience "unto death, even the death of the cross". 

During these three and a half years of severe testing, Christ 
Jesus was demonstrating himself to be the sole heir of all the 
provisions of the Abrahamic Covenant, promised to Abraham's 
seed. Hence now in him, and in him only, "shall all the families
 of the earth be blessed". Thus, by" fulfilling the conditions
 of the added Law Covenant Jesus made an end to that 
Law for every Jew who believed, nailing it to his cross, and 
was ready to begin the work of blessing, in God's due time* — 
Romans 10:4; Colossians 2:14. 

Thus the Abrahamic Covenant confirmed the idea that 
the seed must be of Abraham's descendents. while the Law 
itself just a=i surely proved that he would be "holy, harmless
, linden led, and eep.irate from sinners". — Hebrews 7:26. 

COVENANTS OF SACRIFICE 

"Gather my saints together unto me; those that have mad© a 
covenant with me by sacrifice." — Psalm 50:5. 

During the period of Israel's national favor, and even before
 that time, a few men and women exercising faith above 
and beyond the Law Covenant, were blessed by the underlying
 Abrahamic Covenant, though the Law itself made nothing 
perfect. They were blessed not in the sense of being given life, 
but in the sense of having divine favor or appreciation of their 
efforts to practice righteousness under conditions which tended 
to discouragement. 

These ancient worthies the Apostle enumerates in Hebrews 
the eleventh chapter. They had the testimony that by their 
faith "they pleased God", although they did not by obedience 
to the Law Covenant secure the blessing which it proposed. 
These faithful ones will get through Christ what the Law 
Covenant could not give them ; for because of inherited weaknesses
 they were unable to do perfectly. Those noble heroes 
of faith will be rewarded for their past sacrifices by a "better 
resurrection". — Hebrews 11:35. 

That resurrection will be better, or advantageous, not 
only in point of timet — for they will evidently be brought forth 
from the tomb with perfect organism at the beginning of 
Messiah's reign, rather than gradually throughout that reign — 
but it will be advantageous also in that they may be made 
"princes in air the earth" (Psa3.ni 45:16) ; that is, they may be 
raised to positions of responsibility and prominence in dealing
 with the "residue of men" and, as earthly and visible 
representatives of the heavenly and invisible kingly class, 
may help the toiling but happy multitudes of mankind up the 
highway of holiness, then open. 

As there were some in past ages whose faith could reach 
out and sense God's benign intentions regarding earth's affairs
 and could struggle against the general tendency toward
 depravity and selfishness in the world, so since the first 
advent of our Lord there have been those who, with greater 
light on God's purposes and with greater reward as a spur, 
have been willing, yes even anxious, to forego the pleasures 
and emoluments of the present evil world for the prospect of 
a resurrection not merely to human perfection, but to "glory, 
honor and immortality" — "the divine nature". — Romans 2:7; 
1 Peter 1:4; 2 Peter 1:4. 

SACRIFICE NOT COMPULSORY 

No one is forced into this covenant of sacrifice. Our 
Master, the Head of the Christ, and the Exemplar in voluntary
 sacrifice, in opening the way for his church said on this 
point: "Tt any man will come after me, let him [1] deny himself
, [21 take up hi 3 cross, and [3] follow me." Those who 
have heard and appreciated the Lord's offer to become his 
disciples have had faith in God's existence and in his disposition
 to reward those who diligently seek him. They approach 
Jehovah through Jesus, therefore under the original Abrahamic
 promise. The spirit and devotional attitude of those 
who thus come to God through Christ is perhaps nowhere 
better expressed than in a little poem which some footstep 
follower of the Lamb has left behind, called "My Sacrifice". 

"Laid on thine altar, my Lord divine, 

Accept this gift today, for Jesus' sake. 
I have no jewels to adorn thy shrine, 

Nor any world-famed sacrifice to make; 
But here I bring, within my trembling hand, 

This will of mine — a thing that seemeth small ; 
And thou alone. Lord, canst understand 

How, when T yield thee this, I vield mine all. 


* 'Hidden therein thy searching gaze can see 

Struggles of passion, visions of delight, 
All that I have, or am, or fain would be — 

Deep loves, fond hopes, and longings infinite. 
It hath been wet with tears, and dimmed with sighs, 

Clenched in my grasp till beauty hath it none, 
Now, from thy footstool, where it vanquished lies, 

The prayer ascendeth — *May thy will be done!' 

"Take it, Father, ere my courage fail; 

And merge it so in thine own will that 1 
May never have a wish to take it back; 

When heart and courage fail, to thee I'd fly. 
vSo change, so purify, so like thine own 

Make thou my will, so graced with love divine, 
I may not know or feel it as mine own, 

But recognize my will as one with thine." 

Of course Jehovah can accept no sacrifices unless they are 
perfect; and those coming to God since Jesus' day are no more 
perfect than were the Jews. God might appreciate them and 
call them friends because of their heart harmony with him 
(as he did to father Abraham} but he could not accept them 
as sacrificers unless made perfect. What, then, can be done? 
The sacrificer can do nothing toward making himself perfect, 
for he is under the sentence of Adamic death. — Psalm 49:7. 

"ACCEPTED IN THE BELOVED" 

But while believers cannot make themselves acceptable, 
the very one who invited them to become his disciples can 
make their sacrifices "holy and acceptable unto God", (Romans 
12:1) Let us see how this works: 

Our Lord Jesus was born \mder the Law Covenant and 
kept its provisions faithfully. By so doing he fulfilled the 
prophecy concerning him which said: "He will magnify the 
law, and make it honorable", (Isaiah 42:21) Previous to our 
Lord's full compliance with every requirement of the Law 
it might have been claimed that God's standards were so 
rigorous that no one could possibly live up to them, that they 
were simply dream visions of holiness. But when Jesus not 
only loved God with all his heart, mind, soul, and strength, 
and his neighbor as himself, but also did more, in that he sacrificed
 himself, "the just for the unjust" he demonstrated 
the fact that God had not given an impossible law; but that 
the fault lay with mankind, who had lost the original perfection
 with which the Father had endowed them. 

The rights or prizes gained by our Lord Jesus through his 
perfect obedience to the law were earthly rights — human perfection
, an Eden home, fellowship with God, and the dominion 
of earth. (Psalm 8:6-8) But the succinct wording of the 
Abrahamic promise embraces what is elsewhere more clearly 
stated, viz., that the seed of the promise was not merely to get 
the blessing but that it was also to dispense the blessing to 
the nations of earth. 

Instead of keeping the earthly rights which his special 
birth and obedience to the Law made possible to him; and instead
 of using his powers and position as a perfect man to 
bring palliative blessings to mankind in the shape of instructions
 in health and morals, Jesus, in harmony with the 
Father's program, sacrificed these earthly rights at once aa 
soon as he reached manhood's estate at thirty years of age. 
At Jordan he engaged to give up his earthly rights, interests, 
and privileges as the perfect seed of Abraham, and symbolized 
his complete consecration into a sacrificial death by water 
immersion, 

HEW MATURE AS A REWARD 

The Father accepted his consecration and forthwith gave 
him the begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature. For the 
three and one half years of his earthly ministry our Lord 
persistently sacrificed his earthly life and every earthly interest
, finishing the sacrifice at Calvary when he cried, "It is 
finished!" On the third day thereafter the Father raised him 
from the dead to a new life, again on the spirit plane of being, 
but far above angels, principalities, and powers. — Heb. 5:5, 6. 

So, then, as the glorified One in hi3 resurrection, Messiah 
was a spirit being, "the express image of the Father's person," 
and, having ceased to experience his unforfeited human life 
at Calvary, he would henceforth have it to dispense, according
 to the Scriptures. Or, as he himself describes it, he had at 
the time of his resurrection the merit of his ransom sacrifice 
as an asset with which he could satisfy the claims of divine 
justice against any or all of Adam's race — he had the authority
 and technical ability to open the great prison house of 
death. — Revelation 1:18. 

Forty years after our Lord's resurrection he ascended on 
high and appeared in the presence of God to appropriate the 
merit of hi3 sacrifice on behalf of believers. (Hebrews 1:3; 


[6447] 


(183-184) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PlTTSBUBGH, Fa. 


9:24) Only when divine justice had accepted his righteousness
, vicariously applied to the then believers, could those believers
 be accepted as joint sacrifices with Christ Jesus their 
Lord ; and only then was it possible for them to be begotten of 
the same holy Spirit to a new nature, as the Apostle Peter explained
 on the day of Pentecost: "He hath shed forth this 
[manifestation of that] which ye now see and hear." — Acts 
2:33. 

Throughout the Gospel age the way has been open to that 
incorruptible inheritance; and those who have thus become 
Christ's are "Abraham's seed" and "heirs according to the 
promise". (Galatians 3:29) So, then, it is The Christ, the 
antitypical Isaac class, Jesus the Head and the church his 
body, which is the primary seed. This class, first drawn from 
the Jews and later from the Gentiles, is first blessed (as all 
peoples must be, according to the promise) {Galatians 3:8, 9) 
with life, reckoned or applied to them in response to their 
obedient faith, then, if faithful, they have another blessing in, 
helping to dispense those life privileges, which Jesus alone 
earned, to the needy world, the rest of mankind. (Acts 15: 
15-17) And inasmuch as "it is more blessed to give than to 
receive" it may be truthfully said that the blessing of this 
seed class, the church, is a far more exceeding one than those 
who merely receive. 

GRACE WITHOUT A MEDIATOR 

All men are sinners, children of wrath under divine sentence
 of death; but there are other very important respects 
in which all men are not alike. Some hate the chains or sin 
wherein they are held and long for freedom and for reconciliation
 to God ; while others love the sin and are estranged from 
God. God is not in their thoughts. Apparently this latter 
class is in the majority, for thfe Apostle John Bays: "We know 
that the whole world lieth in wickedness". — 1 John 5:19. 

Here we have the reason for the difference in God's dealings
 with the two classes. He takes note of those who are 
weary and heavy laden; and these, feeling after God if 
haply they might find him, he is pleased to "draw", during 
this Gospel age, through a knowledge of the truth, to Jesus 
that at his hand they may become justified and acceptable, if 
they will, as members of the body of Christ, and suffer with 
him now. Then they will reign with him bye and bye. The ungodly
 are not drawn or called in consecration with the high 
calling of the Gospel age, but are left to be dealt with by the 
Redeemer when he shall assume the office of Mediator between 
God and men — the world. 

But is it not Scripturally declared of believers that they 
were enemies of God through wicked works? (Golossians 1:21) 
Yes, but nowhere does it say that they were enemies of God 
through wicked hearts, at the time of their coming to Christ. 
And this constitutes the difference. God, who reads the heart, 
deals with them from- that standpoint and leads them to 
Christ (John 17:6), that the merit of his sacrifice may offset 
the demerits of their sin and their imperfect works. 

These are drawn of the Father, as Jesus declares: "No 
man can come unto me [now] except the Father which hath 
sent me draw him," and whoever cometh unto me, drawn by 
the Father, I will in no wise reject. (John 6:44, 37) Some 
of the Lord's followers were drawn to him, of the Father before
 he had completed the sacrifice for sin on Calvary, and 
others have been drawn throughout the Gospel age; "even as 
many as the Lord our God shall call." — Acts 2:39. 

If Abraham, who was but a friend of God, needed no mediator
 between himself and God, surely there is no need of such 
an official between those who occupy the tender and intimate 
relationship of father and son. (John 16:27; Hebrews 2:11; 
1 John 1:3) But the church does have the kindly offices of an 
Advocate to represent her affairs at the court of divine justice 
and to make good for her unwitting and unwilling trespasses. 
—1 John 2:1; Romans 8:34; Hebrews 7:25. 

SEED 07 ABRAHAM TWOFOLD 

In Romans 4:16 the Apostle shows that the original Abrahamic
 Covenant contains two parts. 

"Only of late have Bible students discerned that Abraham 
is to have two seeds, exclusive of the Ishmaelites of the law 
or Hagar covenant. 'Thy seed shall be as the stars of heaven, 
and as the sands of the seashore.' The stars of heaven 
picture to us a glorified Christ and his church, the spiritual 
seed of Abraham, changed from human nature to divine 
nature, from earthly conditions to heavenly conditions. These 
are the heirs of Galatians 3:29, and are referred to by Saint 
Paul again when he says, 'As star differeth from star in glory, 
so is the resurrection of the dead'. — 1 Corinthian 15:41, 42. 

"But God's glorious plan will only begin its accomplishment 
in the glorification of the church. All the families of the 
earth, like the sands of the seashore, will be privileged to 


come into relationship with God under Messiah's kingdom. 
All who will then knowingly and wilfully reject the divine 
arrangement will be cut off in the second death, but all who 
will then accept the terms of Messiah's kingdom and become 
obedient thereto will be gradually brought to perfection, and 
because of faith and obedience become identified with God 
and become the earthly or human seed of Abraham, blessed 
with human perfection and everlasting life in an earthly 
Eden."— Z' 13-p. 43. 

"During the Gospel age, Jehovah has been selecting the 
members of this spiritual seed, that they may lay down their 
human life and earthl interests in order to attain to the 
spirit nature. The selection of this seed has been the work 
of the Gospel age. Soon the seed will be all gathered; then 
the work of blessing the natural seed will begin, and through 
them the blessing will subsequently spread to all nations, as 
these will accept the divine favor." — Z' 13-p. 21. 

The natural seed will not be drawn by the Father, but the 
Lord Jesus will draw them to .imself. "1, if I be raised on 
high, from the earth, will draw all to myself." (John 12:32, 
Diaglott) Even after the Son draws them unto himself, he 
must as the Mediator keep them unto himself until he shall 
have instructed them, disciplined them, made their knees to 
how, and their tongues to confess, taught them the necessary 
lessons and brought them back to what was lost. Until 
this has been done the Father will have nothing to do with 
them, personally. Their acceptance by the Father will be at 
the close of the Millennial age, after the spiritual seed shall 
have completely "blessed" the natural seed, in fulfillment of 
the promise. 

THE NEW LAW COVENANT 

"Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make 
a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house 
of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made with 
their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to 
bring them out of the land of Egypt; which my covenant 
they brake, although I was an husband unto them, saith the 
Lord; hut this shall be the covenant that I will make with 
the house of Israel; after those days, saith the Lord, I will 
put my law in their inward parts and write it in their hearts; 
and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And 
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every 
man his brother saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all 
know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, 
saith the Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will 
remember their sins no more." — Jeremiah 31:31-34. See also 
Ezekiel 11:19; 36:26. 

The New Covenant is the arrangement employed for the 
carrying out of the Abrahamic promise to mankind in general
, estranged from him now not merely legally through 
the sentence of death, but also estranged in heart. The New 
Covenant is to be inaugurated with a view to effecting stupendous
 changes in human objects of affection, to painstaking 
establishment of the divine principles of wisdom, justice, love, 
and power in the human heart. 

The prophecy of Jeremiah above quoted, combined with the 
statement of Moses respecting the greater Mediator than 
himself (Deuteronomy 18:15-1&), helped the faith of all true 
Israelites to grasp more firmly the oathbound Abrahamic promise
 — "In thy seed shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed". 

"The Mediator of the New Covenant will be the Christ. For 
more than eighteen hundred years, our Lord has been offering 
the great antitypical sacrifices of himself and his church. 
As soon as he will have finished making application of the 
blood, he will have made satisfaction for the sins of the world. 
This act will correspond to the sprinkling of the book of 
Moses. Divine Justice having accepted this arrangement, 
the Mediator will antitypically sprinkle the people; that is, 
he will show them how to come back into full accord with 
God. 

"The New Covenant will begin to swallow up the old Law 
Covenant as soon as the Kingdom is established. The Scriptures
 indicate that the first to receive it will be the ancient 
wortnies. Raised from the dead to human perfection, they 
will form the nucleus of the new arrangement in the earth. 
Next in order will be those who have been known as Christiana
, but who have not been consecrated to death, and 
Jews who have been consecrated to the Law but who have 
been blinded. Gradually the light will come to all who love 
righteousness and hate iniquity. Sprinkled from all sympathy 
with evil, they will make their declaration of full loyalty to 
God. Tn due time this light will spread to all kindreds and 
tongues and nations. 


[6448] 


Juns 15, 1919 


THE WA TCH TOWER 


(184-183; 


CHANGE OF HEAET IN THE MILLENNIUM 

"The prophet Jeremiah speaking of the New Covenant 
(31:34) says, 'They shall know me", from the least of them 
unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord; for I will forgive 
their iniquity, and 1 will remember their sin no more'. The 
sins and iniquities of Israel will no longer be remembered 
against them. Christ will have appeared on their behalf and 
made satisfaction for their sins. They will then be as free 
from their original sin as the Gospel church are. The atonement
 of the Lord Jesus Christ is the sufficiency for all. — 1 
John 2:2. 

"The prophet Ezekiel tells us that during the next age the 
hearts of mankind will be changed. lie says, Thus saith the 
Lord God; , . . a new heart also will I give you, and a new 
spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony 
heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh'. 
(Ezekiel 36:22-27 ) This change of heart is entirely aside from 
the making of the New Covenant. It will take a thousand
 years to remove the stoniness out of the hearts of mankind
 and to make them stand without a Mediator. Those who 
receive everlasting life must attain this condition ; for all of 
God's creatures who will live forever must keep his law 
perfectly. 

"'During the Millennium God will not recognize the people, 
became of their imperfections, their weaknesses; but all of 
their dealings will he through the Mediator, until they shall 
have been brought up to perfection. At the end of the thousand
 years, they will he delivered up to the Father, unblamable 
before him. (1 Corinthians 15:24) God will then receive 
them as sons, heirs of the earthly blessings which he has provided
 for mankind — the things given to Adam, The very 
moment when the merit of Christ is applied for the world 
is the same moment when they will be turned over to the 
Mediator. Then they will be in covenant relationship with 
God, but only through the Mediator, until they shall have 
reached human perfection and shall enter into this relationship
 directly with the Father/' — Z' 13-p. 21. 

THE WANDERER'S RETURN 


\.w\f The mais Hon / 

the Broken 

Tie: J^-~ 

Thi Promise ^ x; *v^ 

^/ WORLD 

s \/ TO COM* 

The 6ohd 

\^^^ Tm LAW 

^ \^ The SetD ^s^ 

■^TMt NEW 
&ON0 


It is this reuniting of the broken bond of love and fellowship
 between Jehovah and his creature man, which constitutes 
the last work of the Mediator. Throughout the thousand years 
of his reign Messiah holds this new relationship in escrow. He 
sees that mankind is made able to fulfill the law and instructs 
the people in all the advantages of loving God with their every 
power of mind and body, and on the other hand, he represents 
the interests of mankind and sees that Jehovah gives them 
the everlasting life and the lost dominion which they long 
for and need. 

It is this last phase of the Mediator's work on behalf of 
mankind which is covertly referred to in the twenty-fifth 
chapter of Matthew in the words addressed to the then perfect 
members of the human race: "Come ye [now] blessed of my 
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world". (Matthew 25:34) What kingdom? 
it is asked. We answer: The kingdom of or dominion over 
the earth — such arrangement and direction of earth's affairs 
as will minister perfectly to the well-being and happiness of 
every human heart. 

This is the same dominion which Adam possessed in the 
beginning, "the first dominion" (Micah 4:8; Psalm 8:6), 
the same dominion which was lost through disobedience, the 
same dominion which was usurped by Satan, the same dominion
 which was proven to belong only to our Lord, the 
same dominion or kingdom in which he promises his faithful
 followers a share (Luke 12:32; Revelation 3:21), the some 
kingdom for whose advent they have long prayed, the same 
kingdom which will be exercised for a thousand years for the 
blessing and uplifting of mankind, the same kingdom which 
shall increase upon the throne of David (Isaiah 9:7) until 
Christ shall have put all enemies under his feet (1 Corinthians 
15:25; Psalm 110:1), the same kingdom which, when it shall 
have accomplished its temporary purpose of restoring man, 
shall be delivered up to God, even the Father (1 Corinthians 
15:24), and the same kingdom or dominion which shall be 
handed back to the then capable members of the fleshly seed 
of Abraham, like the sands upon the seashore for number. 


There will be a racial relationship between God and 
humanity during the reign of Messiah, but only through the 
Mediator. The individual relationship once enjoyed by Adam 
will not be entered into until the mediatorial government shall 
have ceased. The great Mediator is also Prophet, Priest and 
King. Having first freed them from the sentence of death by 
the application of his own blood to Adam's account, he instructs
 them in the ways of holiness; he gives to the zealous 
just enough love and rewards to spur them on to perfection; 
to the less zealous of mankind he gives just enough love and 
chastisements to encourage hesitating good intention; to the 
froward and incorrigible, after a hundred years trial, he gives 
merciful oblivion in eternal death {Isaiah 05:20) ; and to the 
finally loyal and obedient, a welcome hack to the bosom of the 
Father, where there is fullness of joy and where there are 
pleasures forevermore. — Jeremiah 4:2. 

THE COVENANTS IN TYPE AND PICTURE 

"Abraham had three wives; Sarah, his original spouse; 
then later, Hagar, Sarah's maid, whom she urged upon him 
as a supposed assistance to God in the carrying out of the 
covenant, after a long delay and waiting; and third, after 
Sarah's death. Abraham took Keturah to wife, and by her 
had many children, whereas by the primary wife and by the 
maid, but one each, The Apostle's language justifies us in 
considering this matter allegorically or typically. The holy 
Spirit, through Saint Paul, tells us that Sarah represented 
the essence of the original covenant and that Hagar represented
 the Law Covenant. He explains that the Jewish people 
were in bondage under the Law Covenant and therefore the 
antitype of Ishmael, Hagar's son, and that these were cast out 
from divine favor, even as Hagar and her son were cast off 
from Abraham's family by divine instruction, and to make 
the type complete. The Apostle introduced this lesson to 
show us that the Covenant of Grace, under which the Gospel 
church is developed, has nothing whatever to do with the 
covenant of the Law; that the two were separate and distinct
. 

"Hagar's child might indeed appear to be the child of 
Sarah for a time, but it was not; even as Sarah's child, Isaac, 
was in no sense Hagar's son. The Apostle's argument is, 
'So, then, brethren, we, as Isaac was, are the children of the 
promise' — the original covenant, and not children of the Law 
Covenant. Similarly, we fancy, the Apostle, if writing today 
to those who claim to be under the New Covenant, represented 
in the type of Keturah, would tell them plainly, 'You cannot 
be children of two covenants, children of two mothers'. If 
you are, children of the Keturan Covenant in any sense or 
degree, you cannot be the children of the Sarah Covenant; 
and if you are children of the Sarah Covenant, then in no 
sense or degree can you be the children of the Keturah Covenant
 or New Covenant — which is not yet in existence." — Z' 09- 
p. 105. 

As Sarah was long barren, until after Hagar's son was 
born and became persecutor, so the Abrahamic Covenant, 
which waa to produce the Messiah, was long barren. But 
that Sarah covenant has meantime produced the Lord Jesus 
and the various members of his body who have already passed 
into glory. 'The seed of Abraham, 1 ' "the seed of the promise," 
will be fully born shortly now, when the last member of the 
elect church, which is the body of Messiah, shall have stood 
the test and been received beyond the vail, completing the 
first resurrection, of "Christ, the first-fruits". 

But the allegory continues: "And Sarah died;" and Abraham
 took another wife, Keturah (Genesis 25:1), who well 
pictures another covenant, the New Covenant. Abraham had 
many children by Keturah. even as the New Covenant will 
bear many children to God during the Millennium, but not one 
of them as a direct heir. As it is written: " Abraham gave all 
that he had unto Isaac". (G-enesis 25:5) The children of 
Keturah, therefore, received their ble&sing thnbugh Isaa-c 
and well represent the restitution class of the Millennium who 
will be blessed by the antitypical Isaac, namely, the Christ. 

Two matters should be* borne in mind, first, Keturah did 
not become his wife, or covenant, until after Isaac married, 
nnd this typifies the union between Christ and the church in 
the end of this age; second} Abraham did not marry Keturah 
until Sarah was dead. In other words, this New Covenant 
does not become the wife, or covenant, until after the original 
covenant represented by Sarah, shall have brought forth the 
seed, the Messiah, through which the subjects of the New 
Covenant are to receive their blessing. 

EPHOD AND SHEEPFOLD 

The ephod worn by the high priests of Israel when performing
 certain functions of office was evidently intended to picture
 God's covenants. 

"The 'Ephod* was made of cloth of purple, blue, scarlet, 


[6449] 


(185-189) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh Pa. 


white and gold threads, skilfully and beautifully interwoven. 
It was of two parts, one hanging in front and the other over 
the back. These two parts were fastened together by two 
gold clasps which rested on the shoulders. The ephod typiiied
 the two great covenants — the Abrahamic Covenant represented
 by the front part and the New Covenant represented 
by the back, both of which are thus shown to be dependent 
on our high priest. Both of these covenants are laid on him: 
if he fails to support them, fails to carry out their terms and 
conditions, they fall to the ground — fail. But, thank God, 
these covenants are united and firmly clasped on him by the 
gold clasp (divine power), as well as bound to him by the 
'curious girdle* — a cord made of the same material as the 
ephod."— T. 30. 

" 'The Breastplate of Judgment' — was placed on the front 
of the ephod. It was suspended by a gold chain from the 
clasps on the shoulder, and was fastened to the ephod by 
the lacer, through golden rings — this fastening being so concealed
 underneath that to the casual observer it might* appear 
to be a part of the ephod. (Exodus 28:26-28) This breastplate
 beautifully represented the Law: it was not a part of 
the Abrahamic* Covenant (ephod) but 'it was added' to it. 
(G-alatians 3:19) As the Israelite regarded them (not seeing 
the hidden connection), the covenant to Abraham, and 'the 
Ixiw, which was four hundred and thirty years after/ were all 
one."— T. 34, 

It is interesting to note that the part representing the 
Abrahamic and Law Covenants were both in front of the 
hi^h priest's body, as those covenants both antedated the 
"high priest after the order of Melchizedec". The head of the 
priest was plainly visible then, as Jesus, the Head, stands out 
prominently in earth's history. The body was practically covered
 from view, as the church, the "mystery" class, has been 
obscured to the eye of the casual observer. After both head 
and body of the high priest came the hinder part of the ephod, 
representing the "New Covenant— not to be established until
 all the body of Christ is complete. 

In the first five verses of the tenth chapter of the Gospel
 of John our Lord evidently refers to the Law Covenant 
under the figure of a sheepfold. The sheepfold is an arrangement
 instituted for the protection and welfare of the sheep, 
but they are in difficulty if they have no shepherd. So the 
Law itself was "holy, and the commandment holy, and just, 
and good". (Romans 7:12) But the trouble was with the imperfections
 of the sheep, which hindered them from enjoying 
the privileges of the fold, and with their shepherd, Moses, who 
himself was imperfect and could not give them life. After 
eighteen centuries our Lord came and found them "as sheep 
not having a shepherd". (Mark 6:34) He met all tl^e requirements
 of the Law and thus showed that he was the 
rightful shepherd of the sheep ; the warder, or divine justice, 
did not bar him from calling out such of the Jews as were 
true sheep at heart. He called these out and with them as a 
nucleus founded "this fold" of the Gospel age to which he is 
also the door, or only means of access. When this fold is 
complete he will deal with the "other sheep . . . which are 
not of this fold" — He will open up another fold for the residue
 of men, who will be obedient under the favorable circumstances
 of the Millennial age. The grand result will be that 
"there shall be one flock, and one shepherd", though many 
folds or final arrangements for the housing of God's perfect 
creatures on many planes of being. See John 10:10 Diaglott
. 

SUMMARY 

Summing up, then, we find that covenants produce seed and 
are typified by women. 

In the Law Covenant, (which was bilateral — two sided, 
and required the office of a mediator), Abraham represented 
Jehovah, while Hagar pictured the covenant which produced 
the natural seed of Israel, under bondage to that Law. 

In the Abrahamie-Sarah covenant, (which was unilateral 
— one sided, and required no mediator), Abraham typed Jehovah
, the Father, while Sarah typified the covenant, or mother, 
that produced "the seed of promise". Sarah had but one son, 
Isaac, who was a type of the Christ. (Galatians 4:22-28) The 
Christ, "the seed of promise," is Jesus and his church {Galatians
 3:16, 27-29), Jesus the Head, the church his body. The 
usual manner of birth of natural children is the head first 
This illustrates the birth of "the seed of promise". Christ 
Jesus, the Head, was born at his resurrection to the divine 
nature, and he is the head of the body, the "first born". (Colossians
 1:18) No child can have two mothers, but the head 
and body must be born from the same mother. It follows, 
then, that the church, the body of Christ, must be produced 
by the Abrahamic-Sarah covenant; hence the body members 
of the church could not possibly be under the New Covenant
. 

In the New Covenant, (which is bilateral and requires 
the office of a mediator), the mother is pictured by Keturah, 
who had many children, all of whom were born after the death 
of Sarah and after the marriage of Isaac and Rebecca. The 
New Covenant produces an earthly seed, to wit: all who will 
be restored to perfect human conditions during the reign of 
Messiah. None of the "seed of promise" could possibly be 
under the New Covenant, for the further reason that the New 
Covenant produces a seed, all of whom receive blessings under 
and through the ministrations of the "seed of promise", that 
is the Christ. 


THE CHURCH: ITS LIFE AND WORK 

July 6. — Acts 2:37-47; 1 Thessaxonians 5:11-15. 
[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "The Early Ohurah," published in the issue of January 1, 1902, which please see, J 


PHILIP AND THE ETHIOPIAN 

July 13,— ^Matthew 28:18-20; Acts 8:26-40. 

[This article was a reprint of that entitled, "God's Providences Cooperate/ 3 published in the i^suc of March 1, 1902.1 


CONVENTIONS AND MORE CONVENTIONS 


Those who had the privilege of attending one or both 
of the recent conventions held at Brooklyn and Boston have 
given hearty oppressions concerning the enjoying and profit 
derived therefrom. The maximum attendance at Brooklyn 
was probably in the neighborhood of eighteen hundred and 
that at Boston about thirteen hundred. The spirit shown by 
the dear friends in attendance at both places was certainly 
commendable. All showed a willingness and earnestness to 
take up whatever phases of the Lord's work yet remain to be 
done, just as soon as his providences point out the way. 

Brother Rutherford will be present at all of the General 
Conventions below announced, as also at Vancouver. Other 
speakers of ability, as well, will be in attendance and will 
doubtless minister to the refreshment and edification of all 
the hungry. 

GENERAL CONVENTIONS 

Seattlf, Waste., July 3 fi. This gathering of the friends 
will be very opportune, as it will include the great national 
holiday. Xo doubt there will be a large attendance from the 


Sound classes. Address communications to E. G. Wylam, 
1414 Seventh Ave. 

Spokane, Wash., July 8-10. A mid-week convention has 
been arranged for at Spokane in order that the speakers 
assigned to the other gatherings could be present. This fact 
should not hinder a large attendance. Address comnTunications
 to Isaac Hagen, E. 2623 Seventh Ave. 

Portland, Ore., July 11-12. The friends at Portland have 
arranged for a three day convention on the above dates. Address
 all communications to C. W T . Field, 841 Ilalsey St. 

Denver, Colo., July 17-20. The delightful city of Denver 
has been selected for four days convention on the above dates. 
Address all communications to F. M. Robinson, Room 450 
Railway Exchange Bldg. 

REDUCED RATES FOR NORTHWESTERN CONVENTIONS 

We have made application to the Regional Director of 
Railroads for special rates to the Seattle, Spokane, Portland, 
an<l Denver conventions. When buying your ticket to the 
convention pay full fare for a one-way ticket. Ask your 


[6450] 


June 1\ 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


U90-19O 


agent for a certificate to the International Bible Students' 
Convention. If two hundred fifty delegates attend each convention
 they will be able to secure a very low rate for the 
trip home from the convention. 

LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

TSbie, Pa., July 3-0. The friends at Erie are arranging for 
a four day convention. They have secured a good auditorium 
and several pilgrims will be present, including one of the 
released brethren. For further particulars address Dr. E. C. 
Bruce, 026 K. 6th St. 

Rochester, N. Y., Julv 4-6. All sessions of this convention 
will be held in the R. B."l. Hall, 172 Clinton Avenue, South. 
For further information address Robert Dormer, Room 3^2 
Central Bldg. 

Philadelphia, Fa., July 4-0. Several Pilgrim brethren 
will serve at this local convention. Communications should be 
addressed to George G. Calhoun, 0019 Xorth Tenth St. 

Kalamazoo, IMich., duly 4-0. The Kalamazoo fnemU h.ue 
made arrangements for a three day convention on the above 
elates. Several Pilgrims and one of the released brethren 


will speak. Address all communications to Adrian Ridderhof, 
555 Second St. 

St. Louis, Mo., July 4-0. The friends in the vicinity of 
fit. Ixjuis will be glad to know that there will be a local 
convention in that city on the above dates. There will he 
good speakers on the program, including one of the released 
brethren. Address all communications to J. H. Iloeveler, 
5630 Pershing Ave. 

Los Angeles, Calif., July 4-6. The friends at Los Angelas 
have arranged for a local convention on the above dates. Several
 Pilgrims will serve in connection with the spiritual bill 
of fare. Address communications to F. V. Sherman, 2ll 3 '» 
North Sichel St. 

Chicago, III., July 4-6. The Lithuanian friends will hold 
a three-day convention with sessions at Archer Hall, 29S8 
Archer Ave., cor, McDermott Avenue, For further information
 wTite .J. R. Muzikant, 2957 Lyman. St., Chicago, 111. 
Phone Boulevard 5020. 

Louisville, Ky., June 28-29; Lapsing, Mich., June 28-29; 
and Albany, N. Y., July 5-6. 


LETTERS FROM AFIELD 


LOBE'S BLESSING ON COLPORTEUR WORK 
Dear Brethren: 

Greetings in the name of our dear Redeemer. We have 
been having such good success here at Norfolk, Va., that we 
thought of writing to- let you know of it. Since resuming 
the work which we were compelled to leave temporarily last 
summer, we have actually taken orders for and delivered 
over 1800 volumes in 8 weeks time. This makes an average 
of over 100 books a week for both Sister Zea and me. The 
first four weeks we sold single volumes, either the first or 
fourth, but the last four we sold sets of three. We have 
found nfany, many homes where the books are and many who 
love their contents, as was evidenced by the used condition of 
the volumes. The Father only knows how wonderful a witness 
has been given, in addition to gathering, the wheat. 

I have found it quite effective in gaining the people's attention
 when first approaching them to say I have been sent 
there. Many times this expression gains their attention 
whereas simply to produce the book and then te!l them about 
it would only result in "I have no time" or some other expression
 like it. After telling them I have been s"ent to see 
them, I usually proceed like this: "I am sure you are reading 
the newspapers daily and arc doubtless perplexed as you see 
the terrible condition the world is drifting into and as to 
the meaning of the trouble spreading over every land. It 
seems like present civilization is going into chaos, doesn't it? 
Would you care to know the meaning of this trouble and how 
it is to be settled?" Invariably this question brings an earnest 
"Yes , I would." Having gotten the person to this point which 
indicates interest I then take the book out and begin. I 
'find it very good to refer to the Lord's Prayer, — "Thy kingdom
 come, thv will be done." Also I give a brief synopsis 
of the Plan. 

Surely the dear friends who are unencumbered are missing 
wonderful blessings by not being in the Colporteur work. It 
is amazing how strong the Lord makes us as we daily go forth 
in his strength only to tell the poor groaning creation of the 
wonderful things the dear Lord has in store Jo* them. 

We were so richly blessed at the Brooklyn Convention we 
surely can go forth with renewed determination for we know 
that our deliverance draweth nigh. 

Yours with much love, in which Sister Zea joins me, 

James G. Zea. — Va. 

P. S. — We are surely pleased with the books. Even the 
people remark about how nice they look and how well they 
are bound. 

THE DANGER IS IK PRIDE 

Dear Brethren: 

My heart has been made full of joy and love aiui praise 
through the precious things in the columns of the Watch 
Tower very often, and there was no exception to this in the 
June 1st issue. The first article was so grand and the spirit 
of it par excellent. 

I am living in hope that many or all of the Standfast Bible 
Students, as they call themselves, will see their mistake and 
be humble enough to return to co-operation with the Society. 
If they had not been so hasty in splitting off from the Society 
I believe they would have seen the trick of the adversary in 

[64 


such a thought quite quickly. I am reminded of Proverbs 
19:2: "He that hasteth with his steps, sinneth". I am more 
and more convinced that it is pride that leads off into factions. 
Pride, says the Standard Dictionary, is an unreasonable selfesteem
, or conceit, of our own superiority. And a careful study 
of the subject from the Bible convinces me this definition is 
correct* How easy it is to become conceited with reference 
to our own spirituality and the correctness of our judgment 
regarding spiritual matters. While I did not think it proper 
to subscribe to help carry on the war in any way, why should 
I think that everyone who thinks it would be all right is my 
inferior spiritually? Maybe if I were as matured as some of 
the Lord's people I would see the matter differently. So the 
sane thing, for me to do, it seems to me, is to walk in the light 
as I see it; give reasons for what I believe to those who desire
 them; keep my own mind open for further light; and keep 
in mind the possibility that I might be wrong and others right. 

Lots of friends would be profited by making a study of 
the meaning of pride both from the dictionary, the Bible, and 
experience. I feel quite sure that many would find themselves 
badly afflicted, who think they are almost ripe for the kingdom
, who think they are of the Elijah class and others of 
the Elisha class. 

You have my love, sympathy, prayers and ,appreciation. 

Daniel Toole. — Pilgrim. 
FREED FROfil A DELUSION 
Dear Brethren in the Anointed: 

I am writing to you in view of the fact that I have been 
associated with the "Standfast Bible Students" for the past 
six months and just jecently severed my connection with them. 
Let me say that the course which I honestly and conscientiously
 pursued for six months I now by the Lord's grace am 
able to see is the most subtle delusion God has yet permitted 
to come upon his saints. 

Our beloved Pastor, in commenting on 2 Thessalonians 
2:11. says regarding those coming under these "delusions": 
•'They claim to be conscientious, and so they are". Brethren, 
I feel sure the great majority of these brethren are honest 
and conscientious; nevertheless they are under a great delusion, 
which is daily leading them into greater darkness respecting 
our Pastor's teaching on the "sealing of the saints", the "shut 
door" of our Lord's parable, "the great company class", and the 
"image of the beast". 

But the devil overstepped himself in my own individual 
case and others when recently there were passed resolutions 
at different classes, among them one to this effect: "We believe
 the need for public work is ended in view of the fact 
that the door is shut, the harvest ended, and the saints sealed", 
etc. Since uniting again with the I. B. S. A. the Lord has 
shown me the great darkness I was in. 

Inasmuch as I was one of the most energetic in proclaiming 
in both a private and public way in the Northwest what I 
considered to be the truth (although as Saul of Tarsus I did 
it in good conscience) I am now anxious to do all in my power 
to recover if possible some of the Lord's little ones. 

The "Standfast Bible Students" claim to be standing by 
Bro. Russell's last words on chronology in the Sept. 1st, 1916, 
Toweb, wherein he stated Passover, 1918, would end the 

51] 


(191-178) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pmsfitrftcitt, Pa. 


harvest, and the fact that when pressure was brought to bear 
against the brethren in charge at headquarters at this very 
Bame time and they compromised (?) to keep the work going 
is evidence to their minds that the Watch Toweb ceased 
to be the Lord's Channel, as the Lord and the apostles never 
did anything under pressure that they wouldn't have done 
otherwise. If an article could appear in the Toweb to the ef' 
feet that the action of the Brethren in charge at the Brooklyn 
Tabernacle regarding Bonds last Spring was not done through 
fear, or a violation of individual conscience, it would be the 
means of opening the eyes of many to the fact that the Lord 
is still using the I. B. S. A. to further his kingdom work. I 
am resting in perfect peace knowing that "the Lord knoweth 
them that are his" and that the honest hearted ones will all 


eventually see eye to eye t>n the fundamentals, and I trust this 
letter will be taken in the same spirit with which it is written. 

Praying the Lord's blessing upon your efforts to serve him, 
I remain your brother and fellow-servant in the ministry of 
reconciliation. 

P. S. Blodgett. — Wash. 

[The above letter was written before the June 1st issue had 
been received. The difficulties of the Standfast Bible Students 
were there discussed in the first article, "Who Shall Gain the 
Victory ?" We have already received indications that that 
article was timely; we also commend a prayerful re-reading 
of Brother RusselPs advice on Red Cross Contributing as 
given in V 15-p. 351. Ed's.] 


ORDER REPRINT WATCH TOWERS NOW 

The reprinting of the last forty years of Watch Towers Style A: Green cloth, Morocco tips, gilt top, stamped in gold: 

in book form is now well under way. Those who have indi- sfn™?i e vot5meg ( . 7 eMh U, ! l f!? :::'.::::::::: '^t'.io 

cated their intention of ordering, as also any others who have Style B: Green cloth, plain edges, backs stamped in Oriental 

not so indicated^ may now order, with cash remittance. The & 0,d: , * ' ,„ , v *,„ ™ 

amount of composition and printing involved is very great s££?<! v^^ 

and to avoid diverting our usual funds from our regular work WHOLESALE PRICES: ' For the convenience of class secretaries, 
until the reprints should be complete we request that orders or others, who can send orders for fifty volumes (or seven combe
 sent at once. plete sets), or more, the following prices will apply, carriage 

charges collect: 

It is expected that the first three volumes will be shipped Style A: Complete set (7 volumes) $18. oo 

in about two months, the next three about the middle of Sl ^TolZ^l\Ta Voiumei) \ \ \ \ \ \ \ \ '. ilioo 

October, possibly sooner, and the seventh and last some time Single volumes, each l 75 

later, since this volume is intended to contain a careful and These ices bri ^ f t g f Towms inc i u ding 

exhaustive Scripture citation and topical index for the com- binding> £ ab(mt on |. third the y J riginal 8ufcac ription price 

plete set. Your good intentions which you may have already expressed 

Two styles of binding are in preparation: Style A being mer ely enabled us to determine whether the reprints should 

green cloth with Morocco tips, gilt top, stamped in gold; be made; these were in no instance looked upon as orders unStyle
 B, bound in green cloth, plain edges, backs stamped in ] ess ca^ accompanied the request. Order now. 

"Oriental" gold. It is by no means certain that another edition will ever be 

•DTPrriATT T,Tfl W o. ^ • v „ M- .,. v- «- x * » made of these reprinted old issues, so that all thosa who conRETAIL
 PRICES: Carnage charges prepaid by as to any part of, ,, j • r i. n ujii-l j j. 

the world template ordering at all would do well to order at once. 


IN RE PUBLICATIONS 


Many of our readers are asking "Does the Society authorize 
and approve the printing and publication of an exposition of 
the minor prophets by a brother at Gosport, England?" and 
"Are Convention report* published under the direction and 
approval of the Society?" 

We answer that the Society has nothing whatsoever to do 
with the preparation, printing, or publication of the exposition 
of the minor prophets published at Gosport, England,- The 
attitude of the Society toward such publications is now what 
it has always been, namely that it is not the province of the 
(Society to say what others shall or shall not publish. We 
recognize that each one has the liberty to publish whatsoever 
he pleases. Whether the Society approves it is entirely a 
different matter. The one publishing takes the responsibility. 
Whatever the Society deems to be meat in due season" onA 


and 


profitable for the church it will publish, if at all, in The 
Watch Tower or other publications issued by the Society. 

We might say in this connection that a corps of competent 
brethren under the direction of the Society is studying the 
prophecies and if it seems to be the Lord's will to publish 
an explanation of them, announcement will be made in due 
time in the columns of The Watch Tower. 

Aa to the convention reports, the Society has never regarded
 these reports as necessary for the church, hence has 
never published them. Neither has it delegated to any other 
the publication of such reports, and has no intention of doing 
bo. If others wish to publish these reports, that is their business
, but it will be always understood that the publication is 
not by the direction nor under the supervision of the Society. 


ECCE HOMO! 


[In loving remembrance of Pastor Russell and his Ministry.] 


"Loved and hated! Revered and reviled! 
Spurned and courted! Flattered, defiled! 
With never a falter and never a frown 
Ue kept to his moorings, and laid his life down 
In the place where God put him. What more can be said 
For soldier or hero? For living or dead? 
He wept with the anguished ; he smiled with the glad ; 
He lifted the fallen ; he heartened the sad ; 
He pitied the sinner, inspired the saint; 
He strengtuened the feeble, recovered the faint. 
God gave him a Message — he gave it to men ; 
He patiently told it again and again. 

"When men's eyes were blinded and ears could not hear, 
And men's souls were stunted by folly or fear, 
When minds were beclouded by dullness or doubt 
"He maneuvered the Message and turned it about 
Till 'the wayfaring man, though a fool/ could behold 
And hear the glad Gospel he patiently told. 


And yet will like rabble as stood by the Cros?. 

Not knowing their folly, not sensing their loss, 

Flouting and scouting and wagging their head, 

Stand by in contempt while we weep o'er our dead, 

Dishonoring the prophet of this, their own time. 

And crowning him saint when the World sees their crime. 

"Behold now the Man? — Or wait world-old way 
To pay him the tribute we owe him today? 
Stand reverently now, with uncovered head, 
And look on 'that Servant' and honor the dead ! 
A man has gone from us, leaving none in his place, 
Yet this Message of Truth men can never efface. 
He'd the mind of a master, the heart of a child, 
The courage of Caesar, a soul undefined. 
He'd the love of a father, a shepherd's kind care, 
The faults of a human and sympathy rare. 
He lifted a standard and held it up high. 
He lived— ready to live and ready to die!" 


[End of Fortieth Year] 

[6453] 


^J 


■^1 




9± I * 






-^ ROCK'OF AGES ;^y 
Other founclatioh can''^ 

■■; no man lay-^^ 
A RANS0M;T0fc ALra, 


'<*: 


'^..•v 


C^'.^'f?? 




^Homing G^^ 5 »da : J3igll^al5o!T«a.su':^ 

VOL. XL JULY 1 No, ** 

SEMI-MONTHLY 
A. D. 1919 — A.M. 6047 

CONTENTS 

Test of Sonship 195 

How We Become Sons of God « 105 

Proofs of Sonship 196 

Zeal for the Lord 197 

Love for the Brethren 107 

Not Swift to Take Offense 198 

Loyalty igo 

Why Stand Ye Idle? 200 

Be Not Discouraged 201 

The Lord's Supper 202 

New Wine in the Kingdom 203 

Christian Fellowship 204 

Fellowship in Christ's Suffering 204 

Fellowship not Artificial 204 

Christian Worship 20b 

Another Instance of Tactfulness 206 

W'hen Messiah Cometh 207 

"/ u-t// stand up en my 7/ at< h. and ret// .</'/ mv /vol upvn the 
Toner, and wilt zt>af(fi to ire it hat He "till las unto me, and 
?{ hat am zt er 1 :>hail make to tin ?n :hat oppose me. ' '—Hub. ? /. 



z&m 


--^r^v^^s 



WT.B.JT.S. _ 1 — 


TTpon the earth digress of nations with perplexity: the sea and the waves the restless, discontented) roaring; men « ^ 'f .;^ h ^ r & S ?«S w JK 
to the things coming upon me earth (society); Tor the powers of the heavjns (ecclesiamicism) shall be ahaKMi.. . : ^ b * n > e h f^ IMS. vfJS W"o"i3S?2?^3I 
then jtnowthat the Ktmtlom 0/ God m at hand. Loon up, Wt up your heads, reioice, for your redemption draweth nigh.— Matthew 24. id, MarR 13,29, Ltu* 21. to- ti 


THI® JOURNAL AMP IT« C ACREP MISSION 

THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible I astro ction, or "Seminary ^J^ *" M * ***£ 
presented In all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towbb Bible & Tbact Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For tne Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word; 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and of 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published STUDIES, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons Is specially for tHe Older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute! for 
all.'* (1 Pet 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building ud on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has been 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other A&ree 
was not made known unto the sons of men as It is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance Into fullest 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident ; for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in Its columns must be according to our Judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
nfge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :16, 17 ; Eph. 2 :20-22 ; Gen. 
28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which Hghteth every man that cometh into the toorld," "in due time." — 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is/* be "partaker of the Divine nature/' and share His 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3 :2 ; John 17 :24 ; Rom. 8 :17 ; 2 Pet. 1 :4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop In herself every grace; 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age.— Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev, 1 :6 ; 20 :6s. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and His glorified 
Church— when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed.-— Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa, 85. 


PUBLISH HO BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Towet Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee
, at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and 
•very article appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial 
Committee are: J. F. Rutherford, W. E. Van Am burgh, F. H. Ro bison, 
Gbo. H. Fisher, W. E. Page. 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 IN ADVANCE. 

BEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 


prices: Retail Prices: Manna, 75c each, postpaid; Hell Booklet
, 30c each, postpaid: Wholesale Prices: Manna (lots of 
10 or more to one address), 60c each, postpaid; Hell Booklets
 (lots of 25 or more to One address), 15c each, postpaid. 


Termi to the Lerd'i Poor at follows— All Bible Students who, by reason of 
old age or other infirmity or adversity are unable to pay for this journal, 
will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card each May stating their case 
and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that 
all such be on our list continua lly and in touch with the Studies, etc. 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS — Please remember 
that as a rule we no longer Bend a c»rr) of acknowledgment for a renewal
 or for a new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal axe 
indicated within a month by change in date oi expiration of the subscription
 on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please give old address as 
well as new. This is very important, saTing us much time and annecessary
 correspondence. 

RNTKRBD AS SKCOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA., POSTOFFICK 

UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3RD, 1878. 

REGARDING PETITION WORK 

We are securing many inquiries respecting the petition 
work. It does not now seem expedient to continue this work. 
The case against our brethren has been reversed by the higher 
court. The petition has never been presented; but the evidence
 is overwhelming that the Lord desired this work to be 
done, not so much to get the brethren out of prison, as for 
the purpose of a witness to the truth. It has enabled the dear 
friends to reach all classes of people with the message; in 
fact, classes that could not have been otherwise reached. We 
express the gratitude of the Editorial Committee, and of the 
other dear brethren involved, for the zealous and noble work 
of the friends in this behalf, and join with all of you in giving 
thanks to our heavenly Father and to the Master for this 
additional opportunity of testifying to the goodness and greatness
 of his arrangements. 


CZECHO- SLOVAK CONVENTION 

The Czecho-Slovak friends are planning a convention to be 
held in Cleveland, Jaly 19, 20, and a good attendance is expected
 from Ohio and surrounding states. Testimonies will 
be read from friends who are unable to attend in person. 
Communications should be addressed to Martin Sunal, 3477 
W. 69th Street, Cleveland, Ohio. 


MANNA AND HELL BOOKLET IN SLOVAK 

The "Heavenly Manna" and the booklet "What Say the 
Scriptures about Hell?" have been translated into the Czechoslovak
 language and are now procurable at the following 


NEW TEMPLE CHARTS 

Quite a number of delays have been encountered in getting 
out the new edition of the wall chart of Ezektel's Sanctuary, 
but present appearances warrant us in the expectation that we 
will be able to fill all back orders in about six weeks from 
the date of this issue. The new chart is slightly larger than 
the former one, being 36x38 inches. The price is $2.00, postpaid
. 

RE NIGHT LETTERS 

Friends sending us telegraphic "night letters" frequently 
append their address after their signature. This practice involves
 an extra charge to the sender, even though the body 
of the message contains less than the fifty words allowed on 
the minimum charge. Frequently the address can just as 
well be included in the body of the message, at no extra 
expense. 

"REVELATION"— SINAITIC READING 

We have in stock a vest pocket edition of the Book of 
Revelation, according to the Sinaitic Manuscript. This little 
volume is in convenient form, and meets quite fully the requirements
 of all who desire to know the meaning of this 
wonderful portion of the divine Word. N<5t only is the 
accurate rendering of the ancient Sinaitic Manuscript given, 
with headings and subheadings in bold- face type for convenient
 location of passages, but explanatory notes and comments
 are included, with many illustrations. The book contains
 200 pages, same size as the Vest Pocket Manna. Full 
black leather, gold edges 70c postpaid. In lots of 50 or more, 
50c. Charges collect. 



AND HEPALD OF CHRISTS PRESENCE 


Vol. xl 


July 1, 1919 

TEST OF SONSHIP 


No. 13 



"Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear 
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is." — i John 3 .2. 

generic term applicable to the Bible students throughout
 the world who have come out from Catholic and 
Protestant denominations and from the world and 
whose eyes have been opened to the philosophy of the 
great ransom sacrifice and the other great truths now 
revealed in harmony with the philosophy of the atonement
. No membership roll has been kept and therefore
 it would seem very inappropriate for anyone to 
attempt to withdraw, using a formal withdrawal letter 
such as above mentioned. We call attention to this 
merely to show how confusion has taken hold on 
some. Nothing herein is said in the spirit of judging 
or criticism, but with a view, if possible, to aiding 
some of the Lord's dear sheep who have been confused 
to examine themselves, that they may have comfort of 
heart and peace of mind and that those who have his 
spirit may dwell together in unity and love. 

It is observed that the Apostle Paul in the text 
above quoted does not say that we are to examine our 
brother, but the admonition is that each one apply the 
test to himself, that he may discover* whether or not 
he is a true believer. "Put your own selves under examination
." St. John the Revelator spoke for the entire
 church when he said: "There was given unto me 
a reed like unto a rod and the angel stood saying: 
Arise and measure the temple of God and the altar 
and them that worship therein". The measuring rod 
or reed here is the Word of God. (Jeremiah 1 :ii,i2) 
The thought is that each Christian may apply to himself
 the divine measuring rod and determine whether 
or not he is a son of God, and if so whether or not he 
is following the right course that will lead him into the 
great haven of eternal rest and endless joy. 

HOW WE BECOME SONS OF GOD 

The greatest privilege of any creature is to occupy 
the relationship of a son toward the great heavenly 
Father. Adam in Eden was a son of God, perfect in 
organism, mind and will. His sin caused him to lose 
this sonship and through that wrongful act all of his 
offspring were alienated from God. "All were born 
sinners." There are other sons of God on the angelic 
plane. The ones mentioned in our text, however, are 
a new order of being — the new creation, of which 
Jesus Christ is the head. Hebrews 3 :6. 

The Scriptures outline the procedure by which 
Jehovah selects this predestined or foreknown class to 
be his sons on the divine plane. The basis for this 
great work is the sacrifice of his beloved son whereby 
the redemptive price was provided and presented in 
heaven to make good the defects of all who would 
come to God through the Beloved One. None thus 
come to Jesus except they are drawn by Jehovah and 
the Scriptures indicate that it is only the honest of 
heart, feeling after God if haply they might find him, 
who are thus drawn. These are shown through some 


HEN a mariner is in a storm at sea and 
1 there arises in his mind doubt as to 
whether or not he is on the right course, 
he applies all the rules governing mariners 
to discover his true situation. When the 
people of God are passing through stormy 
seasons, doubt may arise in the minds of 
some as to whether or not they are on the 
right course. In fact some might doubt 
whether or not they are really still in the race running
 for the prize to which they were called. Under 
such conditions it is always proper to examine the 
fixed rules governing the new creation that all doubt 
may be removed. "Test yourselves to discover 
whether you are true believers; put your own selves 
under examination. Or do you not know that Jesus 
Christ is in you, [unless] you are [in] sincere." — 2 
Corinthians 13:5, Weymouth. 

During the year just passed the storms of persecution
 have afflicted the people of the Lord and amid the 
storms there have been fiery trials for individuals and 
for the church collectively. As a result, some have 
become offended and have turned away, drawing followers
 after them and organizing themselves under 
various names. We are advised that there are probably
 a dozen or more different groups of Bible students
 acting under different names, and we sometimes 
find that some of these do not always express themselves
 in the sweetest terms concerning or toward 
others who claim to be following in the narrow way. 
Leaders of these various organizations have convinced 
themselves and influenced others to believe that the 
Lord has cast away the Society and those who are directly
 connected with the conduct of its affairs. 

Others have become so confused that they do not 
know which way to turn or what to do. Others of 
the dear friends, influenced by certain leaders, have 
sent letters of withdrawal to the Society on the International
 Bible Students Association form, using the 
letter prepared by Brother Russell for -withdrawing 
from the Babylonish systems. We are sure if the 
brethren taking this course had stopped to consider 
carefully before acting they would have seen how inappropriate
 it is to send any such a letter of withdrawal
 for the reason that there is nothing from which 
to withdraw, unless such see fit to withdraw from being
 a Bible student, and surely no son of God would 
want to do that. The Watch Tower Bible & Tract 
Society is a corporation created and organized under 
the law of the land, the organization of which by 
Pastor Russell, we truly believe, was directed by the 
Lord for the purpose of conducting the harvest work 
and making proclamation of the incoming kingdom of 
the long-looked- for Messiah. 

The International Bible Students Association is a 


19^ 


196 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PlTTSBL^GH. Pa 


knowledge of the divine plan that they were born sinners
 and that the blood of Jesus alone can cleanse 
them, and thus believing such accept the Lord Jesus as 
their Redeemer. 

JUSTIFICATION 

Even though one does accept the Lord Jesus as his 
Redeemer, he could not be acceptable to the Father 
without being first justified, since God cannot receive
 any imperfect sacrifice, nor does he deal with 
any imperfect creature. Hence all who come to 
Jesus must be justified before being acceptable to the 
Father. Justification means to be made right with 
God. Therefore, in the true sense of the word, there 
can be no partial justification. There is no progression
 in justification. Justification is an instantaneous
 matter. There is progression toward justification
. Consecration must precede justification. The 
basis for all justification is the merit of Christ on deposit
 with the heavenly Father for that purpose. All 
justification is legal. Justification could not be illegal. 
The process of justification may be stated thus: A believes
 on the Lord Jesus as his Redeemer and Savior; 
he has a sincere desire to do the will of the Lord. He 
presents himself in full consecration, which means a 
full surrender of his own will to do the Lord's will, 
whatsoever that may be. 

There is some merit in A, because if there were no 
merit, that is to say, if he were totally depraved, he 
would not even have a desire to do the Father's will. 
But whatever merit is in him is far short of the required
 amount to make him perfect. Thus when he 
presents himself in consecration he could not be acceptable
 without something done on his behalf. The 
merit of Jesus therefore on deposit with the heavenly 
Father is imputed to A in a sufficient amount to make 
up for all his defects and thus A, having received the 
benefit of the merit of the ransom sacrifice, and because
 of his faith therein, God receives him and 
counts him as though he were a perfect being, righteous
, holy. There results to him by reason of this 
righteousness the legal right to life as a human being, 
and that right he sacrifices at the time he agrees to do 
the Father's will. Being accepted by the Father then 
in the Beloved One and by reason of the Beloved 
One's merit, God begets him (A) "of his own will 
with the word of truth" to membership in the body of 
Christ. There has begun the newness of life, the 
embryo new creature. The new creature now consists 
of the new will — since the human will of A has been 
surrendered and he has taken the will of God and the 
new mind which has begun in A — new hopes, new 
desires, new prospects. Since a creature cannot exist
 without an organism, however, the body of flesh is 
appropriated as an organism and A "has this treasure 
in an earthen vessel". The will now must remain perfect
 The new mind is developed more and more into 
the likeness of the mind of Christ (Romans 12:2) 
The transforming process now must be progressive : 
"And be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed
 by the renewing of your mind, that ye may 
prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect 
will of God". (Romans 12:2) The renewing of the 
mind results from an increased knowledge of God's 
Word and conforming one's self to that knowledge, 
whereby he is able to ascertain and prove to himself 
what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of 
God. As a new creature now, he develops character. 
Character in perfection means the attributes of 


wisdom, justice, love, and power in even balance. 
The embryo new creature has some character with 
which to start and which he must continue to increase. 
He is admonished: "Be ye perfect, even as your 
Father in heaven is perfect" Jehovah is perfect in 
character; that is to say, the attributes of wisdom, justice
, love, and power are equally and exactly balanced 
in. Jehovah. Such is true of the Lord Jesus, who is 
the express image of the Father and the new creature 
is admonished to grow into the likeness of his Master. 
"For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate 
to be conformed to the image of his Son." (Romans 
8:29) All who are begotten by Jehovah to the divine 
nature are thus the begotten sons of God, and continuing
 faithful unto the end they have the promise of 
being born on the divine plane as members of the 
house of sons, of which Jesus is the Head. 

PROOFS OF SONSHIF 

All who thus start to run for the prize are called in 
the one hope of their calling, towit, called to jointheirship
 with Christ Jesus in the kingdom of the 
Father. When the storms of persecution arise, when 
there are fiery trials w T ithin the church, when divisions 
come, when doubts and fears enter into the heart it is 
not infrequent that we hear one ask, "How do I know 
that I am a son of God running in the race for the 
prize of the high calling ?" Sometimes we hear one 
express his opinion concerning another to the effect 
that he is not a son of God. The Scripture, as we 
know, does not ask us to examine our brother, but to 
examine self. And the Lord has laid down the rule 
so clearly and explicitly in his Word that by applying 
this measuring rod to self we can reach a reasonable 
conclusion which enables the true follower of Christ 
to have consolation of heart and peace of mind. The 
Apostle, writing under inspiration, said: "The spirit 
beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children
 of God. and if children, then heirs, heirs of God 
and joint-heirs with Christ, if so be we suffer with 
him that we may be also glorified together". 
(Romans 8:16,17) The Spirit here mentioned is the 
spirit or holy power or influence of Jehovah, and our 
spirit is the new mind — the mind of the new creature. 
A witness is one who gives testimony for the purpose 
of establishing a question at issue. Jehovah therefore 
witnesses to his begotten sons on the divine plane in 
two distinct manners: first, through his Word, second, 
through his manner of dealing with such. 

The new creature then, beginning the examination 
of self, should first ask, Have I been drawn to the 
Lord and have I exercised faith in the merit of Jesus 
Christ, made a full consecration to do Jehovah's will? 
If this question is answered in the negative, no further 
attempt at examination need be made. If it is 
answered in the affirmative, then he should begin to 
look for the evidences that the Lord has accepted his 
consecration and that he has been begotten to the spirit 
nature. Jehovah gave a beautiful illustration whereby 
aid is given to the one examining himself. The Tabernacle
 in the wilderness contained two parts, the holy 
and the most holy. The holy represents the spiritbegotten
 condition of the sons of God The most holy 
pictures the spirit-born condition. The furnishings 
of the holy consisted of (1) a golden candlestick filled 
with oil, lighted by the High Priest and which furnished
 the illumination for the holy, (2) the table of 
shewbread and (3) the golden incense altar. The 


July 1. 1M9 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


197 


new creature is represented as being in the holy in the 
person of the high priest. One of the first evidences
 he has and which should be gratifying to the 
mind of the new creature is that he has received the 
illumination of the holy Spirit, which enables him to 
see the deep things of God's Word. St. Paul in i 
Corinthians 2:9,10,14 shows that the natural man cannot
 discern spiritual things, but that when begotten 
to sonship these things are revealed to him through 
the Word of God. One of the first proofs of sonship 
would be an understanding and a heart appreciation 
of the deep things of God's Word. By reason of the 
illumination in the holy the shewbread could be seen 
and eaten, which would picture the fact that the new 
creature, by reason of his illumination as a new creature
, can understand and appropriate to himself the 
Word of God, which is pictured by the shewbread, and 
can hold it forth to others. 

THE MYSTERY HID FROM AGES 

Among the deep things of God's Word which is 
hidden from those of worldly minds, is "The 
Mystery", that is The Christ, "even the mystery which 
hath been hid from ages and generations, but is now 
made manifest unto the saints, to whom God would 
make known what is the riches of the glory of that 
mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, 
the hope of glory." (Colossians 1:26,27) The new 
creature now sees that the Mystery is The Christ, composed
 of Jesus the head and the 144,000 members of 
his body, called, chosen, and faithful unto death and 
conformed to his exact image. He sees that this is 
the "seed of promise" by and through which Jehovah 
purposes to bring blessings to all the groaning creation 
and that the creation of earth waits in groaning until 
the time this mystery class is completed. 

This knowledge and appreciation of the divine arrangement
 plants firmly in the mind of the new creature
 a hope that he may attain to the likeness of the 
Master, and thus enables him to make progress in the 
transforming process. "Every man that hath this 
hope in him purifieth himself, even as he [the Lord] 
is pure." — 1 John 3:3. 

The new creature energized by the spirit of the Lord 
has a keen desire to make known to others the glad 
tidings and he becomes bold in the declaration of that 
message. "For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of 
Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation, to 
everyone that believeth." (Romans 1:16) "Knowing, 
beloved, your election of God, for our Gospel came 
not unto you in word only, but aJso in power and in the 
holy spirit and in much assurance." — I Thessalomans 
1 :4,5- 

ZEAX FOR THE LORD 

Another evidence of sonship and one which the new 
creature should expect to find in his own heart is a 
burning desire to glorify the Lord by using his all in 
the Lord's service. "If the spirit of him that raised up 
Jesus from the dead dwell in you ; he that raised up 
Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal 
bodies by his spirit that dwelleth in you." (Romans 
8:11) The thought here is that if the spirit of the 
Lord dwells in one, such a one would be energized to 
use whatever faculties he possesses to magnify the 
Lord and serve him as opportunity affords. Such a 
one would be diligently looking for opportunities of 
service and would appreciate the fact that laying down 
his life in following the example of the Master and 
the apostles is but his reasonable service. 


As above observed, the house of sons is the new 
creation, of which Jesus is the Head. There is a zeal 
peculiar to that house, and those who have the spirit 
of the Lord, should expect to find a measure of that 
zeal controlling them. Such zeal prompts one to service
, not of a man, or earthly institutions, but a joyful
 service to the Lord. The Psalmist puts it thus: 
"For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up ; and the 
reproaches of them that reproached thee are fallen 
upon me". (Psalm 69:9) It was the zeal of the Lord 
Jesus to do the Father's will, prompted by love for the 
Father, that caused him to drink joyfully the cup 
which the Father poured for him. The footstep followers
 of Jesus, therefore, first expect to find within 
themselves such a zeal, prompted by supreme love for 
the Father and for Christ Jesus, the Beloved One, to 
do with their might whatever their hands find to do to 
the glory of God and of Christ. Such respond to service
 not that they might receive the approval of men, 
but, like the Master, that they might receive the approval
 of Jehovah. This is the spirit of God and "as 
many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the 
sons of God". — Romans 8:14. 

LOVE FOR THE BRETHREN 

In our text St. John tells us that "now are we the 
sons of God" and then gives a sure and absolute proof 
whereby we may determine that we are his sons, saying
: "We know that we have passed from death unto 
life because we love the brethren. Let us not love in 
word, neither in tongue, but in deed and in truth, and 
hereby we know that we are of the truth and shall assure
 our hearts before him.'* (1 John 3:14,18,19) 
Let each one ask himself, Do I really love the brethren 
in deed and in truth? Love for the brethren may be 
defined as an unselfish desire to do good to a brother, 
and putting that desire into action without regard to 
whether the brother upon whom it is bestowed knows 
it or does not know it, even though it cause us much 
sacrifice, being prompted by the motive to build up 
such a one in the most holy faith. The unselfish love 
of Jesus for us such that he laid down his life for us. 
"Hereby perceive we the love ot God, because he laid 
down his life for us and we ought to lay down our 
lives for the brethren." (1 John 3:16) To do so 
would cost us something, of course, and if pure love 
prompts our action then it would not be material 
whether our brother knew or did not know we were 
trying to do him good so long as we are really putting 
forth the effort, really manifesting the spirit of Christ. 

There is a special obligation between brethren, because
 they are all members of one household, hence 
we are admonished to do good unto all as we have opportunity
, especially unto them that are of the household
 of faith. (Galatians 6:10) Justice and love operate
 harmoniously in Christ. Justice and love operating
 harmoniously in us who are Christians must control
 our conduct and our conversation toward others. 
We must give to our brother the true measure of 
justice, but it is not our duty or privilege to require 
that he render justice to us in all the relations of life. 

Of course it is his duty to deal justly, but if he 
fails to do so it is not our privilege to demand justice. 
To illustrate: A may say something offensive to B. 
It would become the just duty of A to make sincere 
apology to B and to make restitution of any wrong as 
far as possible, but B, exercising brotherly love, should 
never demand of A that he make an apology or render 


198 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa, 


justice. On the other hand, if A failed to apologize 
voluntarily and make restitution, he would be the one 
missing a blessing. With the new creature this matter 
proceeds upon the true theory that one who is consecrated
 has agreed to surrender all of his earthly rights 
and privileges, and the spirit of Christ would demand 
that he sacrifice in behalf of his brother. If justice 
must mark our conduct toward others, even so must 
love be used by us to measure the conduct of others 
toward us. Love demands that we accept less than 
justice from others, because we realize they are imperfect
 in organism, mind and judgment Proceeding, 
then, according to these principles, brethren find themselves
 glad to make a sacrifice in behalf of each other 
and especially is this true with reference to positions 
of honor and service. "In honor preferring one another
." If one son of God is honored, then the others 
having the spirit of the Master rejoice that he is thus 
honored. Such is the spirit of Christ, and "if any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his." 

NOT SWIFT TO TAKE OFFENSE 

The Christian is to have the loving, generous disposition
 of heart, a copy of the heavenly Father's disposition
. In trivial affairs he is to have so much sympathy
 and love that he will take no notice, just as 
God for Christ's sake, deals with us and does not impute
 sin to us except as it represents knowledge and 
wilfulness. With such a rule operating among Christians
, a determination not to recognize as offensive 
anything that is not purposely done or intended as an 
offense would be a great blessing to all and a proper, 
Godlike course. Yet the transgressions to which our 
Lord refers in Matthew 18:15-18 are not trivial affairs
, but such as should have attention in the manner
 pointed out by the Master, and then action should 
always be prompted by love for the brethren. 

Further illustrating: a brother is serving the church 
in the capacity of elder or servant He receives some 
treatment at the hands of a class or those whom he is 
serving which is contrary to the spirit of justice and 
love. Would such a servant be justified in saying, I 
will no longer serve this class or these friends; I will 
have nothing whatever to do with them. Would that 
be showing the spirit of brother love, the spirit of 
Christ? The Apostle Paul, who had the spirit of 
Christ, answered this question clearly and unequivocally
. Evidently the church at Corinth had not been 
rendering to him the full measure of brotherly love, 
yet he wrote to them saying: "I will very gladly spend 
and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I 
love you the less I be loved". — 2 Corinthians 12:15. 

Such is a Godlike spirit; such is the spirit of Christ, 
and one who has this spirit has a strong witness that 
he is the son of God. One who engages in the pilgrim
 service is a servant of the Society which he represents
, a servant of those of the church whom he 
serves, and a servant of the Lord. The Watch Tower 
is also a channel or instrument for service of the 
Church. The duty devolves upon some of the 
brethren of such pilgrim to edit The Watch Tower. 
Suppose The Watch Tower publishes something that 
is offensive to the pilgrim brother. Would love for 
the brethren justify such pilgrim brother in saying: I 
will no longer serve those who are supporting the 
Society and The Watch Tower, but I will withdraw 
and take some followers unto myself. Would he be 
justified in such a course? Would that be manifesting
 the proper spirit of Christ, the spirit of brotherly 
love ? We think such a course would not be according
 to the spirit of Christ. Brother Russell was sole 
editor of The Watch Tower for many years and 
made many mistakes, because he too was imperfect. 
Frequently brethren became offended at him because 
of some fancied or real mistake, withdrew and tried to 
induce others to follow after them. Their efforts 
were attended with little success, as is well known, 
evidently because they were not manifesting the spirit 
of the Lord. The general rule has been that many 
of those who turn away go back into Babylon and 
into the world. Those who are leaders often make a 
shipwreck of their own faith and shatter the faith of 
others. 

THIS JOUBNAL AND FUNDAMENTALS 

Since Brother Russell left us, a committee of imperfect
 men have tried to edit The Watch Tower, 
men even more likely to make mistakes than was 
Brother Russell. That these have made mistakes is 
freely admitted. The ultra-critical can always find 
fault in anyone's work But can anyone who is really 
consecrated to the Lord, who loves the Lord supremely 
and who loves his sheep better than he loves any 
earthly life or thing — can such a one find justification 
in his conduct in leaving the service of the brethren 
whom he started to serve under the supervision of the 
Society, turn aside and strive to get others to follow 
him and thereby attempt to cause division among the 
brethren? Would such be a manifestation of the 
spirit of Christ and of the apostles? Not according to 
the standard fixed by St. Paul and by Christ Jesus before
 him. Doubtless Jesus had many occasions to 
take offense at his disciples, to become offended because
 of their mistakes, yet he never ceased to minister
 lovingly to them, and the Apostle tells us that his 
determination is to be spent completely in the service 
of the brethren because of his love for them, even 
though they appreciate and love him less. 

No one can point to a single instance in which The 
Watch Tower has denied the great fundamental doctrine
 upon which all Christian faith rests, namely, the 
ransom sacrifice. No one can point to a single instance
 in which it has repudiated the "mystery" or any 
other fundamental doctrine taught by Jesus and the 
apostles and the Lord's "faithful and wise servant". 
If there have been mistakes or errors committed by 
reason of the imperfection of tht instruments used to 
edit The Watch Tower, would it be the spirit of 
Christ, the spirit to be manifested by a son of God, to 
attempt to disrupt the Lord's people and cause confusion
 among his true flock? St Paul answers this 
question, explicitly in the negative. (Acts 20:29,30; 
Romans 16:17,18) We suggest therefore that each 
one of the Lord's dear flock who has been confused 
or disturbed in mind by such deflections of brethren 
and who has started to follow them, ask himself 
this question in his personal examinations: Did the 
spirit of the Lord cause this deflection and am I being 
guided by the Master's spirit when I follow in such a 
course? All the members of the church this side the 
vail find themselves very imperfect. None can do 
anything perfectly: (Romans 7:15,25) Knowing this, 
when we observe a mistake on the part of a brother 
what course will the spirit of the Lord prompt us to 
take ? St. Peter answers : "Above all continue to love 
one another fervently, for love throws a vail over a 
multitude of faults". (1 Peter 4:3, Weymouth) The 


July 1, 1919 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


199 


child of God will measure himself by this standard. 

But suppose one does feel that he is fully justified 
in withdrawing himself and forming another class, 
how should we treat him? Should we speak to him 
unkindly and treat him evilly? We answer by asking, 
What would be the spirit of the Lord? "God is too 
wise to err and too good to be unkind." Would it be 
either wise or kind to speak harshly of those who have 
turned aside? We think it would be unwise, because 
it would tend to injure the one thus speaking, and 
the spirit of the Lord would prevent, unkindness. The 
conduct of those turning away might be such that we 
would be warranted in declining to fellowship with 
them, but to speak evil of them or to treat them with 
unkindness would be contrary to the spirit of the Lord. 
(Titus 1 13) The one speaking evilly or harshly would 
do more injury to himself than he would to the one 
spoken against. The son of God would not wish to 
injure himself or another. 

How, then, should we treat those who have turned 
aside? We heard of one brother who said in answer 
to a similar question : "We should treat them as we 
would a snake or the devil." We can hardly believe, 
however, that this report concerning the brother's 
language is true. It is inconceivable how one following
 in Jesus' footsteps could treat another who claims 
to be following the Master as he would a snake or the 
devil. On the contrary, he should treat such a one 
with kindness. Justice and love will demand that we 
be kind and considerate, even to the unthankful. 
While the Scriptures admonish the Lord's people to 
withdraw themselves from those who pursue a wrongful
 course, and not to fellowship with them, yet the 
Scriptures nowhere tell us that we are to treat such 
in a rude, harsh or unkind manner. The spirit of 
Christ prompts the son of God to pity his erring 
brother and if opportunity arises he may be permitted 
to restore him. "My brethren, if anyone among you 
withdraw from the truth and someone turn him back, 
know you that he who turns back a sinner from his 
path of error will save his soul from death and cover 
a multitude of sins." (James 5 :2, Diaglott) We are 
not to follow after the erring one, walking as he walks, 
but our course in following the Lord should be so 
consistent that by our precept and example we may be 
able to help the one who is turned aside. The spirit 
of the Lord will prompt us to try to do him good as 
opportunity is offered. 

Some brethren whom the Lord has heretofore 
blessed in their service of his people have turned aside, 
drawing disciples after them. We have no unkind 
words to express against them, but we do ask those 
who have been drawn after them to examine themselves
 to determine whether or not the spirit of the 
Master is leading them. Let each one ask himself or 
herself, Do I still love the Lord? Do I believe that 
those from whom I have turned aside love the Lord 
and are trying to serve him ? Who is the enemy of 
the Lord and of those who strive to walk in his footsteps
 ? The answer must be, The great adversary and 
the instruments he uses. Then can I, as a follower of 
the Master, if I have his spirit, manifest the spirit of 
ill-will, slander, backbiting, evil speaking or other 
manner of antagonism against those who claim to be 
serving the Lord? Written aforetime for the benefit 
of the church were these beautiful words: "Behold, 
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell 
together in unity". Psalm 133:1. 


LOYALTY 

Loyalty to a friend means to be faithfully devoted 
to that friend and to guard his interests during his 
absence as well as in his presence. There is a loyalty 
of spirit between natural or earthly brothers, as indeed
 there should be, and such that leads one brother 
to protect and defend the good name and interests of 
his brother and to look devotedly after his interests, 
both during his absence and in his presence. The tie 
that binds together the new creation, the sons of God, 
the brethren in Christ, is far greater than any earthly 
tie. The true Christian will be loyal to his brothei in 
Christ under all circumstances, in evil report and in 
good report, and until he is fully convinced beyond a 
reasonable doubt that such a one has lost the spirit of 
Christ and ceased to be a brother, and even then he 
will do him no injury. 

True loyalty to a brother in Christ, such as is 
prompted by the spirit of Christ, does not mean a devotion
 to his brother only while such brother is on the 
crest of the wave and everything is going smoothly 
and serenely, but it does mean that he will be lo^al and 
devoted to his interests even when his brother is being
 assailed by the enemy, when his name is cast out 
as evil, when he is being despised and persecuted and 
such loyalty will continue in the absence of the brother 
as well as in his presence. If one, in his zeal and devotion
 for the Lord and his cause brings down upon 
him the wrath of the enemies of Christ, the brother in 
Christ who is truly loyal to him and has the spirit of 
the Master, will be drawn even closer to his persecuted
 brother and will the more faithfully and loyally 
stand by him. The Master warns us that the love of 
the brethren would be put to a test along this line in 
the closing experiences of the church's career in the 
flesh. (Matthew 24:9,10) We believe it can be truly 
said that the fiery trials and persecutions that have 
come upon the church during the past year have 
drawn closer and closer together those who really have 
the spirit of the Master. 

We may expect that the "beast" will pursue a 
further and rigorous persecution against the Lord's 
people, but those who have the Master's spirit will not 
be dismayed by such persecution. On the contrary 
they will remember with joy his words: "If the world 
hate you ye know that it hated me before it hated you." 
"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you and persecute
 you and say all manner of evil against you 
falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, 
for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted 
they the prophets which were before you." Those 
having the spirit of the Master realize that there can 
be no compromise between the "beast" or any of his 
agencies, and the church. 

As a further evidence that one is a son and is in 
Christ, is the fact of his loyalty to the Lord and his 
cause. This would mean that he rejoices in keeping 
the commandments of the Lord and in performing the 
service that the Lord has prescribed for his people. 
"He that sayeth, I know him and keepeth not his commandments
, is a liar and the truth is not in him, but 
whoso keepeth my word, in him is the love of God 
perfected. Hereby know we that we are in Him" 
(1 John 2:4,5) God has commissioned his sons, the 
church, to perform certain things while in the flesh, 
and among other things specified in the commission is 
"to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, and the 
day of vengeance of our God, to comfort those that 


200 


T 11 E WATCH TOWER 


V\ i I shi;ki,h, Pa 


mourn". (Isaiah 61 :2) The Gospel age is the acceptable
 year of the Lord, and the message concerning 
this has been especially proclaimed during the harvest. 
Manifestly the Lord intended that- the church should 
declare his day of vengeance, especially when that vengeance
 is upon the earth, to the intent that all who are 
of the right condition of heart may be comforted with 
the fact that the great stress upon the nations will 
result in the destruction of unrighteousness and bring 
in the righteous kingdom of our Master, for which he 
taught all his followers to pray. To be loyal to the 
Lord, then, would mean that we would take pleasure 
in calmly, dispassionately, yet zealously pointing out 
the wicked system of Babylon which encumbers the 
earth and that God's vengeance is upon such and that 
those who flee from it and diligently seek the Lord 
would be comforted. To refrain our voice from thus 
announcing the message of the Lord, or to the extent 
that we do refrain, would show a lack of the spirit of 
the Master and a lack of love for God and a lack of 
loyalty to his cause. 

WHY STAND YE IDLE? 

We are informed that some who have withdrawn 
from the Society insist that the Harvest work is done, 
that there is nothing more to do, hence it would be 
wrong for them to take part in any work that the 
Society is engaged in doing. Such a conclusion is 
clearly due to a misapprehension or confusion of mind. 
True the forty year period of the harvest closed in the 
spring of 1918, but that does not at all signify that the 
work ceased or should cease, nor does it mean a complete
 closing of the door. In the natural harvest of 
Israel, which the Lord gives as an illustration of the 
spiritual harvest, there was always a gleaning work 
to be done, which work followed the regular harvest 
work. As long as there are any of the saints this side 
the vaii there will be a possibility of some falling away 
and losing their crowns, in which event some others 
would be selected to take the place or places of those 
falling away. There are doubtless many saints yet 
this side the vail. This is a good reason why there 
is yet some work to be done, and explains why some 
are still coming into the truth and giving evidence of 
being spirit-begotten. Additionally, there are other 
reasons for continuing activity on the part of the sons 
of God, namely, (a) the binding and burning of the 
tares, which is now in progress; (b) the declaring of 
the day of God's vengeance, which is also a part of 
the commission given to the church; (c) the awakening
 of the great company class, which must be done by 
the proclamation of the truth, and (d) the announcing
 to the world the incoming of Messiah's kingdom. 
If anyone has put his hand to the plow, let him not 
slack his hand or look back. Remember Lot's wife. 
She stood fast and did no more work. Besides all 
this, none of us can afford to be dogmatic about just 
when the Lord will cease any certain part of his work. 
What has heretofore been said in The Watch Tower 
concerning the end of the harvest and the closing of 
the door has been an expression of the judgment of 
those writing it, based upon faith in the Word of God 
and the best evidence we have at hand. Our chief 
duty is to keep on serving the Lord, entering every 
door of opportunity that opens and being diligent in 
that service to the glory of his name. Let no Christian
 be deceived by the adversary and thereby become 
negligent of his privileges or duties. The overcoming 


saints will not be deceived, but "will persist in telling 
the truth unto the last". C-231. 

FURTHEE PROOF 

In addition to the specific Scriptures by which the 
son of God may measure himself and determine 
whether he is pleasing to the Lord, the spirit witnesses 
to him also by God's manner of dealing with his sons. 
It is written: "For those whom the Lord loves he disciplines
: and if you are left without discipline, of 
which every true son has had a share, that shows you 
are bastards and not true sons". (Hebrews 12:6,8, 
Weymouth) Sons of God when begotten to the divine 
nature enter the school of Christ, there to be trained 
and disciplined by being put through such experiences, 
fiery trials and tribulations as may be necessary to test 
their love, fidelity, and loyalty to the Lord. This is 
pictured in the Great Pyramid: 

"This 'ante-chamber' symbolizes the school of 
Christ, and the discipline — the trials of faith, patience, 
endurance, etc., — to which all are subjected who have 
made a full consecration of themselves to the will of 
God; it affords them opportunities for overcoming, 
and for proving their worthiness of a place, as overcomers
, with Christ in his incoming reign of glory. If 
we be without such lessons and trials, we are not sons 
and heirs on this divine plane. (Hebrews 12:8) It is 
in the present life, after our consecration to his service
, that God schools and disciplines us, and thereby 
tests not only our fidelity to him, according to our 
covenant, but also prepares us to sympathize with 
others in trial and trouble, over whom he wills shortly 
to make us rulers and judges. — 1 Cor. 6:2,3." — C-352. 

Our first experience in the school of Christ was to 
lay the foundation, which is faith, and thereafter 
through the lessons that came to us we were expected 
to add* to our faith virtue and knowledge and self-control
 and patience and godliness and brotherly love and 
love (2 Peter 1:4-7) tnus building the superstructure, 
which means growing in the knowledge of the Lord 
and in the fruits and graces of the Spirit. We should 
expect to come to a time of testing. The Apostle 
Peter says to the church — the sons of God: "'Dear 
friends, do not be surprised that that scorching flame 
of persecution is raging among you to put you to the 
test, as though some surprising thing were suddenly 
happening to you. On the contrary, in the degree that 
you share in the sufferings of Christ, rejoice so that at 
the unfolding of his glory you may also rejoice with 
permanent gladness. You are to be envied if you be 
reproached for bearing the name of Christ; for in that 
case the spirit of glory, even the spirit of God is resting
 upon you." — 1 Peter 4:12-14, Weymouth. 

What character of suffering should we expect 
which would be a witness to us that we are sons of 
God? We answer, The same character of suffering 
that came upon Jesus and the faithful apostles. The 
persecutors of Jesus were not the common people, who 
had a desire to be law-abiding and do right, but his 
persecution came from the clergy element of his day, 
who, themselves being unfaithful, instigated others to 
persecute the Master. They did the same thing with 
the apostles. Jesus said of them that they were "the 
seed of the serpent" (John 8:44) and we may know 
then that the seed of the serpent would persecute the 
"seed of promise" until the end because the Scriptures 
assure us that such will be the case. Each son of God 
now on earth may ask himself, Have I been suffering 


July 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


201 


for righteousness' sake ; have I suffered because I have 
attempted to give a witness at this time concerning the 
Lord's plan? Do I believe that the Lord organized, 
through "his faithful and wise servant" the Watch 
Tower Bible & Tract Society as the channel to carry 
the message to the people and to witness against the 
unrighteous systems of the earth? Have I witnessed 
any persecution from the "beast" and its various 
agencies against the Society and those who have endeavored
 in their own weakness but in the strength 
of the Lord to carry forward the work committed to 
it? If these questions are answered in the affirmative 
there is further cause for rejoicing because of this addition
 of proof of sonship. Some who have withdrawn
 from the work will do well to ask themselves, 
Am I suffering persecution from the "beast" because I 
am declaring the day of God's vengeance against 
Babylon and announcing the setting up of his kingdom
? And if not, might it not be well for me to examine
 myself more carefully and see if I took the 
right course when I turned aside? The Apostle explicitly
 said: "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus 
shall suffer persecution". (2 Timothy 3:12) To live 
godly, then, means to live according to God's will and 
his will is as expressed in his Word, to show a zeal in 
keeping his commandments, which includes the proclamation
 of the message even until such service consumes
 us. Nowhere in the Scriptures does he say 
that we run until a certain time and then withdraw 
ourselves and do nothing more. Our consecration is 
unto death and it is not for his sons to say when the 
Lord would have them stop, but it is for them joyfully
 to obey his will by continuing to be witnesses 
for him in the earth until they are called home. 

The discipline, therefore, that would come upon the 
sons of God must be sufferings like unto the Master. 
The Apostle assures us of this when he says: "It is a 
faithful saying, If we be dead with him we shall live 
with him; if we suffer we shall reign with him". (2 
Timothy 2:11,12) Faithful service unto the Lord in 
the closing days of the church's experiences of necessity
 must bring persecutions and sufferings. If we 
love the truth we will serve the truth and this service 
is sure to bring upon us the disapproval of the world. 
If devotion to the will of the Father brought upon our 
Lord shame and ignominy, we should expect to be 
treated likewise as a result of faithfulness. The willingness
 to bear joyfully such disapproval, hatred and 
persecution as a part of our reasonable service is a 
further evidence that we are his sons. L^pon this 
point we quote from Brother Russell: "If there is a 
decrease of zeal in this direction, then we may know 
that there is a danger of going backward instead of 
forward. If we have the spirit of loyalty to God, to 
the truth and to the brethren we have the mind, the 
disposition of Christ". — Z '13-132, 

BE NOT DISCOURAGED 

Some have greater opportunities for service than 
others. Thanks be to the Lord he does not judge us 
according to what we accomplish, but judges us according
 to the love and zeal that we manifest toward 
him and his cause in proportion as we have the opportunity
 of serving him. For instance, some dear 
sister may have a large household that requires her 
attention and that precludes her from actively participating
 in the service. Or the brother or sister's health 
may be such that they cannot actively engage, or some 
other conditions over which they have no control may 


preclude them from being as active as they would like. 
But with such the question is, Am I, zealously 
prompted by love for the Lord and his cause, doing 
with my might what my hands find to do, be it little 
or be it much? The Lord judges according to the 
intent of the heart and the performance in proportion 
to the opportunity possessed. 

But, one asks, how may I know that I am continuing
 in the fight, and how may I know that I still have 
the prospect of entering the kingdom as a glorified son 
of God? St. Paul reached the point where he said: 
"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 
I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for 
me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the 
righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to 
me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing
". (2 Timothy 4:8) Each child of God should be 
able to say this same thing at the end of each day. It 
may be, because of some weakness or some shortcoming
 that he has failed or has a spot on his garment. 
What then should he do? We answer, He should not 
wait one moment, but apply through his Advocate according
 to the Lord's gracious provision, for the removal
 of such spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing. The 
Apostle said: "If we confess our sins he is faithful 
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from 

all unrighteousness These things write I unto 

you that ye sin not, but if any man sin ye have an advocate
 with the Father, Christ Jesus the righteous." 
(1 John 1:7; 2:1) It is our privilege then to confess 
freely our wrong, our negligence, and claim the 
promise here given, that our Advocate may make intercession
 for us and that our Father may forgive us. 

Then can not each one truly say, I have fought a 
good fight; I have not been fighting an evil or wrongful
 fight, but fighting on the side of the Lord. I have 
not denied the faith, but on the contrary I have kept 
the faith and still hold to that faith once delivered to 
the saints. I know that my Father has promised me 
that if I am faithful he will grant unto me the crown 
of life. I know that in myself there is no strength, 
and I could not keep the faith alone, but abiding in 
Christ who doeth all things for me I can accomplish 
all things. Doubtless I could have done better, it was 
my heart's sincere desire to do my best, and since I 
have tried I have the assurance that my Master makes 
up for my unwilling defects, therefore I can confidently
 lay my hand in the Lord's and say: 'He who 
has promised, is just and faithful. He knows my 
weaknesses, he loves and he cares, and since I have 
the witness of his Word and of his instructive providences
 that I am his son, I can confidently say, I know 
that a crown of righteousness is laid up for me which 
that righteous judge will give me in his due time if I 
continue faithfully from now on even unto the end.' 
We have the assurance that if our heart is perfect 
toward God, if we are loyal to him, to his message of 
truth, and loyal to the brethren, he will exercise his 
strength in our behalf, and this being true we cannot 
fail. To those, then, of the Laodicean church who 
have this witness of the Spirit and who possess such a 
perfect heart, who are fighting the good fight of faith 
against all opposition that the adversary has brought 
upon them, the Head of the house of sons, our Captain
, our King, has said: "To him that overcomeih will 
I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also 
overcame and am set down with my Father in his 
throne".— Revelation 3:21. 


THE LORD'S SUPPER 

July 20: — Matthew 26:26-30; 1 Corinthians 11:20-34. 

the antitype of the passover instituted by moses — the memorial of jhat antitype — what the bread and the wine 
symbolize — the new wtne in the kingdom — the church's privilege of suffering now and of sharing in the 
glory and honor of the kingdom later — the meaning of our lord's suffering and death, 

"For as often as ye eat this bread and drink the cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death till he come!* — iCorinthians 11:26. 



HE CONTEXT of our lesson gives our Lord's 
instructions to his disciples as to where they 
should prepare for him and themselves, as a 
special and peculiar Jewish family, a place 
in which to celebrate the requirements of the 
law in the type which pointed to our Lord as 
the Lamb of God. Respecting this supper 
our Lord himself said: "With desire have 
I desired to eat this Passover with you before
 I suffer". He did not refer to the principal
 feast, which lasted a week from the 15th 
of Nisan. He was referring to the roast-lamb supper, 
eaten with bitter herbs, which preceded the general feast, 
and which reminded the Jews of their deliverance from 
Egypt and became the basis of their subsequent rejoicing 
as a liberated people. The upper room was provided for 
this supper. Things were made ready; and at even, at 
sundown, after six o'clock, our Lord and the twelve as T 
sembled. One of the accounts tells us that there was a 
dispute among the disciples respecting the more honorable 
positions at the supper; and that Jesus rebuked this ambitious
 spirit in them by washing their feet, thus illustrating 
his own humility of heart, his readiness to serve each and 
all of them. He set them an example that he whom they 
esteemed greatest among them, should be their principal 
servant, willing and ready to serve any and all. 

"ONE OF YOU SHAXL BETRAY ME** 

While they were eating, Jesus remarked that one of them 
would betray him; and at once a spirit of sadness spread 
oyer the company. Each one, feeling it incumbent upon 
him to prove his innocence of such a charge, asked: "Lord, 
is it I." With the rest Judas also put this question, realizing
 that if he did not ask, it would imply his acknowledgement
 that he was the one. In response to his inquiry Jesus 
replied: "Thou hast said". That is to say, 'Yes, I refer 
to you/ Another account tells us that Jesus answered the 
query of another disciple by saying that the one for whom 
he would dip a sop would be the betrayer; and having 
dipped the sop, a piece of the lamb and a piece of the unleavened
 bread they were eating, he gave it to Judas, thus 
indicating him without directly naming him. It would 
appear, too, that up to this time the other disciples had not 
learned to know Judas, but that it was subsequently they 
ascertained that he was a thief, etc. 

Among the Jews and the Arabs deceit and betrayal were 
not so very uncommon, but there was a code of honor 
recognized according to which no one would eat the food 
of the person whom he would in any wise injure. As 
food was seasoned with salt, it was probably this custom 
which was known as the "covenant of salt" — the covenant 
of faithfulness. To succeed in having an enemy eat at 
your table or take of your food seasoned with salt was at 
that time among those people the equivalent of a pledge of 
his lasting friendship, that he would never do you an injury. 
Apparently Judas was so lacking of a proper spirit that he 
did not even acknowledge and obey this custom of that time, 
to be loyal and faithful to the one whose bread he ate and 
of whose salt he partook. Hence our Lord's words : "He 
that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall 
betray me". 

Nevertheless Jesus testified that his death was not a 
victory on the part of his betrayers and his enemies, but 
in harmony with what had been written of him before by 
the prophets. Nor are we to consider that in this matter 
Judas was merely fulfilling -a prophecy irrespective of his 
own responsibility, his own wilfulness. Such a thought is 
negatived by our Lord's statement: "Woe unto the man 
by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It would have been 
better for that man if he had not been born 1 '. These words 
leave no question, we think, that Judas had already enjoyed 
his full share in the great atonement work through the 
intimate opportunities he had of coming to a clear knowledge
 of the truth, and the corresponding opportunities. Evidently
 his was the sin unto death, the second death. Hence, 
aside from any future existence we . are to consider that 
his life was a wasted, useless one; and that its joys did not 


overbalance its sorrows and anguish when to the latter 
were added his subsequent despair and suicide. 
"TAKE, EAT; THIS IS MY BODY" 

It was after the Passover supper, after the eating of 
the lamb with the herbs and the unleavened bread, etc., that 
Jesus instituted the Memorial supper, which by his direction 
takes with all of his followers the place of the Passover 
supper of the Jews. This was a new matter; and the 
apostles listened with interest to his words as he blest some 
of the thin cakes of unleavened bread and then broke them 
and handed portions to his disciples, saying, "Take, eat; 
this is my body". What could he mean? During their 
three years in his company they had learned that he spoke 
in parables and dark sayings. On another occasion he had 
declared in their hearing that he himself was the bread 
which came down from heaven, of which if a man partook 
he would live forever. Now he was handing them some 
unleavened bread, saying that it was his body. Evidently 
they understood him to mean that to them this bread would 
represent or symbolize his body; for on this occasion he 
told them that thenceforth they should do this in remembrance
 of him, that thenceforth they should remember him 
as the slain Lamb and should use unleavened bread to represent
 his flesh, and partake of this instead of eating previously
 of a literal lamb. 

Our Lord could not have meant, as Roman Catholics 
and some Protestants believe, that by his blessing the bread 
was turned into his actual flesh; for he still had his flesh. 
He was not killed for about fifteen hours later. Hence 
all the arguments to this effect are foolishness and sophistry
. When he said, "This is my flesh," the expression was 
as much a figure of speech as when a little 1'ater he said, 
"I am the vine". The right, sane view of the Master's 
words is apparent: he was represented in these different 
ways. In the case under consideration the bread would 
represent him, his flesh, to his apostles and to all his followers
 throughout the Gospel age. 

As bread stands for and symbolizes all food (indeed, 
wheat is said to contain every element of nutrition in its 
proper proportion) so the teaching of this symbol is that 
whoever would have the life which Christ has to give must 
accept it as the result of his sacrifice. He died that we 
might live. The rights and privileges which he surrendered 
voluntarily may be eaten, applied, appropriated by all who 
have faith in him and who accept him and nis instructions. 
Such are reckoned as having imputed to them the perfect 
human nature, with all its rights and privileges lost by 
Adam, redeemed by Christ. None can have eternal life 
except by the eating of this bread from heaven. This applies 
not only to believers of this present time, but also to those 
of the future age. Their life-rights and privileges must 
all be recognized as coming to them through his sacrifice. 
In a word the bread representing our Lord's body teaches 
our justification through the acceptance of his sacrifice. 
"DRINK YE, ALL, OF IT" 

Next our Lord took a cup containing the fruit of the 
vine. We are not told that it was wine. Therefore it 
is an open question whether it was fermented or unfermented
; and in view of all the circumstances of our time 
and the requirements of the Lord's Word, we may feel sure 
that unfermented grape juice or raisin juice will fulfill the 
Lerms of his injunction. Since it is never called wine, but 
merely the cup and the fruit of the vine, there is no room 
for disputation among the Lord's followers. Each may 
be free to follow his own conscience in the matter of what 
kind of fruit of the vine he shall use. For our part we prefer 
the unfermented as being less liable to do injury or to awaken 
dormant passions for drink in the followers of our Lord. 

In connection with the cup the Master said: "This is 
my blood of the covenant, which is shed for many for the 
remission of sins". (The two oldest Greek MSS. of the 
New Testament, the Sinaitic and the Vatican, No. 1209 
omit the word "new".) True, the New Covenant must be 
sealed with the blood of the Christ before it can go into 
effect, and it is not to go into effect until the opening of 
the Millennial age. But there was another covenant, the 


202 


July I, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


203 


old covenant, the foundation covenant of all covenants; 
namely, the Abrahamic Covenant, which was sealed by our 
Lord's death. That it would be thus sealed was typically 
represented in the figurative death of Isaac at the hand of 
Abraham and in his figurative resurrection from the dead. 
The Apostle Paul assures us that Isaac represented our 
Lord Jesus, and also declared: "We, brethren, as Isaac 
was, are the children of promise"— the oath-bound covenant. 
Galatians 4:28. 

Applying our Lord's words thus to the Abrahamic Covenant
, which he was sealing or making sure, we see that 
it was by his death that he became the heir of that covenant 
and of all its glorious provisions for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. From this standpoint we see 
a special meaning and force in Jesus' words to his followers
: "This is my cup; drink ye all of it." Thus understood
, the invitation to drink of the Lord's cup signifies 
an invitation to all of his elect church of the Gospel age 
to partake with him of his cup of suffering and death, to 
lay down their lives with him that they also might 
have a share with him in the coming glories of the kingdom
 which will be the divine channel for the fulfillment of 
the Abrahamic promise, the blessing of earth's families. 

While the eating of the bread and participation in 
the justification effected by our Lord's death, and by the 
acceptance of the same, will be necessary to the whole world 
if they would have the restitution blessings purchased by 
our Lord's sacrifice, nevertheless the cup is not for the 
world, but only for the church, only for the consecrated 
of this Gospel age. There will be none of the sufferings 
of Christ left over for the coming age. No more suffering
 for righteousness' sake will then be known to the world. 
Only evil doers will suffer thereafter. Now is the time 
when whosoever will live godly shall suffer persecution, and 
when all of the Lord's followers who would be loyal to him 
and counted worthy to share in his kingdom glories must 
expect to drink of his cup. Hence again our Lord unites 
the two thoughts, saying, "Except ye eat the flesh and drink 
the blood of the Son of man, ye have no life in you". 
(John 6:53) Those who during the Gospel age consecrate
 as the Lord's disciples, to walk in his steps, must not 
only share in justification through faith, but must also share 
through sacrifice the cup if they would gain the life eternal 
promised to the elect who now become his disciples. 

NEW WINE IN THE KINGDOM 

In declaring, "I will not drink henceforth of the fruit 
of the vine until that day when I drink it new with you in 
my Father's kingdom," our Lord implies a new wine under 
different conditions at some distant date. He thus confirmed
 in their minds what he had been teaching them for 
some weeks previously; namely, that he would not at this 
time set up his kingdom, but that instead he would suffer, 
be crucified; and that they must expect also to suffer with 
him; and that by and by, when the kingdom should be 
established and himself be in glory, his disciples should be 
with him in his throne. These new thoughts in their minds 
were confirmed by the lessons now given. 

The cup in the present time must speak to them of the 
crushing of the grapes, the blood of the grapes, their Master
's blood, the life sacrificed, poured out, and their lives 
also sacrificed with him in his service, in his cause. But 
the sufferings of this present time were linked with the glory 
that would follow, by the thought that all who would drink 
of the present cup of suffering, shame, ignominy and death 
would also share in his cup of joy and blessing, glory and 
honor in the kingdom. This same thought should be 
before our minds; and like the apostles of old it will help 
us more and more to look forward to the kingdom as the 
time when suffering for the name of Christ shall cease, and 
when the glories shali follow and result in the blessing of 
all the families of the earth. Our Lord here identifies his 
kingdom with his second advent, and in no sense of the 
word intimates that they would drink of this new wine at 
Pentecost, nor at the destruction of Jerusalem, nor at any 
other time but that mentioned in the prayer which he taught 
them, saying, "Thy kingdom come; thy will be done on 
earth as it is done in heaven". 

This should be the thought before our minds also. In 
waiting for the kingdom we are waiting for the second 
coming of our Lord and his subsequent setting up of the 
kingdom; that is, the resurrection change, the glorification 


of his faithful ones, who must be with him and share his 
glory. No wonder the Apostle declared that he who hath 
this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure! 
14 FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS' » 

As far as we are concerned, it is in vain that men teach 
that God forgives sins without exacting a penalty therefor 
from anybody. It is in vain that they claim that Christ 
was not the ransom price for the sinner; that it was not 
necessary that he should die, the Just for the unjust, in 
order that he might bring us back to harmony with God, 
in order that God might be just and yet justify the sinner. 
It is in vain, too, that they claim that it was sufficient that 
Jesus was a great teacher, by whose words the world should 
he saved. Our reply is in harmony with the Master's statement
 here and elsewhere and with the testimony of all the 
apostles, that it was necessary that Christ should die for 
our sins; that our sins could never have been forgiven by 
divine justice except through the divine arrangement by 
which our Lord paid our penalty. To us it is a most 
precious thought, therefore, that our Lord's blood was indeed
 shed for the remission of sins of the many. And 
it is also a precious thought to us that we are privileged to 
be so intimately associated with him as members of his body; 
that our little sacrifices covered by his merit are in God's 
sight esteemed as part of the great sin sacrifice for the 
world; that as joint sufferers with Christ we are permitted 
to drink of his cup and be immersed into his death. 

It is equally vain for evolutionists and higher critics to 
tell us that, so far from man's falling from God's likeness 
into sin and death, he has been on the contrary evolving 
upward step by step, from beastly conditions to where he 
is now. We believe them not. We hold fast the divinely 
inspired testimony that there was a fall, and that this made 
necessary the redemptive work; that Christ was the honorable
 servant of God, privileged and authorized to make 
atonement for the sins of the whole world; that he began 
this atonement work in the sacrifice of himself; that he has 
been carrying it on during this Gospel age by the sacrificing 
of the members of his body; and that he will soon complete 
it, when he, with all of his members glorified, shall during 
the Millennial age distribute to the world the blessings of 
that redemptive work, causing all to come to a knowledge of 
the truth, of the love of God— that its height and depth 
and length and breadth are immeasurable, yea all accomplished
 through him who loved us and bought us with his 

precious blood. 

"IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME" 

Referring to this Memorial supper, the Apostle Paul 
quotes our Lord as saying, "This do in remembrance of 
me," and then adds, "As oft as ye eat this bread and drink 
this cup ye do show the Lord's death till he come". ( 1 
Corinthians 11:24-26) The thought is that we are thus to 
celebrate this great transaction until the time come for the 
kingdom celebration of it with the new wine, the joy, the 
glory, the honor, which we are to share with him who loved 
us and bought us. Evidently the Apostle does not merely 
mean until the parousia, the presence, of the Lord to gather 
his servants and reward them, but rather until all shall have 
been gathered and the kingdom class shall all thus have been 
set up and glorified. 

The same Apostle in the same epistle ( 1 Corinthians 
10:16-17; 12:12) emphasizes the thought of the unity, the 
oneness of the church, with each other and with the Lord. 
He declares: "The loaf which we break, is it not the communion
 [the fellowship] of the body of Christ?" Are we 
not all as parts of one loaf broken with our Lord? "For 
we being many are one loaf and one body; for we are all 
partakers of that one loaf." Again he adds: "The cup of 
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion [participation
, fellowship] of the blood of Christ?" Assuredly 
this is the thought then, that from God's standpoint there 
is the one great Messiah, the elect Head and the elect members
 of his body. These as one loaf constitute from God's 
standpoint the bread of everlasting life for the world; and 
in order to fill this picture each and all must be broken, 
each and all must partake of the cup of Christ's suffering 
and death before entering into his glory. And not until 
all these sufferings shall have been completed will the Lord's 
time come for the new dispensation, the new day, the day 
of blessing instead of cursing, the day of restitution instead 
of dying, the day of uplifting instead of falling, as far as 
the world is concerned. 


CHRISTIAN FELLOWSHIP 

July 27.— PniLipriANS 4:10-20; Acts 2:42, 46, 47. 

F»AI_ T I. A\n THE PHILIPPIAN CHURCH— THEIR KINDNESSES ACCEPTED NOT AS DONE TO HIM PERSONALLY, BUT AS TO AN AMBASSADOR 
OF CHRIST— FELLOWS F-UP WITHIN THE CHURCH, PREFERABLY WITH THE LOWLY— LOVE, THE INSPIRATION TO FELLOWSHIP — 
"THAT WHICH EVERY JOINT SUPPLIETH". 

"// we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another!' — 1 John 1:7. 



HE STORY of Paul and the Philippian church 
forms one of the most interesting narratives 
of the whole Cible. He and Silas were led to 
go to Philippi by a vision which appeared to 
Paul at night while they were at Troas, evidently
 in a state of more or less perplexity 
because of the hindrance which the Lord had 
placed in their way when they had attempted 
to go into the East. 

Just why the holy Spirit suffered them not 
to go into Bithynia we cannot be sure, but 
possibly it was for two reasons: (1) the basic character 
qualities of the eastern peoples rendered attraction to the 
truth less likely, for their conception of honesty is such as 
leads them to leave truth largely to the imagination, while 
that of the northern and western peoples inclines them to 
leave little to the imagination, but to be more direct and more 
strict in making statements conform to facts; (2) granted 
that there may have been some work to do in eastern parts, 
the Lord doubtless saw that some less capable apostle could 
do whatwas there necessary to be done in the way of extending
 a witness of God's love and goodness. Indeed, plausible 
tradition has it that Bartholomew went into Bithynia and 
with St. Thomas went through Arabia and across southern 
India. Thus the Apostle Paul was liberated from one service 
that he might enter into a more extensive one; he proceeded 
at once to Philippi. 

PROMPT TO GIVE, PROMPT TO RECEIVE THE MESSAGE 

They heard that devotional exercises were usually held on 
the Sabbath by the tivcr bank outside the city, and they resorted
 thither to see if the Lord might not use them there. 
Probably the greater portion of these worshipers were either 
Jewish or Jewish sympathisers. They evidently knew something
 of the true God. Some of them listened, and Lydia, 
an emmigree from Asia Minor, received the message gladly 
and was baptized. Naturally these accounts given us are 
very limited, but making all due allowance for brevity in the 
account, it was evidently true that her acceptance of the 
Gospel was ready and that she was baptized at once. Here 
were both depth and decision of character; there was no dillydallying
 or putting it off to a more convenient season. Had 
she delayed long she might not have had the opportunity, 
for it was only a few days until Paul and Silas were asked 
to leave the place and the only other two visits of the Apostle 
were some years later and probably also very brief. At all 
events she did accept Christ and thus came into possession 
not merely of divine favor but doubtless also got added blessing
 for her promptness— there was no occasion for regret. 

It was only a few days when Paul, harrassed by the continued
 and unwelcome attention of a young girl who was 
possessed of an evil spirit, exorcised the demon in the name 
of the Lord Jesus, and the demon left her, to the chagin 
and anger of her exploiters, who laid charges against Paul 
and Silas before the police authorities, had them beaten and 
committed to jail. They were miraculously delivered, which 
eventuated in the conversion of the jailer with his household, 
the exoneration of the missionaries by the magistrates, and 
the comforting (if the brethren. Then followed many years 
of acthity on the part of the Apostle until he spent about 
four years in military custody, two years in Caesarca and 
about two years in Rome. It was toward the latter part of 
this last period that this letter was written, in return for and 
in acknowledgement of cheer and financial help sent by 
the Philippian brethren to Paul at Rome at the hand of 
Epaphroditus. The journey was in all about seven hundred 
miles and represented considerable outlay in time, energy, 
and money. 

The Apostle was encouraged by their gift not only because 
of its intrinsic worth, but more because of the love and true 
fellowship trrey thus manifested in him as a servant of the 
Lord. He accepted the aid which they on their part esteemed 
it a privilege and a blessing to be allowed to give. 

FELLOWSHIP IN CHRIST'S SUFFERING 

"Fellowship is a mutual association of persons on equal 
and friendly terms; communion;" "participation in something, 
especially in ideas and sentiments held in common". 


The Apostle's fellowship with the brethren at Philippi had 
covered a wide range of experiences; and this fact becomes 
all the more remarkable when we consider that there had 
not been much time spent together, nothing like as much as 
that spent at Corinth or Ephesus. Yet there was no church 
with which the A^postlc had closer fellowship than with that 
of Philippi. First he had fellowship with some of them in 
prayer; they had met in common at the river-side for that 
purpose. Then they had all had fellowship in the understanding
 of the Gospel. Whatever other things people may 
have in common there is nothing that draws them quite so 
closely together as the community of interest arising from 
a mutual understanding of God's great purposes and designs 
ns revealed in his Word. 

But their new-found common interests were not limited 
to praver and appreciation of the truth; the poignant hand 
of persecution soon fell upon the little group. Satan, the god 
of this world, was opposed to their activities because they 
had the effect of enlightening the minds of those who received
 the message concerning the real character of Jehovah, 
and this was inimical to the interests of Satan's empire. 
Then their fellowship reached out to the new joy of deliverance
, dampened a little, no doubt, by the need of parting. 
But their interest in him did not die with their farewells, nor 
did his for them. They kept in touch with him and, during 
the short time he was at Thessalonica, they sent twice to 
minister to his necessities. — Philippians 4:16. 

Furthermore the Apostle and the Philippian brethren had 
fellowship in hope — hope that Christ would be magnified in 
his body whether it be by life or by death (Philippians 1:20), 
hope of their being with Christ in the first resurrection 
(ch. 1:23), hope of <=o running along the marked-off way 
that they would attain the prize of the high calling of God 
in Christ Jesus, hope that Christ's body of humiliation, of 
which they were a part, would be changed and fashioned into 
his own glorious body, according to the working whereby he 
is able to subdue all things even unto himself, (ch. 1:21). 

Their hearts were also joined in longing, as is intimated 
in the first verse of the fourth chapter: "Therefore, my 
brethren, dearly heWed and longed for*. From what we can 
gather of the natural inclinations of the Apostle we would 
not take him to be given to much gush of sentiment; when 
he uses these terms of endearing affection therefore, they 
are all the more significant of the depth and abiding love, of 
the fusion of spirit which had been wrought under the fires 
of affliction and on the anvil of experience. 

Moreover a community of need entered into their relationship
. He needed their love and encouragement and they 
needed his counsel and guidance in spiritual matters. But 
most of all they all needed the wisdom, the spirit, and the 
favor of the Father nnd of their Master, Jesu^, without whom 
they could do nothing. There was fellowship in steadfastness
, as the Apostle cheerfully acknowledges in the first 
chapter of his letter: "I give thanks to my God upon every 
remembrance of you (for I always have joy in remembering 
you all in even' petition of mine) for your resnonsiveness 
to the good news from the first day until now ; having this 
^ame confidence, that he who started a good work in you, 
will keep completing it until the day of Christ Jesus". 

FELLOWSHIP NOT ARTIFICIAL 

No amount of artificial effort can produce true fellowship; 
effort merelv makes it a theatrical representation of the real 
thing. If there is community of interest, there is fellowship; 
if there is no community of interest, there is no fellowship, 
and no effort at appearance will make it so. But there is 
such a thing as forgetting the fact that a real community of 
interest does exist — interest in the things of the world or of 
the flesh may dim our consciousness of the things eternal. 
That there is a danger along this line is admitted by the 
warning of the Apostle against forgetting the assembling of 
ourselves together. (Hebrews 10:25) Forgetful of this admonition
 there crept into the church the hermit and monastic 
life, both of which precluded the possibility of full fellowship 
in sympathy, in suffering, in hopes, in fears, in doctrine, in 
hearing the message, in bearing the message, in prayer, in 
the breaking of bread. 

It is true that the Scriptures tell us to "love not the world 


204 


juxv I, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


205 


neither the things that are in the world" ; bul it is not the 
thought that Christ's followers are to hide themselves from 
contact with the world nor with one another and lead a 
monastic existence. The Lord himself is the best example 
on this point. Except on rare occasions he did not seclude 
himself, and even when he did he did not remain there to 
eke out his existence in ascetic practices, but, when refreshed 
by prayer and communion with the Father, he returned to his 
accustomed ministry. He was dealing with the people nearly 
all of the time, yet he said of himself: "I am not of the 
world". His scparateness from the world therefore was one 
touching not so much his person as his affections and ideals. 
The ideals of the world are based on selfishness and those 
of our Lord on the highest of altruism, love. 

In our exercise of fellowship with those of like precious 
faith, we naturally encounter the imperfections ot the brethren
. Their imperfections may at times and for a time seem 
to becloud our real fellowship in the things of the spirit. It 
is some comfort to know that these difficulties were also 
experienced even in the Philippian church, as there was some 
variance between two sisters who had been faithful workers 
with the Apostle in the spreading or* the g(ad tidings. 
(Philippians 4:2, 3) But those people who are the most 
pleasant to us may not in the end prove to be those who have 
helped and developed us the most. We therefore should not 
be too assiduous in either seeking or rejecting the fellowship 
of those whom divine providence has thrown in our path. 
If we seek the special fellowship of some particular individual 
we may find that we have done so from selfish or, at best, 
natural motives; if we reject the fellowship of those who 
are not so attractive to us according to the flesh we may 
miss some of the most valuable lessons of life. 
"MIND NOT HIGH THINGS" 

We are instructed to "mind not high things, but condescend 
to men of low estate". (Romans 12:16) Doubtless the reason 
for this instruction lies in the fact that "with the lowly is 
wisdom". (Proverbs 11:2) Those well endowed by nature 
are likely to feel their superiority and feeling their superiority 
they become proud and supercilious, and the proud and supercilious
 are not likely to have, or having, to retain, an unbiased
 or accurate view of things. And among the things 
which they are apt to forget is their need of the Lord and 
th$ foolishness of attempting anything without his blessing 
and guidance. The lowly are not so occupied with their own 
devices and are more likely to have a reverential respect for 
the Lord's commands and greater willingness to sacrifice 
personal preference for the comfort or benefit of others. 

The Lord has arranged that all his work of this Gospel 
age be carried on through the sacrifices of the saints, not 
because the Lord needs anything, but because the consecrated
 child of God, as also every ecclesia, needs to encourage 
the sacrificial quality of his or its own service. It counteracts
 acquisitiveness and self-centered ^ thinking and assists in 
developing that love which seeks nothing for itsclt t but whkh 
seeks to dispense blessing to others. Because it will assist in 
our development, therefore, God permits his work to be in 
such condition that it will have need of the best efforts of 
all who are truly his. 

Love is the inspiration to fellowship, as the Apostle John 
tells us. (1 John 4:11) God's love for us is the great wellspring
 which starts our love for him. But there is little wc 
can do to show our love for God directly; so he has arranged 
that our lo\ e for him be shown largely to those who are his. 
(1 John 420) In love for the Lord and for his people we 
find the source of every virtue. If love does not see in a 
brother or a sister all that we would like to see of the image 
of Christ, love can afford to wait. The Lord has waited 
long and patiently on us and has been kind to us in spite of 
our repeated shortcomings, 

"Then they ihat feared the Lord spake often one to another
". (Malachi 3:16) These words suggest conferences 
on holy things meetings, conventions, et cetera, to encourage, 
to give sympathy, to receive broader views of God's goodness, 
new suggestions regarding his work either of witness to tha 
world or of grace in the hearts of his children^ and, not least, 
the correction of errors in thought, in word, in conduct. 

In another of his epistles the Apostle shows why fellowship
 is necessary to the wellbeing of the new creature. It 
is because no one member has all the graces of the spirit in 
full development, and no one has all the means of grace or 
assistance for the others. It is like one great body: some 
have the position of eyes, some of hands, some of feet Ail 
are necessary, for the body is "held together by that which 


every joint supplieth". (Ephesians 4:16) "The eye cannot 
say to the hand, I have no need of thee" (1 Corinthians 
12:21), and, if the figure were carried out, neither could the 
teeth say to the gastric juice, "I have no need of thee". 
Severn] parts in a musical composition add harmony to the 
melody; so the various individual members make the work 
of the body as a whole more interesting and more of a glory 
to God. 

SUCH FELLOWSHIP GAINFULLY EXPENSIVE 

Such was the fellowship which the Apostle had with the 
brethren at Phifippi. They did not try to be apostles and to 
lake over the work which the Lord had evidently given him 
to do, but they did have participation with him in their minds 
and. in their own smaller field, also in the proclaiming of the 
good news. More than this their hearts went out to him in 
his sufferings, and while he was undergoing imprisonment 
for the kingdom of heaven's sake they sought to alleviate 
his discomfort as much as lay within their power. 

He was careful to assure them that though there had been 
a season in which he had not heard from them, he realized 
that it was from lack of opportunity and not from any coolness
 of their love toward him. He hastened also to reassure 
them that it was not his own want which had been foremost 
in his mind. No: it was the continual thought of their 
growth in love and in likeness to their Lord and Master. 

As for himself he had learned by long experience in the 
narrow way to be content^ litera-lly, to hold himself together 
— not to "go to pieces" simply because everything did not 
go along as smoothly as heart could wish. He was not satisfied
, for that blissful state can only be reached when we awake 
in the likeness of him who is the express image of the 
Father's person. (Psalm 17:15) He had learned to do with-' 
out, to suffer privations and humifiations and yet to be content. 
Many people in the world suffer privations but the great 
Apostle had learned how to do it gracefully, contentedly, 
thankfully, knowing that he had committed his every interest 
to the King of kings and Lord of lords, and having made 
every effort within his power for provision of his needs he 
accepted the outcome with happiness. 

Some learn to be submissive under adversity and want but 
straightway lose their balance if prosperity comes their way. 
Few of u-: could stand the insidious tendencies of affluence 
and it is probably for this reason that the Lord allows most 
of us to remain poor, knowing that unspeakable riches arc 
just before us if we are but faithful unto death. There was 
no boasting in this mention of having such character poise 
as enabled him to retain his balance under all the vicissitudes 
of life, for he cheerfully acknowledged that his strength came 
not from himself but from his Lord and Master. He could 
do everything necessary to be done to finish his course as a 
pilgrim toward Zion and as an ambassador for the living God. 
He did not of course mean that he could do anything foolish 
or unnecessary, but that he could to all those things which he 
had laid claim to doing — to being content under trying circumstances
, to being abJe to do with or do without. The restraining
 influence in the one case and the buoying influence 
in the other came from him who is the Head over all things 
to the church which is his body. 

He expressed himself as being abundantly supplied with 
evcrvthing necessary. The things which they had sent he 
recognized to he sacrifices and knowing that they had done 
a good and noble deed, had "communicated'' or shared with 
him what they possessed, therefore he knew that "with such 
sacrifice* God fwas] well pleased". (Hebrews 13:16) In 
return for thi- he could assure them that God, the fountain 
head of every .Wessing, the provider for all the universe, 
would supply their needs too. He would make more than 
the general provision which had been made for the just and 
the unjust, for, they having sought first the kingdom of God 
and his righteousness, he would add whatever else was necessary
 for their continuance and perseverance in the narrow 
way. And he would not do this stintedly as though to keep 
account of every' cent, but his provision would be according 
to, in proportion to, or commensurate with his riches in glory, 
which we are elsewhere told are "exceeding". 

One part of the subscribed salutation is especially worthy 
of note— there were "saints in Caesar's household"! The 
Caesar here referred to was Nero, who was already started 
on his course of debauchery and sensuousness. But here in 
that cesspool of festered vice, around which would naturally 
flit and buzz the most loathsome moral flies of all the realm, 
there were saints. Truly as the loving John has said: 
"Greater is he that is in you. than he that is in the worid". 
— 1 John 4 14. 



CHRISTIAN WORSHIP 

August 3.— John 4:1-10, 19-24, 

great religious antipathy between jews and samaritans — our lord's conversation with the woman of samaria— the 
satisfying water of life — illustrations of our lord's tactfulness — proper manner of approaching the throne 
of grate — in what sense "salvation is of the jews"— 3uh lord's declaration of his identity — the woman's missionary
 spirit. 

"God is a spirit; and they that worship him must worship in spirit and in truth/' — Verse 24. 

directed towards the self-righteous sentiment which feared 
even to touch garments with the outwardly more degraded. 
Our Lord, without approving of the outward degradation, 
showed that God looketh upon the heart, and that some of 
those highly esteemed among men were more abominable in 
his sight than were some despised of men. 

Our Lord displayed great tactfulness. Instead of replying 
to the woman's query, he attracted her attention to a deeper 
truth. This lesson of tactfulness many of the Lord's people 
need to learn. We know some who mistakenly believe that 
they must use no tact, that to do so would be dishonest. 
They have the feeling that to be honest one must be just a 
little disagreeable. Hence they are frequently blunt to the 
extent of injuring the feelings of others and of hindering 
their own usefulness. Such should note in this lesson, and 
in many others, our Lord's tactfulness, He did not feel that 
it was necessary for him to answer the woman's question. 
On the contrary he said: "If thou knewest the gift of God, 
and who it is that saith unto thee, Give me to drink, thou 
wouldst have asked of him, and he would have given thee 
living water". Similarly, let us in all the affairs of life try 
to turn the attention of those with whom we have contact 
towards the heavenly, the spiritual things — not, however, that 
we should obtrude religious matters on every occasion, nor 
that we should suppose that our Lord would have done so. 
Quite probably he saw something in the way of honesty of 
character in the woman he addressed; else he would not have 
conversed with her. So we should be on the lookout for 
every opportunity to speak a word in season, to be helpful to 
others, to honor the Lord. 

The woman understood the expression "living water" to 
mean fresh water, as distinguished from stagnant water. 
She perceived that our Lord was not provided with the necessary
 lowering bucket and camel's hair cord, and said; *li 
you had ever so much desire to give me to drink, it would 
be useless for me to ask you, since you have nothing to draw 
with, and the well is deep, and there is nowhere else that you 
can hope to procure better water than this. Where would 
you get it?' "Art thou greater than our father Jacob, which 
gave us the well, and drank thereof himself, and his children 
and his cattle?" Again our Lord tactfully ignored the question
 in the woman's interest, not to deceive her nor to take 
advantage of her, but for her benefit. He was instructing 
her, and leading her mind up from the natural water to the 
spiritual, and from the natural foundation to the spiritual. 
He said : "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give 
him shall never thirst ,r ; for that water "shall be in him a 
well of water springing up into everlasting life/' 
ANOTHEB INSTANCE OF TACTFULNESS 

That our Lord talked to no ordinary woman is evidenced 
by the quickness with which she grasped his presentation and 
by her earnestness to get the living water he had described. 
She said: "Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, neither 
come hither to draw". Again we note out Lord's tactfulness. 
He turned the subject. It was necessary that the woman 
should appreciate the fact that she was a sinner under the 
death sentence and needed water of eternal life, which God 
alone could give, and which he has provided only in Jesus, 
the Fountain. Our Lord turned her thoughts inward very 
quickly by saying, "Go, call thy husband". Her answer was, 
"I have no husband 1 '. With that reply came a flood of 
thought, which our Lord riveted upon her by declaring, 'You 
have well said that you have no husband; for you have had 
five husbands, and he whom you now have is not your 
husband'. The woman was now thoroughly aroused. She 
perceived that she was in the presence of one who knew her 
very deepest heart secrets. Yet she feared not She fled 
pot from him. His kindliness, his gentleness, his willingness 
to talk to a Samaritan woman, indicated that she had "found 
a friend, oh, such a friend". Her answer was: "Sir, I perceive
 that thou art a prophet." 

Shrewdly then the woman led the conversation away from 
matters too personal to herself, and too solemn and too tender 
for discussion; and our Lord did not 'follow up the subject, 
but left it. Many of his followers need to learn this ]esson 
of first awakening in the hearts of their hearers a consciousness
 of sin, and then leaving it to work for them at greater 


OHN THE BAPTIST had testified of Jesus: 
"He must increase, but 1 must decrease". 
(John 3:30) It is in harmony with this that 
we read that Jesus (at the hands of his disciples
) baptized more than did John and his 
co-laborers. The growing popularity of Jesus 
aroused to bitter opposition the Scribes and the 
Pharisees, and they looked for an opportunity 
to put him to death. Hence we read that "he 
would not walk in Jewry, because the Jews 

sought to kill him". (John 7:1) Tbey had 

greater animosity toward Jesus than toward John; for in 
him they recognized a superiority over themselves, and because
 the common people heard him gladly, saying, "Never 
man spake like this man". Thereafter we hear little of Jesus 
being in Jerusalem except on festive occasions, when great 
multitudes gathered in accordance with the requirements of 
the law. . . 

En route to Galilee, the home country of the majority ot 
his apostles, the journey took them through the country of 
the Samaritans, concerning whom we remember that our Lord 
charged the disciples, saying, "Go not into the way of the 
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not; 
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel". 
(Matthew 10:5 6) The Samaritans are thus classed with 
Gentiles— aliens, strangers, foreigners from the commonwealth 
of Israel. We recall their history. At the time when the 
king of Babylon took the Israelites captive into Babylonia, 
he planted some Gentiles in the land of Israel— immigrants. 
Cut off from their former idolatries these people became 
interested in their new home country, its theology, traditions, 
religious sentiments, etc. Furthermore, some of the careless, 
ignorant and vicious among the Jews, disregarding their 
divine law on the subject, intermarried among the Samaritans. 
Thus an element of Jewish blood was intermingled among 
them. They called themselves the children of Jacob, and 
trusted that this meant some special blessing for them. 

A sharp religious controversy was thus established between 
them and Jacob's natural progeny, the Jews. The latter, 
following the law given by Moses, recognized Jerusalem and 
the Temple as the center of all acceptable worship to God. 
The Samaritans, being thus excluded, claimed that they had 
something better, that right in their own country they had 
the very mountain in which Jacob worshipped God; and 
towards this mountain they went or looked in their worship 
of God, esteeming it as a great natural temple and superior 
to anything else on earth. These facts account to us for 
some of our Lord's expressions connected with this lesson, 
and also show us why his message excluded the Samaritans, 
as well as all Gentiles, from the call which he was giving, 
the kingdom invitation, which was exclusively for the Jews. 
It was not until the Jews a^ a people had neglected their 
opportunity that the special privileges of the kingdom were 
taken from them and subsequently tendered to such as would 
have an ear to hear in every nation, people, kindred and 
tongue of earth, including the Samaritans. 
"GIVE ME TO DRINK" 

The road leading to Galilee branched off at Jacob's well; 
and the disciples went to the nearby Samaritan village of 
Sychar to purchase food, while Jesus rested at the well, 
which was seventy-five feep deep and the mouth of which 
was so walled up as to form a circular seat at its top. A 
Samaritan woman, laboring in the fields nearby, came to 
draw water, and was intensely surprised when Jesus asked 
her the favor of a drink. So tightly were the lines of social 
etiquette drawn that under ordinary circumstances no selfrespecting
 Jew would ask a Samaritan for any favor, and 
especially for a drink of water. A gift of water or of food, 
extended or received at that time, signified fellowship, a covenant
 of good will. The woman asked an explanation of our 
Lord's peculiar conduct, but he £ave none. We perceive in 
the Gospel record our Lord's humility, that he was quite ready 
and willing to mingle with any class, that he shunned no 
opportunity for doing good to any class, publicans or sinners ; 
and that he reproved and rebuked the Scribes and the Pharisees
 for their aloofness. One of his parables was especially 


206 


Jclv 1, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


207 


leisure, sorrow and repentance and reformation. It is not 
for us to break the hearts of those around us, but to find 
those who are broken-hearted. The command is, "Bind up 
the broken-hearted". (Isaiah 61:1) In many instances, as 
in this one, the broken heart needs to be touched in connection
 with the binding-up process, in the application of the 
healing balm of grace and truth; but the touches should be 
gentle. If more breaking of the heart is necessary, it is not 
for us to do. 

"SALVATION IS OF THE JEWS" 

Not only would the woman escape a discussion of her personal
 character and affairs, but she would embrace this opportunity
 of settling in her own mind, with the aid of this 
one whom she had proven to be a great prophet, a question 
which had long troubled her. Were the Jews or were the 
Samaritans right as respected religion and/ worship? Before 
her was a proven prophet, in whose words she could have 
great confidence. Hence her inquiry: 'Who are right — our 
fathers, who claim that this mountain is the place of worship, 
or you Jews, who say that Jerusalem is the only place?' Our 
Lord was not bent upon making of her a Jewish proselyte. 
The time for that was past; the harvest time had come. He 
would tell her something that would be to her advantage, 
and through her to the advantage of others in the near 
future, when the middle wall of partition would be broken 
down which still separated the Jews, in God's favor, from 
all others. His answer, therefore, applied to the Gospel dispensation
 in general; and this was already beginning as far 
as some of the Jews were concerned, and would later reach 
Samaritans and all Gentiles. He said : "Woman, believe me, 
the hour cometh when ye shall neither in this mountain nor 
yet at Jerusalem worship the Father". 

That hour began after the Jewish house had been left desolate
, after the new dispensation had been inaugurated; and 
it still continues. Believer* do not have to go to a certain 
place, a certain mountain, a certain city, a certain house, but 
may approach the living God, through the great Redeemer, 
at any place and find him. That coming hour had already 
come since our Lord himself was the first of the spiritbegotten
 ones; and his disciples, accepted of the Father 
through him, were taught to pray, to seek, to knock, to find. 
Those who worship under this Spirit dispensation will not 
be accepted along the lines of former worship and places— 
not in families nor nationally. Their acceptance will be as 
individuals and because they come unto the Father^ through 
his appointed way, the Redeemer, and come "in spirit and in 
truth; for the Father seeketh such tc worship him". During
 past times he did indeed prescribe forms of worship and 
times and places; but now all that come unto the Father "in 
spirit and in truth" through Christ are accepted. 

While it is most absolutely true that forms and ceremonies 
are not commanded, but the true worship of the heart, nevertheless
 we feel that some still maintain too much of a relationship
 to forms and ceremonies, and thus lose much of 
the spiritual blessing of prayer and communion. But on the 
other hand we seem to see a danger into which some of the 
Lord's dear people fall, through ignoring all regularity in 
prayer, and sometimes through too little formality in approaching
 the throne of heavenly grace without a sufficiency 
of humility and reverence for him who has granted us so 
great a favor as to receive us into his presence and to hearken 
to our petitions. While thankful that we can call upon the 
Lord in every place and at any time, let us approach his courts 
with reverence, with an awe of heart befitting to us in our 
humble, lowly condition, and to him in his great exaltation. 
Thus we enter into the real spirit of prayer, which should 
recognize our complete dependence and the greatness of the 
Almighty. 

WE KNOW WHAT WE WOBSHIP 

Very pointedly, though we are sure in no rude manner, our 
Lord declared the truth to the woman when he said: "Ye 
worship ye know not what; we know what we worship; for 
salvation is of the Jews". The Samaritans, not being of 
the stock of Israel, were in no sense of the word heirs of the 
Hagar (Law) Covenant. Not discerning this cardinal truth in 
its true light, they were confused as to every feature of the 
divine plan. The Jews, on the contrary, understood that they 
were the natural seed of Abraham ; and that from them must 
come the great Messiah ; and that eventually through him 
and some of their nation associated with him, all the families 
of the earth would receive a blessing. Our Lord said: "Salvation
 is of the Jews", He did not say, For the Jews, nor, 


To the Jews, exclusively. It was of them in the sense that 
the promises were exclusively to that nation, so that Messiah 
could not have been born of any other nation and yet inherit 
those promises. It was of that nation also, in that from 
them our Lord selected the earliest members of his church, 
his body, through whom the invitation to membership in 
that body has during this age been extended to every nation, 
people, kindred, and tongue. 

We would not say that the Samaritans were typical of a 
certain class of people here; for typical would be too strong 
a word. We would see, however, that as there were true 
Israelites there in the type, and a class of people somewhat 
resembling them, who were not of them, so here in spiritual 
Israel we find some like the Samaritans, who are, strangers 
from the covenant and the promises, because not of the same 
family— not begotten again of the holy Spirit. Some of 
these are estimable people, honorable and with a form of 
godliness, but denying its power. Then among the true Israel, 
all begotten of the holy Spirit, all therefore related to the 
Lord, there are two classes: the "little flock" of Israelites 
indeed, whose love and zeal the Lord approves; and a great 
company whose love and zeal are not sufficient to gain them 
the distinguished title, "More than Conquerors"— joint-heirs. 

In our conversation on religious subjects with those corresponding
 to the Samaritans, it may m>t be using the wisdom 
of serpents for us to say: "Ye worship ye know not what", 
even though this be strictly true. Nevertheless, to those of 
this class who give evidence of desire to know the truth, it 
would be proper for us to attempt to show them kindly how 
different are the hopes, aspirations and promises which apply 
to the consecrated saints of spiritual Israel from anything 
which they have known or thought In all of our dealings 
with the Israelites and with others, let us remember the 
Master's words, "Be ye wise as serpents and harmless as 
doves". — Matthew 10:16. 

WHEN MESSIAH COMETH 

The mind of the Samaritan woman swept forward in 
thought. She recalled the expectation of her own people and 
of the Jews that God would provide a Messiah, an Anointed 
One, who would be all-wise and all-powerful to the relief of 
all perplexity and to lift out of all difficulty. She wondered 
whether the Messiah could be more wonderfully wise than the 
prophet, the teacher, to whom she talked. She did not like 
to ask the question direct, but suggested it sidewise, saying, 
"I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ; when 
he is come, he will tell us all things". Seeing her readiness 
of mind our Lord expressed to her — more plainly, perhaps, 
than to any other person during his ministry — the great fact 
that he was the Messiah: "I that speak unto thee am he". 

The disciples, returning at this time marveled that he talked 
with the woman, but had too great respect for hi* i to question 
him; and all through the Gospel age many, reading the account
, have marveled at the Master's humility thus displayed. 
It has brought a good lesson to many of the Lord's followers 
— that they are not to despise opportunities for service, for 
preaching the truth, even though they have an audience of 
but one. Indeed, the opportunity of speaking to one earnest 
listener should be esteemed far greater than that of addressing 
a thousand inattentive ones. Doubtless our Lord saw in this 
woman something that indicated her worthiness of the time 
and the energy thus bestowed upon her. 

But from another standpoint, what worthiness could she 
have? What worthiness do any of us possess by nature? 
Fallen and imperfect, the only thing remaining that could in 
any way be pleasing to the Lord would seem to be our 
honesty of heart. Honesty this woman evidently had; and 
hence we believe she was favored, and many of the Lord's 
dear people have received this message since. Here, too, we 
have another illustration of the importance of using every 
opportunity that may come to us. Time and energy spent in 
the assistance of some worthy one may, as in this case, flow 
out in widening influence to many. Eternity alone will show 
the value of some of the little things, the feeble efforts put 
forth in the name of the Lord. This reminds us that our 
Lord is judging us by our faihfulness in little things and in 
small opportunities rather than by our great achievements. 
His own words are: "He that is faithful in that which is 
least is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in that 
which is least is unjust also in much". (Luke 16:10) Remembering
 this, let us be careful in the little things, little 
opportunities, the hours and the moments, that we may show 
ourselves zealous for the Lord and his cause, and have his 
eventual approval, as well as his present blessing. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAEER 


Fasper, Tex 

KirbyviJle, Tex. . . . 

Mlsbee, Tex 

Clawson, Tex 

Apple Springs, Tex. 

Helmic. Tex 

Houston, Tex 


.July 


14 

15 
16 
18 
19 
20 
21 


Normangee, Tex. 

Mexia. Tex 

Groesbeck, Tex. . 
Thornton, Tex. . 
Lampasas, Tex. . 
Brownwood, Tex, 
Dublin, Tex. . . . 


.July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H. BARBER 


Perry, K. Y 

Olean, N. Y 

Bolivar, N. Y. . . . 
Shinglehouse, Pa. 
Salamanca, N. Y. 
Jamestown, N. Y. 


.July 


7 Onoville, N. Y July 

8 Warren, Pa 

9 Westfield, N. Y 

10 Ashtabula, O. . . . 

11 Erie. Pa 

13 Oil City, Pa 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


Kennebunk, Me. ...July 

Portland, lie 

Hallowell, Me " 

Wilton, Me ^ 

Auburn, Me. ...... 

Belfast. Me " 


14 Pittsfield, Me July 

15 Bangor, Me " 

17 Blame, Me " 

18 Portland, Me ** 

20 Wiscasset, ile " 

21 Kittery, Me " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 


Stockton, Cal July 

San Jose, Cal 

Santa Cruz, Cai. 

Oakland, Cal || 

Richmond, Cai 

San Rafael, Cal. . . . ' * 
San Franciaco, Cal. . 


13 Santa Rosa, Cal, ...July 

14 Eureka, Cal 

15 Trinidad, Cal 

16 Sacramento, Cal. . . 

17 Chico, Cal 

18 Paradise, Cal 

20 Ashland, Ore 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. H. BOYD 


Elma, la 

McGregor, la. . . 

Dubuque, la 

Clinton, la 

Davenport, la. . . 
Rock Island. 111. 


.July 


10 

11 

13 
14 
15 
16 


Moline, 111 

Muscatine, la. . 
Keithsburg, 111. , 
Burlington, la. 
Ft. Madison, la. 
Keosauqua, la. , 


...July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A, J. ESH1EMAN 


Marengo, 111 July 

Elgin, 111 " 

Batavia, 111 " 

Aurora, 111 " 

Joliet, 111 *; 

Hammond, Ind. ... " 


14 Michigan City, Ind.. July 

15 LaPorte, Ind 

16 Plymouth, Ind. . . . 

17 Atwoci, Ind 

IS Warsaw, Ind 

20 Ft. Wayne, Ind. . . 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Camden, N. J July 12 

Cheater, Pa " 13 

Wilmington, Del. ... " 13,14 

Lansdaie, Pa " 15 

Linfield, Pa " 16 

Boyertown, Pa " 17 

Reading, Pa " 18 


Manheim, Pa. . . - 

Lancaster, Pa 

Elizabethtown, Pa. 

Vork,«Pa 

Plainfield, Pa 

Northumberland, Pa 
Shamokin, Pa 


July 


22 

23 
24 
25 
27 

28 
29 


14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
20 


22 
23 
25 
27 
28 
29 


21 
22 
24 
27 
28 
29 
31 


17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
27 


19 
20 
22 
23 
24 
25 
27 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERR 


Carthage, Mo July 

Monett, Mo " 

Aurora, Mo 

Springfield, Mo. ... " 

Lebanon, Mo " 

Holla, Mo 


10 
11 

12 
16 
14 
15 


Ash Grove, Mo. , 
Golden City, Mo. 
Kansas City, Mo. 

Sedalia, Mo 

Burton, Mo 

St. Louis, Mo. . 


.July 16, 17 
. " 18 

. " 20 

. " a« 

23 
24 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER OSCAR MAGNUSON 


B. River Falls, Wis. July 
Tunnel City, Wis. . . " 

Plover, Wis " 

Stevens Point, Wis. . ' ' 
Junction City, Wis.. "' 
Richfield, Wis. " 


7 Waukesha, Wis July 

8 Madison, Wis " 

9 Racine, Wis. ...... " 

10 Kenosha, Wis " 

11 Waukegan, 111 " 

13 Milwaukee, Wis. ... " 


14 

15 
16 

17 
18 
20 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 


Crawfordsville, Ind. July 

Bedford, Ind " 

Linton, Ind " 

Terre Haute, Ind. . . " 
Brazil, Ind " 


2 Indianapolis, Ind. ..July 9 

3 Kokomo, Ind " 10 

4-6 Logansport, Ind. ..." 11 

7 Hammond, Ind " 12 

8 Chicago, 111 " 13 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 


Belleville, 111 July 7 

Lebanon. Ill " 8 

Granite City, 111. ..." 9 

Alton, 111 " 10 

Gillespie, 111. " 11 

Bunker Hill, 111. ..." 13 


Pana, 111 

Mattoon, Ill 

Champaign, 111. 

Danville, 111 

New Richmond, Ind. 
Kokomo, Ind 


July 


14 
15 
16 
17, 18 
19 
20 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H, THORNTON 


Richmond, Va July 

Petersburg, Va. . , " 

Spot (and Neck, N. C. " 

Enfield, N. C " 

Rocky Mount, N. C. " 
Vanceboro. N. C . . " 
Wendell, N. C " 


2 
3, 4 

6 

7 

8 

10 

11, 12 


Raleigh, N C. 

Selma, N. C 

Stem. N. C 

Henderson, N. C. 
Louisburg, N. C. 
Fayetteville, N. C. 
Hayne, N. C 


July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. F. ZINK 


Union City, Pa. . . . Ja 

Titusville, Pa 

Oil City, Pa 

Warren, Pa 

PeYoung;, Pa 

Butler, Pa 


7 Kittanning, Pa July 

S Punxsutawney, Pa. . " 

9 Mahaffey, Pa '* 

10 Curry Run, Pa " 

11 Alexandria. Pa " 

13 Altoona, Pa " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H, L. ADDINGTON 
Bradford, O July 6 Waynesburg, Pa. ...July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLSIN 
Niles, July 6 Kittanning, Pa July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCEEY 
ClarksDurg, W. Va. .July 6 Connellsville, Pa. ..Jmly 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D, ESHLEMAN 
Johnstown, Pa July 13 Auburn, Ind Jaly 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H, E. HAZLSTT 
New Castle, Pa July 6 CanonBburg, Pa. . . .July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUDGING* 

Lewistown, Pa July 13 Wellsville, O J»Jy 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER JOHN HUTCHINSON 
Warren, July 13 Washington, Pa, ...July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
St. Louis, Mo July 6 Batavia, N. Y J»ly 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 
Dover. July 6 Vandergrift, Pa. ...July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F, H. ROBISON 

Erie, Pa July 6 Uaasilton, O Jmly 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBTTRGH 

New Kensington, Pa. July ti Wheeling, W. Va. . .July 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

Sharon, Pa July 13 New Brighton, Pa. . . Jaly 


MORNING HYMNS FOR AUGUST 

After the close of the hymn the Lord's people may well 
have the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord", then join 
in prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is 
considered. Hymns for August follow: (1) 277; (2) 
276; (3) 322; (4) 95; (5) 67; (6) 184; (7) 208; (8) 
44; (9) 183; (10) 23; (11) 186; (12) 145: (13) ltl; 
(14) 118; (15) 267; (16) 324; (17) 166; (18) 48; (19) 
193; (20) 79; (21) 325; (22) 8; (23) 194; (24) tff ; 
(25)" 92; (26) 60; (27) 130; (28) 116: (29) 21S; 
(30) 196; (31) 333. 


13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
19 
20 


14 
15 

16 
17 
19 

20 


20 


20 


13 


a* 


30 


13 


IS 


13 


20 


)?J£*^fe 


IV ', /// 




*'. .' .",'•; 


#, 

/#\\'. 




K::^ 


^'#J 




L^- 


7*,.. . 't„S/'„~'s* 


|fc#fe*#; 


VtJ//^ 


"ROCKMDFACES^* 

Other foundation can'; v l 


A ftANSOM/FOfti'&L'^WS^ 


s 


■>**:>* 


/.:;ve? 


S^&W^ 


W 


VOL. XL JULY 15 NO. 14 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — A.M. 6047 

CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 21 1 

Bloodless English Revolution 21 1 

Twenty-three Wars Going On 212 

Mr. Vanderlip on British Finances 212 

No Clear, Arresting Voice in Pulpit . . . 213 

Many Interested in the Apocalypse .... 213 

Rebuilding the World 214 

From "Messiah" to "Community" 214 

Unhappy, but Aspiring Vatican 215 

Methodist Leaders Lean toward Truth 216 

"Sown in Weakness, Raised in Power"... 217 

Winning Others to Christ 218 

No Slumming Parties 219 

Christian Missions 220 

Honesty Rewarded with Stones 220 

Social Responsibility 221 

Letters From Far and Near 223 

"/ ivitf stand upon mywatth, ar.d will srt my foot upon the 
Toivf}\ and ivili natch to srr ?(//•■■ Hr will say unto me, and 
what answer I Aha// make to them '> j.' appose me."—Hab. 2 i. 


)WT.B.fT.S. _;- 


^#>. 


ri^n *N- ^nh fltitmw of nations with perplexity: the wa and the waves (the restless, discontented) roarins; men > ■< ■arts ^"B^f™ J£?J?3L ?S ™me t?S£Li 

* *« .mi.inc un<m the earth {society); for the powers of the heavens (eceleauwtielam) shall he shaken . V* ''i'JUVk^ 9^- mS^T ?Q- in£>2pi?fi 

> u« « that thr Kingdom of (Jod la at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh .—Matthew 24. 33. MarK u.^J. mue zvua ai 


THIS JOURNAL. AND IT© SACRED MISSION 


THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now being 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towbe Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and ot 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled 'Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Beivan Lessons" arr topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers, By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "tbe Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Random [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all." (1 Vet. 1:10; 1 Tim. 2:0.) Building un on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11 > of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has been 
hid in God, ... to tbe intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Aget 
was not made known unto the sons of men as It is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :!j-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It Is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the txjrd 
hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used 'only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear In its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3:16, 17; Eph. 2:20-22: Gen. 
28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world/' "in due time."— 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the nope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hlfl 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 :& 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and His glorified 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed, — Acts 3 : 19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Totvet Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee
, at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and 
•very article appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial 
Committee are: J. F. Rutherford, W. E. Van Auburgh, F. H, Robison, 
Geo. H. Fisher, W E. Page. 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 IN ADVANCE. 
IIND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Terms lo the Lord's Poor as follows— All Bible Students who. by reason of 
old age or other infirmity or adversity are unable to pay for this journal, 
will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card each May stating their case 
■nd requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that 
all such be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 

NOTICE TO ALL TO WEE, SUBSCRIBERS — PUaso r«m»mb«r 
that as a rule we no longer send^ a card of acknowledgment for a renewal
 or for a new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are 
indicated within a month by change in date of axpiratipD of the mb- 
»cription on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please gire old address aa 
well as new. This is very important, saving as much time and «naecessary
 correspondence ___^_ 

ENTERED A^ SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA., POSTOFFICE 

UNDER THE ACT OF MAR CH 3RD, 187fl. __ 

ANNUAL GENERAL CONVENTION 

ON PUT-IN-BAY ISLAND, LAKE ERIE 

AUGUST 24-SEPTEMBER i. 
If satisfactory arrangements can be made, a general nineda
\ convention will be held on Put-In-Bay Island, Lake Erie, 
during the period of August 24-September 1. Accomodations 
will be had at the Hotel Victory — of pleasant memory to very 
many of the friends, for it was at the same place where one 
of our largest conventions was held in the fall of 1908. Considering
 the nature and location of the hotel, reasonable rates 
are obtainable. These will be announced in greater detail in 
the August 1st issue of the Tower. The convention will include
 two Sundays and Labor Day. It is anticipated that the 
entire pilgrim force will be present. 

"GO YE ALSO INTO THE VINEYARD" 

Reports from many parts of the country show that Colporteurs
 are having extraordinary success in introducing the 
Studies in the Scriptures to the public. While the prices 
have advanced over what they were a few years ago, the 
advance (made necessary by the increased cost of production) 
is nowhere near proportionate to the general advance in the 
price of other things; so that the low price is still a matter 
of astonishment to the public. 


Our Society does all in its power to facilitate various 
methods of circulating the truth — particularly in the Colporteur
 branch of the service; assisting in the matter very 
materially by supplying the books at remarkably low prices. 
If the Colporteur work appeals to you — travelling from town 
to town introducing the Bible Keys, soliciting orders and delivering
 the books— write for "Hints to Colporteurs". We 
shall be glad to hear from you, and we assure you that every 
sacrifice yctu may make on behalf of the truth will mean rich 
blessing for yourself. 

ORDER REPRINT WATCH TOWERS NOW 

The reprinting of the last forty years of Watch Towers 
in book form is now well under way. Those who have indicated
 their intention of ordering, as also any others who have 
not so indicated, may now order, with cash remittances. The 
amount of composition and printing involved is very great 
and to avoid diverting Qur usual funds from our regular work 
until the reprints should be complete we request that orders 
be sent at once. 

It is expected that the first three volumes will be shipped 
in about six weeks, the next three about the middle of October, 
possibly sooner, and the seventh and last some time later, since 
this volume is intended to contain a careful and exhaustive 
Scripture citation and topical index for the complete set. 
RETAIL PRICES: Carriage charges prepaid by us to any part of 
the world. 

Style A: Green cloth, Morocco tips, gilt top, 6tamped in gold: 

Complete set (7 volumes) $18.50 

Single volumes, each 2.70 

Style B: Green cloth, plain edges, backs stamped in Oriental 
gold: 

Complete set (7 volumes) $14.00 

Single volumes, each 2.00 

WHOLESALE PRICES: For the convenience of class secretaries, 
or others, who can send orders for fifty volumes (or seven com - 
plete sets) , or more, the following prices will apply, carriage 
charges collect: 

Style A: Complete set (7 volumes) $18.00 

Single volumes, each 2.60 

Style B : Complete set (7 volumes) 12.00 

Single volumes, each 1.75 

These prices bring the forty years of Towers, including 
binding, to about one-third the original subscription price. 
Your good intentions which you may have already expressed 
merely enabled us to determine whether the reprints should 
be made; these were in no instance looked upon as orders 
unless cash accompanied the request. It is by no means certain
 that another edition will ever be made of these reprinted 
old issues, so that all those who contemplate ordering at all 
should order now. 


AN D H ERALD OF CH 



Vol. xl 


July 15, 1919 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


No. 14 


"Their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges. For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and 
of the fields of Gomorrah; their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter." — Deuteronomy 32:31,32. 

"The government is having its hands full with the 



HE WORLD moves on apace ; and the 
pace is a very rapid one. Those people 
whose faith has been in the established 
customs or conventions of men, rather 
than in God, are in a truly pitiable plight, 
for they see the foundation of their faith 
slipping swiftly from under them. There 
could be no good in reviewing the situation
 in the world were it not for the fact 
that the whole set of affairs is intimately connected 
with the glorious promises of God's word. Then, too, 
the spirit of distrust which is abroad in all the earth 
tends to percolate into the church, and a contemplation 
of the dire effects of distrust in the world should be 
a warning to the Lord's people, supplementing the 
warnings of his Word, in this time of testing and 
stress upon both church and world. 

The present political, social, and economic difficulties
 of mankind are touched upon in a recent editorial 
from the New York Globe: 

"There has been no more disturbing news for many months 
than this of the morning of Friday, June 13. Mutterings of 
rising peoples and the creakings of rocking governments, 
reports of hunger and oppression, and rumors of the whirlwinds
 that follow them. Charles Selden in the Times hints 
darkly at an industrial crisis in France that may develop into 
a revolution, and at lack of power on the part of the government
 to resist the forces that may be generated by the general 
strike ; French, English, Italian, and Belgian labor leaders are 
discussing plans for a strike that would tie up the continent 
of Europe and render inevitable the overturn of established 
authority; the Austrian communists seem about to get possession
 of the power in Vienna; the radicals are near a victory 
in Berlin ; Asia is awakening from her long, sullen acquiesence 
— Corea has declared her independence in defiance of Japan, 
China has suddenly wrenched at her economic bonds, and, in 
an effort to strike back at the dominant European, declared 
a boycott of European goods. 

********* 
"Only a very thoughtless observer could take pleasure in 
the spectacle of a world in process of revolution. For the 
real advancement of liberty among men seems to progress no 
faster in these times than at others, and the price for the 
steps taken is paid in bitter suffering. It was England that 
invented the bloodless revolution. It would be well for the 
world to take a leaf from her memoranda." 

BLOODLESS ENGLISH REVOLUTION 

The bloodless English revolution referred to is 
treated at some length in the Boston Traveller, under 
the date of June 13: 

"Great Britain's 'bloodless revolution' is gaining fast, and 
the Lords and Commons in daily session are progressing with 
proposals designed to equalize opportunities in every phase 
of life. . 

"The coal nationalization plan is gaining adherents in high 
places, despite the vigorous and virile attacks by the plutocratic
 holders and agents of coal tracts. It is- contended by 
the government's witnesses and experts that the titles to these 
areas are invalid and have been unjustly and illegally held 
for centuries. 


its hands lull with the unemployment
 question, and cool heads alone will avert a clash. 
Americans may have a better idea of conditions when they 
learn that whereas in the United States, according to Mr. 
Gompers, less than fifteen percent of wage earners are organized
, in the British Isles less than fifteen percent are not. 
In other words, labor is making tremendous efforts to gain 
entire control of the government.'* 

Another, though quite concurrent view is set forth 
in the Nashville Tennessean of some weeks back : 

"The world in solemn truth is groping for peace with the 
anguish of one whose eyes have been blinded by the horror 
of the spectacle upon which it has gazed. This state of mind 
has never been equalled before. 

"Are we entering into some new life? Prophets say aye; 
it does not require more than the ordinary vision of the ordinary
' man to affirm it. The past will never loom up again 
except as history, repeating itself vaguely. The future is in 
a different order. Whether the world, or a large part of the 
world, would have it so cannot affect the fact of its existence. 
In the order of change, the old gives place to the new, and 
there is no getting away from it The events fundamental 
to this transformation have alreadv occurred; they consist in 
the new conceptions forged on the hot anvil of war, in the 
new visions which people have had, in the issuance of selfdiscovered
 peoples from the conflict: there is no denying of 
their existence, and the problem is not to refute but to make 
way. 

"Instead of a state of war the world is experiencing a series 
of bloody revolutions. Central Europe, the erstwhile ground 
of vicious imperialism and heartless autocracy, is the scene 
of bitter civil wars, starvation, want among women and children
. In Russia, four governments exist instead of one; 
not one can feed the population, nor bring about the inevitable
 unity that should prevail in the government In the 
Balkans all are in confusion except the small group of 
nationalists who seek to forge out of the national kinship 
of the Slavs a lasting democratic government, and are handicapped
 by the incomprehension of the populace, the need for 
food, the quarrel with Italy. In Poland Paderewski issues 
statements that others prepare, and tries to annex a part of 
the territory of a newly freed nationality. Belgium wants a 
bit of Holland; Denmark would have a piece of Germany; 
Japan wants Kiachau; Italy wants Dalmatia. Ireland has 
proclaimed her independence ; Egypt is in partial revolt ; India 
is troubled; Finland is in the dark; Korea is rebellious and 
would be in arms if there were any available. Bolshevism 
usurps authority In Russia, extends to Hungary, to Germany, 
to Vienna, and other nations are fearful of its clutch. Italy 
is seething with unrest. The French Socialists form a strong 
party ready to oppose the government _ Lloyd George has 
been driven to radical extremes to conciliate labor. In our 
own United States four strikes since the armistice have taken 
place on a large scale; the Seattle strike, the textile workers 1 
strike in New Jersey and New England, the telephone strike, 
and the harbor strike in New York City." 

A WOBLD EPIDEMIC OF HATE 

Sober, dispassionate words are given by the San 
Francisco Call and Post of June 19: 

"Often of late the atrocities with which the world still 
echoes seem less like the crimes of individual men than an 
obscene disease which has seized upon humanity. The course 
of this disease may even be mapped out. It began, so far 
as this generation is concerned, in Armenia, where the Turks 
killed the Christians without provoking the so-called Christian 
nations to anything more than mild protests. It spread to 
the Balkans, where the second Balkan war was preceded and 


211 


212 


THE WATCH TOWER 


l'l i i shi hi. ii. Pa. 


accompanied by the most appalling massacres. The official 
report upon these massacres, in which no one's hands were 
clean, was a sensation early in 101 \. 

"With the outbreak ot the war between Servia and Austria f 
the disease blazed up with renewed fury and ^ when the little 
war became a great one the germs were carried into France 
and Belgium on the one side and into Russia on the other. 
The Germans committed atrocities in the west, both the Russians
 and the Germans committed atrocities upon each other 
in the east, and in Poland both sides persecuted the Jews. 

"The Bolshevist revolution introduced a new element of 
hatred— envy and desire for revenge on the . -ic hand, fearon
 the other. The number of the killing* by iheBolshcviki 
has bn.ii exaggerated, but though it is claimed Ecnine has not 
killed wantonly, it is admitted he spared no life that stood in 
the way of his success. On the outskirts of the revolution 
wavered a barbaiic fringe, the offspring of poverty and oppression
, who killed like beasts and were in turn killed, even 
by the revolutionists. 

"The enemies of the revolution were from the first as bloodthirsty
 as the worst of the tenorists. In Finland, Mannerheim
 is reported to have killed about nine thousand, Kolchak 
is known to hold down his 'liberated' districts with a bloody 
hand and has executed hundreds, including several members 
of the Constituent Assembly who took refuge with him from 
the Bolsheviki ; the Japanese hold large parts of Siberia under 
a reign of terror, and Petlura's forces are charged with the 
almost incredible crime of killing or instigating the killing of 
84,000 Jews in the Ukraine. 

"Spontaneous as well as organized cruelty has been rampant 
everywhere. The forces of order and of disorder are almost 
equally savage. What is going on seems to be a general 
breakdown of civilized restraints throughout a large part of 
central and eastern Europe. It is just such a breakdown, 
apparently, as preceded the destruction of the old Roman 
civilization fifteen hundred years ago. The devil is let loose 
in the world, the hearts of men are full of cruelty. Such a 
degeneration can drag great masses of men down toward the 
beast just as it can individuals. Conceivably the whole world 
may be attacked by it. Neither western Europe nor Ameiua 
is safe. We do not know what tempests may sweep over us. 

"There is no antidote except a clinging to a few old standards
 which have been proven good. We can not tell what 
of our institutions will survive, or if any will survive unimpaired
, but we can be sure that the more tolerant we arc, 
the more kindly, the more willing to study the other man's 
point of view, the more chance we shall have of holding on 
to what we most value in civilization. This is no time for 
violent language, even when it is not literally meant, nor for 
the cultivation of hate. It is no time to denounce or vilify 
even the worst and weakest of^ mankind. It is a time for 
understanding. Only that and its fruits can save us— only 
Christianity." 

TWENTY-THREE WARS GOING ON 

To this the New York American of June 17 adds 
a rather ironical squib from London, headed "23 Wars 
Going On": 

"The peace terms to be^ presented to Germany today are 
the final reply of the Allies, Andrew Bonar Law, Government
 spokesman in the House of Commons, declared in opening
 the Victory Loan campaign at the Guildhall today. He 
added : 

" 'It is for them to choose within five days.' 

"The speaker said that the chief of the British staff had 
declared twenty-three different ivars were now going on, and 
added : 

"'It is not all over. It is quite possible, by want of wisdom
, by absence of restraint, by disunion among the Allies 
and by want of unity at home, to lose, not the victory, but 
the full force of the victory which has been bought so 
dearly/ " 

These partly social and partly political phases of 
earth's difficulties are supplemented by the financial 
and economic estimate of the conditions as made by 
Frank A. Vanderlip, president of the National City 
Bank of New York, in an address recently delivered 
and as reported in the New York Times of May 27. 
Mr. Vanderlip is one of the foremost financiers of the 
world and his speech has attracted more attention 


than anything that has happened this side the Atlantic 
for many weeks. The full text was printed, but preceded
 by a careful summary, which latter we quote: 

"Frank A. Vanderlip, who spoke last night at the Hotel 
Astor, at a dinner of the Economic Club, which was held for 
the purpose of hearing his story of conditions in Europe, 
whence he has recently returned, said that England was on 
the verge of a revolution, which was narrowly averted in 
February, when he was there, and the conditions on the continent
 of Europe are appalling beyond anything dreamed of 
in this country. 

"He said that (he food conditions in Europe would be 
worse instead of better for a year ahead, than they have been 
in the preceding year, because of the dislocation of laboi and 
the destruction of farm animals, and that the industrial and 
economic outlook, generally, points to a period after the war, 
which will equal, if not exceed the war period in suffering 
and misery. 

"He said that Italy was afraid to disband her army, because
 she could not cmplwy the mm and was afraid of idleness
, lie said that the differential, which had kept England 
preeminent in international trade, was the underpayment of 
labor, and that this differential was now being wiped out, 
forcing England to face tremendously serious problems for 
the future. He quoted a British minister as raying that 
means would have to be found to send six or seven millions 
of Englishmen out of the British Isles and closer to the 
sources ot food production, if continental conditions continued 
long as at piesent. 

"He said that the best printing presses in the world today, 
except those in Washington, were at Petrograd, and that they 
were turning out masses of counterfeited pounds, francs, 
marks, lire, and pesetas, so skillfully made that detection was 
almost impossible. He said that these counterfeits were being
 spent largely by Germans to foment Bolshevist propaganda
. 

"Spain would, he said, be the most promising country in 
Europe except for the labor situation there, which had brought 
it to the verge of Bolshevism. He said that the most perfect 
laboratory of Bolshevism in Europe outside of Russia was in 
Barcelona, Spain, which he said was ruled absolutely by a 
mysterious secret council, which had censored and fined the 
newspapers until they quit publication and had enforced their 
will in all matters by assassinations, which no one dared to 
punish. 

"He said that America alone could save Europe and that 
its aid must be extended to all countries equally. He said 
that this was necessary, not only to save Europe, but to pre- 
\ em an invasion of America by the forces threatening the 
social overthrow of Europe," 

MR. VANDERLIP ON BRITISH FINANCES 

After expressing his appreciation of the welcome 
accorded him Mr. Vanderlip is reported to have said: 
" 'You are here because you believe that I may have something
 to tell jou about the most remarkable situation that the 

world e\er saw 1 would like to examine for you a little 

the English situation. England has held the premier position 
in the international industrial markets. America grew, but 
England grew too. America grew faster. So did Germany 
grow faster. But England had, up to the outbreak of the 
war, held the premier position. Now, how did she hold it? 
She had little raw material, some iron, and some coal; that 
was all. I will tell von how she held it. She held it by 
underpaying labor. That was her differential. That is how 
she competed. She underpaid labor, until today labor has not 
a house over its head in England, and the Government is 
undertaking to build a million houses for working men— a 
million houses !' " 

It may be that there is a bit of tactful advice and 
perhaps also of covert warning in these remarks on 
the cause of British commercial perplexities at the 
present time. He continues: 

"'English industry made a red ink overdraft on the future 
by underpaying labor so that it did not receive enough to live 
efficiently, and you know that in the mill towns of England 
there grew up a secondary race of small, underfed, uneducated
, undew loped people Let me tell you just a word 

of English finance. The English fiscal year begins on April 
I. Now from April I to the armistice England's war cost 
was £7,500,000 a day, roundly. It was just a little under that. 


J( i.\ 15, 1919 


T II E WATCH TOWER 


213 


In the months since the armistice her war cost has been 
£6,500,000 a day. Why, the cost of this war, after the armistice
, is going to amaze the world.' " 

Now all these views of human conditions are secular 
and if they are somewhat sinister and murky of outlook
 we can excuse them on the ground of dearth of 
spiritual vision. When we turn to the religious elements
 in earth's society, surely we have the right to 
expect to find the beacon light of hope set confidently 
in the window to cheer earth's mariners on the sea of 
life. But no: there is even greater confusion there 
than in the secular field. We cannot but recall the 
statement of the wise man: "Where there is no vision, 
the people perish," spiritually. (Proverbs 29:18) 
Mr. William T. Ellis, widely known as the "Religious 
Rambler", in a syndicate article quoted from the 
Richmond News-Leader, fairly well describes the general
 desuetude into which the spiritual forces of the 
world have fallen. It will be remembered that Mr. 
Ellis, some years back, went to considerable trouble 
to show the readers of the (Presbyterian) Continent 
that there was no beauty, that they should desire «?. 
(Compare Isaiah 53:2, 3) "Truly, our fellowship is 
with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ." 
(1 John 1:3) But note Mr. Ellis' resume: 

NO CLEAR. ARRESTING VOICE IN PULPITS 

"Where are the prophets whom this time so bitterly needs? 
Germany's prophets proved mere politicians; Russia's and 
Austria's only ecclesiastics; Turkey had none at all. What 
about our prophets in the English-speaking world? Who are 
wearing the mantle of Jonah today? 

"Let us face the facts fearlessly. We dare not indulge in 
self-deception or unwarranted optimism when the issues are 
so grave. Without captious criticism, or yet concern for 
conventional complacency, what do \\ c find when we look 
into the realm of our professional prophets, the ministers of 
the Gospel? Countless godly and faithful men, certainly. 

"Yet it is notorious that during the past five years of 
spiritual agony throughout the whole earth, there has been 
no one clear, strong, arresting voice heard in the Christian 
pulpits of the world. We hav had to look to the laity for 
our prophetic messages. One reason why society is in a 
state approaching chaos has been the collapse of great 
spiritual leadership. The men whom wc thought might sound 
the world note have become mere administrators and ecclesiastical
 functionaries." 

That the watch dogs in nominal Zion have been 
dumb, some of them themselves suggest. In the 
Canadian Presbyterian General Assembly, recently 
held at Hamilton, Ontario, Rev. Dr. Banks Nelson is 
reported in the Toronto Daily Star to have said : 

"We have suffered from being dumb dogs in the church 
and only when red, bloody revolution was hammering at the 
gates do we take action. The only way to avoid revolution 
is to preach repentance among Christian people." 

Prominent among religious topics in this country 
and Great Britain is that of Church Union. But all 
people do not look upon it with equal approbation. A 
contributor to the Denver Post of June 1 has this to 
say on the subject: 

"There is a movement towards a so-called 'reunion' of 'the 
churched which requires to be watched by those who believe 
in the ultimate supremacy of spiritual values. 

"If a church has lost the spiritual vitality which gave it 
birth it will not regain it by union with another church 
equally dead. A row of empty cisterns is useless in a drought, 
however great their unity and possible cubic content. What 
the world needs is not large religious caravanseries, but 
spiritual people." 

"Can Christianity save its soul while sponsored by 
the institutions which assume to mediate it among 
the people?" asks Joseph E. McAfee in the New Republic
. 


"The churches are not democratic; are they Christian? Can 
genuine Christianity survive their manipulation? Is the 
Christian tradition sate in their keeping? Will the people 
ever know and feel what Christianity really is under the 
churches' tutelage?" 

MANY INTERESTED IN THE APOCALYPSE 

Sometimes the comments take on a pathetic tinge, 
and thus reveal the deep, underlying desire of all 
nations for the promised dominion of righteousness, 
peace, and love. An editorial from the New York 
Herald follows in this strain : 

"In these troublous times all over the world scholars are 
divided in their opinions as to whether the war is a demonstration
 that the Christian Church has not performed its 
mission on earth, or war is a fulfillment of prophecy and the 
turning point in the final victory of the Church. The 
Apocalypse, the Greek word for Revelation, always a fruitful 
topic of discussion among speculative theologians, has arrested
 the thought and attention of the world more than ever. 
It has become an interesting theme for discussion in circles 

both religious and secular. 

********* 

"Believers in the infallibility of prophecy say that these 
visions hold the mystery of great events and explain the 
meaning of the last four years of tragedy — war, pestilence, 
famine, and death being the horsemen of Revelation seen by 

St. John If this interpretation is correct the tremendous 

events of the last four years would seem to be a literal fulfillment
 of the Scripture and the visions of St. John. The 
Christian Church, then, has not failed in its mission, but is 
now on the eve of an era of greater power and usefulness 
than ever. 

"The great events of these recent years, the horrors that 
have visited the world, the coming of war and death and the 
presence of famine, all tell the story of the four horsemen, 
as St. John saw them, representing the power of darknes* 
finally to be overcome by the power of light. 

"The Christian world is more hopeful than ever and looks 
to the final triumph of faith. Truly the bones of the martyrs 
are the foundation of the Church, and the Church will stand 
and endure. But that triumph, it is believed, must be led by 
some great spiritual, not temporal, power, beyond the genius 
of man.'* 

To this last sentence we can add a reverend and 

hearty amen! But others are very sanguine of their 
ability to accomplish great things in the Lord's name, 
whether they are things sanctioned by him or not. A 
communication from the Interchurch World Movement
 of North America carries one paragraph as follows
: 

"The seventy-six denominations included in the scope of 
the Interchurch Movement, with 200,000 separate churches 
and congregations totaling more than 50,000,000 people, are 
combining their resources for systematic effort to improve 
conditions of life in all parts of the world. By the introduction
 of Christianity, the modern interpretation as furthered
 by the Interchurch project means also introducing the 
benefits of Christian methods of living, in sanitation, child 
culture, working conditions, housing, clothing, scientific 
methods of production and manufacture and any other element
 conducive to prosperity, health, and general usefulness 
in the world." 

Nothing is said about teaching the truth concerning 
God's character, and it is only by that truth that we 
shall be made free. (John 8:32) We are told that 
"man shall not live by bread alone [however scientifically
 made], but by every word that proceedeth out of 
the mouth of God". The idea of magnitude as synonomous
 with success seems to be a prominent one 
with those who are responsible for the publicity of the 
Methodist Centenary work — widely advertised "In His 
Name". (See Matthew 7 '.22) In one of their leaflets, 
the illustrated side of which bears a picture of our 
Lord directing the "Rebuilding [of] the World", we 
read : 

"The church has caught the new spirit of the day. It is 


214 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pi II SBrkt.H, P-v 


undertaking gigantic things. It has followed the nation into 
the realm of world affairs and proposes to be a greater world 
force." 

KEBT7IXDING THE WORLD 

Drunk, drunk, drunk with the thought of exaltation 
before the time. Rather overconfident of their worthiness
 some will say to the Lord: Have we not done 
many wonderful works in thy name? Perhaps all of 
us are too slow to learn the lesson that it is "not by 
might nor by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord". 

Granted that the rebuilding of the world is the theme 
of all the holy prophets since the world began (Acts 
3:19-21), would it not be more becoming in those supposedly
 aspiring to be the bride of Christ to follow 
their Lord in his bearing testimony to the truth and 
in faithfulness to his covenant of sacrifice rather than 
following any "nation into the realm of world affairs' 
We very much fear they gave utterance to a great 
truth — "the church has caught the new spirit of the 
day/' but not the spirit of the Master, on this subject. 

This discrepancy is recognized, more or less, by 
worldly observers. A somewhat facetious article in 
the June 19th issue of Life gives vent to the world'. 1 '. 
hearty dislike of ecclesiastical interference in its affairs
 : 

"The Methodist Episcopal Church has undertaken to raise 
a centenary fund of $140,000,000 to be used 'to take advantage 
of the present remarkable opportunity to raise civilization to 
a higher level.'. .. .They will raise the money — in) doubt of 
that; they have got it and they will give it. 

"But how about the rest of their undertaking? Can they 
raise civilization to a higher level? Have they the facilities? 
Have they the liberal spirit? Do they know aboitt civilization
? Do they themselves circulate in its higher levels, and 
do they hope to haul the world up to their perch, or do they 
aspire to boost it up from where they are, and then, maybe, 
climb up after it? 

_ "Money, even a lot of money, will not do much to raise 
civilization to a higher level,.., but a lot of strong, enthusiastic
 support can be had for the suggestion that these centenary
 millions could not be better spent for civilization than 
to finance a great movement to civilize the Methodists. 

"That they are excellent raw material of civilization there 
is no doubt; they are shock troops of religion, and religion is 
a basis of civilization; but the material needs a lot of patient 
labor before the rest of the world will contemplate it without
 anxiety. For the world fears that the Methodists' true 
aim is to make it Methodist, and it does not want to be that. 
It will take to the woods first. It may easily like Methodists, 
for many of them are good, and lots of them are useful. 
But it will never like a Methodist civilization, and it never 
ought to. 

"Methodism is too puritan, too much given to salvation by 
legislation, too narrow in its notion of what is wrong, too 
inventive of new sins and too brash about providing legal 
penalties to punish them. So long as Methodists provide, 
and submit to, a discipline for themselves, there is no quarrel 
with them, but when, grown strong, they seek to impose their 
discipline on other and unwilling people, they loom up at once 
as a formidable and tyrannous force, of which account must 
be taken " 

Is it not worthy of passing thought that if the "Everlasting
 God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the 
earth" had wished or expected his people to establish 
his kingdom by political wire-pulling or chicanery he 
would have said something about it in his Word;, and 
if he had wished us to convert the world while yet constituting
 "the body of his humiliation" (Philippians 
3:21), would he not have endowed us with the capacity
 and the facilities for that stupendous work? 

SMOKING IN LAST SIX PEWS? 

Other religious bodies are not so sure of their hold 
on the situation. From the Cincinnati Times-Star of 
May 22 we quote a cable dispatch from London : 

"A movement to allow smoking in British churches has been 


started here and is being discussed at length in the press by 
clergy and laity. Hie proposal seems to be making headway. 
Dr. Fort Newton, pastor of the Temple of London, and one 
of the best known clergymen in London, favors the movement
, saying: The church is too much bound by custom 
and the respectability of it cramps good fellowship. People 
want the chinch to be less conventional.' 

"Dr. Newton argues that the church of the future will not 
be so much a place of worship as a place for companionable 
gatherings." 

But some of the American churches purpose to be 
not one whit behind their British confreres in this matter
 of accomodating the natural man. A recent New 
York paper has this item : 

"Sunday sports have been 'okayed' by one of New York's 
oldest and best known churches— St. George's Episcopal of 
Stuyvesant Square. This is the church of J. P. Morgan and 
other multi-millionaires, and also has the largest congregation 
of any Episcopal church in America. 

"The church not only has decided to approve of Sunday 
baseball motoring, yachting, golfing, tennis, swimming, croquet
, aini other outdoor recreations, but by a vote of the 
vestrymen has detciinined that during the summer months 
Sunday morning service shall be advanced one hpur to 10 
A. At., so that after a short service the members can get an 
early start for the links, tenuis courts, ball grounds, beaches 
or automobile routes. 

"St. George's Church, which celebrated its one hundredth 
anniversary eight years ago, is said to have the largest membership
 of any protestant parish in the world. Among its 
members and their favorite recreations are: T. P. Morgan, 
financier— Yachting and tennis; Newcomb Carlton, president 
of the Western Union Telegraph Company — Yachting; Robert 
Fulton Cutting, financier — Golfing; Dr. George E. Brewer, 
surgeon— Golfing; George \V. Wickersham, lawyer, former 
attorney general— Horseback riding; Henry W. Monroe, 
banker—Tennis. Dr. Reiland's [the pastor's] favorite recreation
 is sailing a boat. It was through sailing a boat that he 
first became convinced that outdoor recreation on Sunday 
was not a sin." 

Certainly no well-informed Christian would claim 
that any of the things named are sinful on Sunday or 
any other day. It is certainly much better to be chasing
 a clean and innocent golf ball around some nice, 
respectable pasture than it is to be delivering or listening
 to pratings about Tpsegeneric Humanity; Autoprogenic
 Divinity; and Hypostatic Unity', as one Chicago 
cleric is reported to have discoursed on the "Incarnation
". The objection is not to the formation by men 
of athletic or social clubs, but the objection is to calling 
it a church of Christ — "Why call ye me Lord, Lord, 
and do not the things which I say?" — Luke 6:46. 

One cannot forget the prophetic description of 
churchianity in our day: "In that day [the beginning 
of the great Millennial day] seven women [all the 
prominent religious bodies] shall take hold of one man 
[Christ], saying, We will eat our own bread [provide 
and prepare our own theological and moralistic pabulum
], and wear our own apparel [quite content with 
our own righteousness] ; only let us be called by thy 
name [be nominal Christians] , to take away our reproach
" — it might interfere with our social standing 
if we dropped the name "Christian". 

CHTJECH DROPS "MESSIAH" FOR ''COMMUNITY' 1 

At least relatively more honorable and more honest 
is the course pursued by one New York church 
recently, as reponed in the New York American of 
May 26 : 

"The Church of the Messiah, at Park Avenue and Thirtyfourth
 Street, yesterday became* 'The Community Church of 

New York* The minister, Mr. Holmes, explaining this 

change, said ; 

" 'The old name had long since lost its meaning, at least 
for our people By this action this church has now comJi
*m 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


215 


pletcd a great work of reorganization. I have left Unitarianism
, cut myself off from all denominational connection 
of every kind, that I may preach a universal, humanistic religion
 which knows no bounds of any kind, not even Christianity
, Wc have done away with assessments, pew rents, etc., 
and thus placed the support of the church on the absolutely 
democratic basis of free, voluntary subscriptions. 

" 'Wc have rewritten our covenant, eliminating every last 
vestige ol theology, thus relegating all matters of belief to 
private individual opinion, and putting membership in the 

institution on an out-and-out citizenship basis We now 

belong to the community, to take rank with the school, the 
library, the community center as a public institution for public 
service.' " 

Commenting on the action of the New York congregation
 in this matter the Boston Traveller of June 
io ? in an editorial, says: 

"Other churches should not be too hasty in their criticism 
of this one. Many of them have been doing the same thing 
for some years past— getting rid of Jesus Christ— not openly 
or all at one stroke, but little by little, perhaps unconsciously. 
Many a church has been guilty of appropriating only that 
portion of his message which it desired, and discarding or 
denying the remainder. Many a religious body has been 
satisfied with the mere shell of formalism, without the kernel 
ot spiritual truth." 

Spiritism and spiritistic activities are running rife 
in some parts of the world, particularly in Great 
Britain and France, where the losses of loved ones has 
been great during the last live years. There can be 
no feeling but that of sincere sympathy for these 
bereaved ones. Would that they were not blinded by 
the great adversary and that the light of the glorious 
goodness of God as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ 
could shine unto them. And it will, full soon, when 
Satan and all his blinding influences are restrained.- - 
Revelation 20:1-3. 

Besides the common forms of spiritism there is- the 
"scientific" kind, of Sir Oliver Lodge and Conan Doyle 
varieties. Then there is the illy veiled "divine healing
" species for the devout and fearsome, such as that 
practised by one James Moore Hickson, layman of the 
Church of England, who is reported to be performing 
cures in no less noted a place than Trinity Chapel, in 
New York, with the approval of such eminent ecclesiastics
 as Dean Roberts, rector of the Cathedral of 
St. John the Divine, and Dr. Manning, of Trinity 
Church — as reported by the Albany Times-Union of 
June 6. 

Mr. Hickson, according to the public press, described
 one of his difficult cures as follows: 

"I am simply used as a channel through which Christ 

work*; A woman came to me suffering from an organic 

trouble. She was a Jewess. She asked me if her religion 
would prevent her from being cured. I asked her if she had 
faith in Divine Help. She said 'yes'. I then laid my hands 
upon her back and I felt a vibration from above pass through 
me and through her. She was cured upon the spot. A few 
weeks later 1 met her doctor, who had given her up for lost. 
He was thoroughly converted." 

THE UNHAPPY, YET ASPIRING VATICAN 

The Vatican seems to be not entirely happy. The 
New York World of June 15 publishes correspondence 
from Rome dated May 16, a part of which follows: 

"Never since the wars of the middle ages has the Holy 
See been so nervous about to-morrow as now, on the eve of 
pcac. The war and its results have shaken its very foundations
. Austria, the greatest Catholic power for many centuries
 has crumbled into dust. The house of Hapsburg, ever 
the Holy See's stanchest friend and protector, is dethroned 
and in exile; and the countries which have risen in its place 
are in rebellion against the authority and teaching of the 
Holv See. 


"Belgium, once the most generous contributor of Peter's 
Pence, is so poor and devasted that it now ranks last among 
the givers of tribute. The Greek Catholics are demanding 
autonomy; Mgr. Valfrc di Bonzo, Papal Nuncio at Vienna, 
has just sent an alarming report about the attitude of 
Catholics in Bohemia, Hungary and Jugo-Slavia to Holy See 
discipline. The Bohemian Government demands the right to 
nominate Bishops and Archbishops, thus threatening one 
of the Pope's most ancient authorities. The Catholics of 
Hungary demand not only expropriation of church lands, but 
marriage of priests, and such divorce facilities for the laity 
as to make the Vatican shudder. 

"The Pope has sent a severe letter to the 'rebels* through 
his Nuncio, but the Bohemian press declares it cares nothing 
for such admonition. 

"In Turkey and Palestine the attitude of the British Government
 toward Arab and Jewish claims has filled the Pope with 
such alarm that he has appealed to a French prelate, Mgr. 
Baudrillart, for help and protection of Holy See interests in 
these countries. 

"In fact, events all around threaten the Papal authority 
and teachings as they have not been threatened for many 
centuries, 

"Not the least alarming is the progress made by the American
 movement for the union of Christian churches. In the 
past few weeks the Holy See's attitude toward it has undergone
 a great change. Since Mgr, Cerretti arrived from New 
York with a report of the committee's plans to send emissaries 
all oyer Christendom, news of rebellion in the Catholic communities
 just mentioned causes the Pope to fear that these 
'rebels' will join with the Americans and break away from 
Rome's authority altogether. 

"The American committee's delegation to the Vatican will 
soon arrive, and one of its tasks is to invite the Pope to send 
representatives to the Pan-Christian Congress. This again 
puts the Holy Sec in a dilemma, for if it refuses it will be 
isolated from what looks like one of the biggest church movements
 of history: if it accepts, the Pope compromises his 
prestige by consenting to merely send representatives where, 
as head of the Catholic Church, he should initiate and preside, 
giving orders and not following them. This is the Vatican's 
viewpoint of the American movement. [Since this was 
written the Pope has declined to cooperate with the committee
. Pd's.] 

"Some daring spirits there — and the Pope is said to be of 
them — have put forward a scheme whereby leadership would 
revert to Rome, as in the middle ages. Its most salient feature 
is the convocation by the Pope of a Vatican Council, inviting 
representatives from all Christian churches. And as this 
would not be successful unless the Holy See saw fit to renounce
 a certain part of its dogmas, these would first come 
under revision, so as to make it possible for Protestant 
Churches to join the union." 

SENATOR SHERMAN FEARS VATICAN MAT RTJLE 

But Senator Sherman, as reported in the Washington
 Evening Star of June 20, fears that the difficult 
position into which the Pope is brought may speil 
something sinister for American freedom, through the 
natural workings of the League of Nations. All careful
 P>ible students will be interested in comparing tlvs 
situation with the statement of Revelation 13:15. 

"A warning that the league of nations may end the separation
 of church and state and bring the civilized world under 
the domination of the Vatican was given in the Senate today 
by Senator Sherman, republican of Illinois, who declared the 
Roman Catholic Church would be represented in the league 
assembly by twenty-four votes out of forty-five. 

" 'From an early age/ said the Illinois senator, 'the occupants
 of the Vatican believed in the inherent right of papal 
authority to administer civil government. It is with the utmost
 regret I fail to find recorded in the course of papal 
claims of later days nny renunciation or disavowal of the 
doctrine. So far as a layman can discover the Vatican still 
believes it ought, and would if the power permitted, assume 
to administer ecclesiastical and civil government as its joint, 
exclusive and paramount power. 

"'Of the original thirty-two member nations, signatories to 
the proposed league, twenty-eight are Christian nations and 
four are of other faiths. Of these twenty-eight Christian 
nations seventeen are Catholic nations, cither a majority or 
an overwhelming preponderance of the population being of 


216 


THE WATCH TOWER 


]'l l I SULK* .11 , \' \ 


tiiat religious faith, and eleven arc Protestant. The Catholic 
hlcmbcrs are Uclghim, Bolivia, Brazil, Cuba, Ecuadoi, France, 
Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Italy, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, 
Poland, Portugal, Uruguay, and Czechoslovakia. The seventeen
 nations will be represented in the league in all human 
probability by Catholic delegates. 

"The peril lies in the claim ot papal power, never abjured; 
never disavowed. The temptation to enforce that belief might 
break down every barrier built up by centuries of struggle 
and sacrifice. 

"'Shall the United States commit itsei; to the mercy of a 
power from which our ancestors delivered us? Shall we risk 
entangling ourselves and our posterity in the toils we have 
escaped through their wisdom and the warnings they left to 
guide us in the duties and perils of our generation? 

"'The covenant of the league of nations bears within its 
folds a reactionary power more fatal and insidious than a 
Prussian helmet, more dangerous than future war/ " 
DREAD "RUSSELLISM" 

One of the plagues upon Babylon, viewed from her 
own standpoint, is the continued presence in the earth 
of loyal, sincere, and zealous Bible students. The 
Philadelphia Record, of May 30, reporting on one of 
the sessions of the World Conference of Christian 
Fundamentals, held in that city during the latter part 
of May, says : 

"The conference is only one of about fifteen which will 
be held throughout the country this summer with the avowed 
purpose of weeding out heterodox teachings and will culminate
 next spring in an international convention in England. 
********* 

"Rev. James W. Gray vigorously scored the great number 
of men occupying important pulpits who teach anything else 
than the truths of the gospel. 'The reason,' he said, 'that 
Christians of today cannot distinguish between true Christianity
 and the false teachings of the day is because of the 
inroads of Christian Science, theosophy, new thought and 
spiritualism and the fact that the church members arc not 
sufficiently instructed in the dogmas of their faith.' 

"The speaker said the truths of the Scriptures arc as clear 
and as reasonable as ever before, but that through the malicious
 efforts of hyprocritical and satanic teachers they were 
being scattered broadcast and made to appear as antiquated 
and not consistent with scientific truth. The speaker showed 
that it was only through the return of the people to the early 
principles from which they had been diverted that they would 
ever solve the great questions of the day; that humanitarianism
 and theosophy and spiritualism, while aesthetic and novel, 
were nothing but chaff and unworthy the serious attention of 

thinking men and women, 

********* 

"Russellism, which was now attracting so many, was nothing
 more than a hellish blasphemy. It was a mixture of 
smut and error, denying all those things which did not seem 
convenient to believe, such as eternal punishment. Like all 
the new issues, he said, it had a great mind behind it, that of 
Satan himself." 

Some called the Master of the House Beelzebub 
(lord of filth) and it should be no occasion for surprise
 if similar epithets are applied to the servants. 
Indeed, it should not be looked upon as a cause for 
personal offense at all; if we are on Michael's side 
we can merely say, "The Lord rebuke thee". There is 
much in this conference worthy of interest. Some 
items of their advance announcement seemed to give 
evidence of an initial awakening of the great company. 
We cite three paragraphs: 

"All over the world are groups of devout, faithful believers
, still true and loyal to the whole word of God. These 
at present are widely scattered and nominally separated. The 
supreme objective of this Conference is to unite all such in 
a world-wide fellowship, to the end that we may all speak 
with one voice of unhesitating affirmation of the things which 
are verily believed among us. 

"We seek to ralhy for a new allied campaign every man 
and woman who believes that the Bible is the infallible Word 
of God, that Jesus Christ is the very Son of God, and that 
the Cross is the only way of salvation. 


"Believing the Bible to be the Word of God, these leaders 
have gone forth to preach the whole counsel of God, and 
create an atmosphere and awaken a desire for fellowship 
among all who have found common faith in these 'unsearchable
 riches' of grace and glory." 

There is certainly much to be commended in the 
motives here expressed. If their condemnation of our 
own small efforts seems not altogether agreeable; perhaps
 our own criticisms of other religious bodies or 
teachings .^eem not less uncomplimentary to those upon 
whom they fall. The difference is not so much one of 
phraseology as of fact: if our teachings can be rTiown 
from the 3>ible to be of Satanic origin then we well 
deserve the condemnation we so richly receive. We 
stand ready at all times to give to every man th;»t 
asketh a Scriptural reason for the hope that is in us; 
and that hope includes a blessing for those who cannot
 now see God's purposes as we see them. 

METHODIST LEADERS LEAN TOWARD TRUTH 

Some of our Methodist friends aie perturbed about 
what seems to them a dread tocsin spreading through 
the land, fairly turning the world upsidedown, it would 
seem. A contributed article in the New Orleans 
Christian Advocate, under the heading of "Russellism: 
A Menacing Calamity", contains the following paragraphs
 : 

"There is no doubt that the modern fabrication of error 
commonly known as Russeliism, is as great a peril to the 
Church spiritually as ISoMicvism is to the State politically. 
The very stealthy, yet rapid spread of this pernicious delusion 
of the evil one should be the cause for great alarm, and much 
solicitude among the members of the orthodox churches of 
our land. Our children and young people must be saved from 
this menacing calamity. 

"On account of non-church-going on the part of so many 
people, the preacher finds himself at a disadvantage trying 
to combat this subtle foe of mankind from the pulpit. The 
only way to light this error successfully is through the distribution
 of books and tracts bearing on the subject. I think 
it would be a great and commendable work for some men of 
means to furnish the funds for the purpose of supplying 
preachers with literature, in the way of tracts and leaflets, 
free, such as they may need to check the onslaught of this 
bold and sagacious enemy of the souls of men. 

"It is indeed surprising to learn of the great number of 
our church members, and among them frequently our leaders, 
that are tainted with this noxious teaching; many of them 
^caning to it very strongly/' 

Truly, this is a terrible state of affairs. 

But we are not altogether bad, as the end of the 
article shows: 

"In the Russcllistic creed there are some beautiful teachings
 that are indeed quite Scriptural, and by these the unwary 
are caught, and drawn in." 

In connection with our recent distribution of a 
special issue of the National Labor Tribune papers 
from Maine to Oregon range all the way from acrid 
to vitriolic in their comments on our activities and 
frequent attempts are made to identify us with ultraradical
 disturbers of the social and political peace. 
Our Sunday Visitor, (Romanist) of Huntington, 
Indiana, wonders who is footing the bill, ".which must 
run up into many thousands". Furthermore: 

"We can see only Rationalism behind this propaganda — in 
an effort to bring all the Christian churches into disrepute. 
It seems that there was simultaneous distribution of this sheet 
in every city and town, requiring 100,000 carriers." 

Much more pointed are the editorial remarks of the 
MiUs County Tribune, of Glen wood, Iowa. This 
editor thinks it not an illogical conclusion that persons 
who were supposed to have conscientious scruples 
during the war and, by association, those who would 


J"i »' 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


217 


circulate a pamphlet complaining of the imprisonment 
of seven Bible Students "might very properly be left 
by the rest of the public as a proper prey for any one 
who desired to prey upon him and had the courage to 
do it". 

REMAINDER OF WRATH RESTRAINED 

But our adversary, the devil, tramples on his own 
toes now and then. A few days back six brethren 
from one of the classes in Pennsylvania went over to 
a neighboring city, where there i? no class of Bible 
Students, to distribute the papers aforementioned. 
They had put out only about fifty when they were 
arrested and tentatively charged with circulating Bolshevist
 propaganda. A great-to-do was made about 
it in the papers and the report was widely copied. 
The brethren were held from Sunday morning till 
Monday afternoon and during that time almost everybody
 of prominence in the city, including city officials, 
ministers, priests, etc., came down to the jail to see 
what a "Bolshevik" looked like. They found the 
brethren reading their Bibles or singing hymns and 
spiritual songs, or holding a prayer meeting. The 
result was that everybody that came took some of the 
literature and there was very little left when the 
brethren were released with a fine of ten dollars each — 
just on general principles apparently, very much as we 
read of the faithful Peter and others that 'they beat 
them and let them go' — Acts 5:40. 

Poor Christendom is truly to be pitied: they probably
 feel just a little piqued that we can be happy when 
they are so perplexed and bewildered. One group 
says tweedledce: Vote for prohibition and moral reform
, give more money for missions and humanitarian
 works and we will soon have Christ's kingdom. 
Another says tweedledum : Give me something more 
tangible, something that will make me well and proud 
of myself, that is the kind of Christ's kingdom I want. 

ITow true the words of the Psalmist-prophet concerning
 Jehovah : 'Tie maketh the thoughts of the 
peoples to be of none effect" — their reelings to and 
fro like a drunken man have no effect whatever in 
turning Jehovah aside from his great purpose of establishing
 Messiah's kingdom for the blessing of all 
the families of the earth. 

What is the Babylon which the Scriptures say has 
fallen from divine favor and shall also fall from lack 
of human support? Babylon means confusion; but 
we incline to think that it refers to a particular confusion
, a confused idea as to the nature of Christ's 
kingdom and as to the means to be employed for the 
establishment of that kingdom. Nearly all people 
long for that benign rulership; we may safely assume 


that the millions of consecrated spirit-begotten on 
earth today long for it as they never longed for it before
; but they are still confused by the idea that the 
only way Christ's kingdom can be established is by 
a gradual conversion of the world to Christ and by 
the employment of their time and influence in political 
fields, and thus seeking to bring about a sort of legislative
 Eden. Since they hold this view it is not 
surprising that they consider us as pestiferous and 
obnoxious spreaders of spiritual discontent. As a 
matter of fact, those who accept the Bible plan for 
Christ's kingdom are the only ones who can be happy 
now in the presence of trouble, such as was not since 
there was a nation. 

CONFUSION TO FALL— CHRIST'S KINGDOM TO RISE 

How, then, will this particular Babylonish idea, this 
confused conception of Christ's taking the government 
upon his shoulder (Isaiah 9:6) by their process of 
wheedling it out of the hands of unwilling politicians — 
how will this Babylon fall? We answer. It will fall 
when the utter fallacy of the premise becomes apparent
 to its now ardent but blinded supporters. And the 
fallacy of it will become apparent when they have a 
fair opportunity to try their schemes and thereby bring 
the poor, long-suffering world from the 'frying pan 
into the fire/ The then politicians will say to them, 
"We have piped for you and ye did not dance"; you 
had your try at pious politics, now get out and stay 
out. Will the great company be disappointed in this 
turn of affairs? Not much, nor for long. We believe
 the reaction will be one of relief ; and this seems 
to be suggested by the 19th chapter of Revelation. 
They will say to themselves: 'Aren't we glad to be out 
of all that? We never could find our heart's approval 
for all those doubtful methods for the furtherance of 
what we thought was the Lord's cause. And now 
we see our colossal blunder/ That hoary confusion 
will then have vanished forever from the face of the 
earth. 

But Christ's kingdom will be established in his own 
time and way. Thank God that kingdom will be the 
desire of all nations; it shall answer to the highest 
longing and deepest desire of every human heart; it 
shall offer to man's original thirst for knowledge, 
science the most boundless and sublime; to his love of 
distinction, an eminence before which all the prizes of 
present fame are dust and air; and to his religious 
sense, an enlargement of faculty, a vividness of view, 
and an endless succession of experiences wholly beyond
 the contemplation of our minds. For that 
kingdom shall we not offer the homage of our lips, 
and of our hearts, and of our lives ! 


-SOWN IN WEAKNESS 

Brother IL L. Addington, member of the office staff 
and also of the Pilgrim force, suddenly finished his 
course on the morning of July 4 at Mansfield, Ohio, 
when he and four other friends, three from Cleveland 
and one from Mansfield, were killed by a special 
Pennsylvania train. Eight friends were seated in an 
autocar and were being driven to picnic grounds nearby
, where meetings were to be addressed by Brother 
Addington during the day. Five friends were killed 
practically outright; three were injured. 

Brother Addington symbolized his consecration at 
Pittsburgh in the spring of 1914 and became a member 


, RAISED IN POWER" 

of the Bethel family in February, 1918. As far as 'S 
known by anyone acquainted with him he never let 
an opportunity for service slip by unclaimed; such a 
record is certainly highly commendable and implies the 
very essence of faithfulness. While discussing some 
spiritual topic at the breakfast table on the last morning
 his closing words were: "I want that immortal 
body". Within an hour the auto was struck and he 
was instantly killed. We have faith for him that, being
 faithful unto death, it was not necessary for him 
to sleep, as did the saints prior to 1878, but that he was 
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, met 
his Lord in the air, so ever to be with him. 


WINNING OTHERS TO CHRIST 

August io. — Acts 16:9-15; James 5:19, 20. 

paul anv silas on the second missionary tour — they meet with timothy — the apostle^ honesty and candor — 

FAITH LAketXY A MATTER OP EDUCATION— "HE THAT RECEIVETH YOU RECEIVETH ME" — THE LORD'S PROVIDENCE OVER HIS 
WORK. 

"Ye shall be my witnesses both in Jerusalem, and in all Judaea and Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the earth" 

—Acts 1 :8. 



OR HIS second missionary tour Paul chose 
Silas for a companion. The original x»l:«-ii was 
that he and Barnabas should go together again, 
but they disagreed respecting the suitability of 
Mark to be their companion. The result was 
a division of the work, Barnabas taking Mark, 
and revisiting the brethren in the Island of 
Cyprus, while Paul went overland to the 
churches of Galatia, probably visiting en route 
his home city of Tarsus. Apparently Silas, 
whose home was at Jerusalem, found it necessary
 to go there to close up his affairs before starting on the 
tour, and he joined Paul later in Asia Minor. This inference
 is based upon the fact that Luke, the historian, says 
"he" instead of "they", at the beginning of Paul's journey; 
then uses the word "they" after Paul had been joined by 
Silas and Timothy at Lystra, and finally uses the word "we" 
when he would include himself; Luke probably joining the 
company at Troas. 

The Apostle's journey among the churches of Asia Minor, 
planted in his previous tour, was for the purpose of their 
encouragement, strengthening, advancement in knowledge, 
and incitement to growth in grace. Doubtless also the 
Apostle experienced refreshment from contact with these 
fruits of his labor. At Lystra he found that the grace 
of God and the knowledge of the Gospel had reached a considerable
 development in a young man, probably about twentyone
 years of age, named Timothy, whose father had been a 
Greek and his mother a Jewess — the latter at this time, according
 to the Greek text, apparently a widow. 

CIECUMCISION OF THE HEART 

Although devoutly raised, Timothy had never been circumcised
 according to Jewish regulations, and when it was 
determined that he should accompany Paul in his missionary 
work the latter caused him to be circumcised. To some 
this has seemed strangely inconsistent, in view of the fact 
that the Apostle at the same time was calling to the attention 
of the Christian brethren wherever he went the decision of 
the council of the apostles at Jerusalem, to the effect that 
circumcision was not necessary to Christian brotherhood. 
We are reminded also that the Apostle would not consent 
to the circumcision of Titus, who was a Gentile. (Galatians 
2:3) ^ In view of these things, why did he countenance 
the circumcision of Timothy? We answer that, properly 
understood, the Apostle's conduct was thoroughly consistent; 
circumcision was no part of the Mosaic Law, but was instituted
 with Abraham, centuries previous, and was intended 
as a mark or sign upon all the children of Abraham, The 
council at Jerusalem did not decide that no Jew must be 
circumcised thenceforth; but it did decide that circumcision 
should not be considered necessary to a Christian. The 
Apostle Paul's own argument on this subject is most specific: 
he says, "In Jesus Christ neither circumcision availeth anything
, nor uncircumcision; but faith which worketh by love" 
— Galatians 5 :6. 

The thought is, that being children of Abraham, according 
to the flesh, is not sufficient to make us new creatures in 
Christ Jesus; and therefore circumcision of the flesh will 
not accomplish this. As the new creature is received of 
God as a member of the body of Christ through a living 
faith, he must as a new creature have the circumcision of 
the heart, in order to be a spiritual Israelite, whether he 
was previously a Jew or a Gentile. Circumcision of the 
heart signifies a cutting off — a separation from the flesh, 
its aims, hopes, desires, etc. We see, then, that there could 
be no objection to the circumcision of Timothy — it would 
neither help nor hinder spiritually — if done with the clear 
understanding that it was only a figure, and not the real 
circumcision which constituted Timothy a member of the 
body of Christ, the church. Timothy's mother being a Jew, 
he was a Jew, even though his father had been a Greek. 
And this fact becoming known to Jews in general with whom 
in traveling they would come in contact, inquiry might be 
made as to whether or not he had been circumcised. If 
the answer were No, the implication would be that he had 
never been a good Jew, but a renegade. If the answer were 


Yes, it would remove this obstacle and grant him correspondingly
 greater influence with them — a closer access to 
their hearts. 

If there was one thing more than another characteristic 
of the Apostle Paul it was his honesty, his candor; and it 
is necessary that we should see his conduct in respect to 
Timothy and Titus in the proper light, in order to do him 
justice and in order also to counteract a compromise spirit in 
some who consider that Paul's course in tins matter justifies 
them in duplicity and compromising. It was in this perfectly
 legitimate way that Paul meant, "Unto the Jews I 
became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews". (1 Corinthians
 9:20) That he had no thought of compromising 
the truth in any degree, is evident from his withstanding of 
Peter on one occasion, when the latter to some extent dissembled
 in dealing with Jew and Gentile believers. (Galatians
 2:11) This is manifest also in his letter to the 
Galatians, in which he most positively declares to those who 
had been Gentiles, that to them circumcision was not an 
optional matter as with the Jew ; but that if they should 
become circumcised and attach any religious significance to 
it, it would imply that they were not trusting wholly to the 
merit of Christ's sacrifice for their acceptance with God, 
their salvation; but were trusting partially to laws ;uul ceremonies
. His words to them are: "If ye be circumcised, 
Christ shall profit you nothing. . . .Christ is become of no 
effect unto you, whosoever of you are justi/ied by {he Law: 
ye are fallen from grace''. (Galatians 5:2-4) _ Let us likewise
 clearly distinguish between concessions in reject to 
forms, dress, ceremony, etc., which may properly be made to 
the prejudice or ignorance of those about us, and concessions 
of principles, which arc not permissible to anyone under any 
circumstances. 

PKEVENTEB FROM PREACHING 

The journey through Galatia and Phrygia having been 
accomplished, the next question was respecting future labors
, other fields. The Apostle's intention was to "go 
into [lesser] Asia"— the region in which subsequently the 
seven churches of Asia were located. But for some reason 
this was not the Lord's plan at this time; and so we read 
that they were prevented or forbidden (.whichever way the 
word might be translated) to preach the Word there. We 
are neither informed why nor how. The Lord possibly 
had some other agent or better means or more favorable 
time for sending the word of his grace unto that quarter, 
as well as some other work for Paul and his company. 
As soon as the missionaries discerned the Lord's leading 
in this respect they turned their attention northward, to go 
into the province of Bithynia; but again the Lord's spirit, 
power, influence, hindered their proposed plans. So they 
passed onward to the coast, to Troas, doubtless wondering at 
the Lord's providences, and speculating as to whether or not 
this meant that their work for the present was accomplished, 
and that they should return homeward. It was at this 
junctuie that Uk Lord instructed them respecting their journey
, by means of a vision or dream, in which Paul saw a 
man dressed in the garb of Macedonia, standing before him, 
and beseeching him, saying, "Come over into Madedonia and 
help us!" 

In these verses we have three positive, distinct statements, 
showing the Lord's supervision of his cause and of his servants
. And when we remember that our God changes not, 
that he is the same yesterday, today and forever, it give-; 
us assurance that he is still careful and interested as ever 
in his work, and in the affairs of all his servants. U gives 
us assurance that the harvest work in the end of this age 
is not going nap-hazard, as it extends hither and thither 
from one to another, by letter, by tract, by book, by word, 
to the uttermost parts of the earth. What a comfort there 
is for the Lord's people in this! How completely overwhelmed
 we would be if we were to lose sight of this fact, 
and feel the weight and burden of the responsibility of the 
work pressing us down! In proportion as we are able to 
exercise faith, trust in the Lord in regard to the work, in 
that same proportion are we enabled to joy in the Lord 
and to possess the peace of God which passeth all under- 


218 


jfi ^ is, mm 


THE WATCH TOWER 


219 


standing, and to have it ruling in our hearts, controlling our 
lives and kecpfng us balanced, not only regarding the things 
of this present time, but also concerning the glorious outcome
—the things to come . 

FAITH STRENGTHENED BY EDUCATION 

This faith is largelv a matter of education, too; for instance
, as we observe the Lord's providential care, as taught 
us in this lesson and other lessons from his Word, we are 
more and more enabled to apply the same care and the same 
promises to ourselves. Nothing wiH calm our fears more 
than this, and enable us to be strong in the Lord and in the 
power of his might; and in our confidence that he will ultimately
 bring off his work victorious. "1 his is the victory , 
that overcometh the world, even our faith." "Lord, increase
 our faith." The Apostle's confidence in the Lord's 
supervision of his work enabled him to read the lessons 
of his time, and to act accordingly with full faith respecting 
the results. The Lord could have directed him otherwise, 
and could direct us also otherwise than as he does — could 
speak to us audibly, if he chose. We are, therefore, to 
presume that it is for some wise purpose as concerns the 
development of our faith that he requires his followers to 
wall; by faith, not by sight and sound. 

As soon as the Lord's guidance was recognized no time 
was lost, and matters in general seemed to cooperate for 
the journey of the missionaries into Macedonia. After 
a sfiort sail the party landed at Ncapolis and proceeded, 
probably by foot, to the city of Philippi, which was some 
eight miles to the northwest of the port. From all that 
the account tells us, the Lord left them to use their own 
collect rated judgment as to what to do. now that they were 
there. They knew they had been sent to proclaim the good 
news and they assumed that the truth hungry would most 
likely be in places where devotional worship was accustomed 
to be held. They did not go to the schools and places where 
learned savants held long disputations about the reality of 
mailer, the immortality of the soul, and kindred subjects ; 
they knew thM in such intricate mazes of sophistry few, if 
any, would be found whose hearts would be open to the 
message of the resurrection. Apparently they found no 
Jewish synagogue there, but outside the place they found 
a spot on the river bank where services were customarily 
held. This place is supposed to have been a temporary 
shed, such as, it would appear, was not unusual where the 
numbers were insufficient to erect a synagogue. It is possible
, too, that this city, being directly under the Roman 
government, prohibited synagogues within its walls. 

NO SLUMMING PARTIES 

We note the course of the Apostle and Silas here, in 
the presentation of the Gospel. They did not go to the 
chief magistrates of the city, and say, Please direct us to 
your most degraded population, the wickedest people you 
have in this city, for we wish to preaeh the Gospel to them 
and reform them. On the contrary, they evidently made 
inquiries respecting people who already knew God, and reverenced
 and worshiped him ; and however small their number
 and unimposing their meeting place, thither the Apostle 
and his companions went. He knew, as many at the present
 time see?>? not to know, that God's work now is not 
that of reforming the world, is not a "shun work", but a 
seeking and gathering of the "jewels"; — a miction for those 
who are hungering and thirsting after righteousness; a hunt 
for those whose hearts arc tender and broken, and therefore
 ready for the balm of Gilcad, the Gospel message of 
redemption and deliverance from sin and its penalty. 

Whatever others may do, let us follow the Scriptural precedents
; let us be laborers together with God in his work; 
the results will justify this course, when this age shall have 
fully ended, and the things now hidden to so many shall 
be revealed, and they shall learn that God's ways were not 
their ways, nor his plans their plans, but that his were 
higher, broader, grander, as the heavens arc higher than the 
earth; that his time for the reformation of the world is 
future, and that the present is his time for electing the 
kingdom class which shall bring about this reformation. 

The text of the Apostle's discourse is not given. We 
know, nevertheless, quite distinctly what his message was. 
He had only the one message, viz., that God's promises made 
to Abraham were beginning to be fulfilled; that Messiah 
had come and had paid the ransom-price for the world, as 
it*. Mfi o fife ring, and that now forgiveness, reconciliation 


to God, and a privilege of joint-heirship in the kingdom, 
was being off ved, "to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile"; 
and that whosoever accepted the call in honesty of heart, and 
was faithful to it, would have not only the joy and peace 
of the Lord's spirit and blessing in the present time, but 
also a share in the glory to follow by and by. 

"WHOSE HEART THE LORD OPENED" 

In the audience was a woman from Thyatira, of the very 
district (Asia Minor) into which the Apostle was not permitted
 to enter and preach. She was in Philippi, probably 
temporarily, engaged in merchandising — a seller of purple — 
perhaps of purple dyes, or possibly of purple-dyed cloth. 
Dyeing and dyes had not reached present development, and 
the processes were generally secret, and profitable to those 
tvho understood them. It is presumed, therefore, that 
Lydia was welbto-do in this world's goods, as well as rich 
toward God in faith. Like the Apostle, she had sought 
out the place of prayer, and now the Lord had rewarded 
her and answered her prayers by sending her the truth for 
which she had been hungering and thirsting. She and some 
of her household believed, and were promptly baptized in 
confession of their faith—possibly on this very Sabbath day 
in which she first heard. 

Where the heart is in a condition of readiness, obedience 
docs not need to be delayed, nor does it require long to decide
 to be on the Lord's side, and to be obedient to the voice 
of the good message which he sends us. This attitude of 
Lydia's heart is noted in the lesson, in the words, "whose 
heart the Lord had opened". We are not to suppose a 
miracle was wrought in her case to open her heart to the 
truth; we are rather to suppose that it was in her case as 
it is in the case of all the Lord's people; that none are ready 
for the truth unless the Lord has prepared their hearts. 
And oh, how much this preparation of heart means!— Often 
trials, disappointments, difficulties, the processes by which the 
Lord' breaks up and mellows and makes the soil of our 
hearts fit for the receiving of his truth and grace. No 
doubt Lydia, after receiving the truth, looked back at past 
experiences, severe ordeals, etc., and could praise God for 
the leadings of his providence by which her heart had been 
"broken" and humbled and made ready for the seed of 
truth, ready to appreciate, not only the good things which 
God hath in reservation for them that love him, but ready 
also to appreciate his promised watch-care in their affairs 
in the present time, guaranteed to work out blessings to those 
who abide in his love. 

"OUR LIVES FOR THE BRETHREN*' 

Having received the truth, and some oi its joy, Lydia not 
only confessed the Lord, but sought means to serve him. 
She could not join the Apostle's company as an evangelist 
of *hc good tidings, but she could entertain and serve Paul 
and his associates, and did so. No doubt she received more 
than compensation for the expense and trouble, in spiritual 
riches and refreshment; but nothing in the narrative implies 
that even this laudable selfishness actuated her. Apparently
 her sole desire was to serve the Lord, and she saw the 
opportunity for this in rendering service to his representatives
. She esteemed it a privilege, and so expressed herself
, saying, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the 
Lord, come into my house and abide". 

When we remember the Master's own words, "He that 
receiveth you, receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth
 him that sent me," we can see that Lydia took no 
extreme view of her privilege and opportuni'y in connection 
with this service. Her whole question was whether the 
Apostle and his companions would honor her dwelling with 
their presence. The same principle is true and applicable 
today, and conduct similar to that of Lydia is always to 
be considered a favorable sign indicating deep love for the 
Lord and for the good tidings. The messengers of the good 
tidings must necessarily always be associated in our minds 
with the message which they bear, and the great King whom 
they represent. 

Our Golden Text calls for just a word of comment. It 
represents the Lord's message to his apostles. It can be 
understood only in the light of God's plan for the blessing 
of all nations. After the expiration of the seventy symbolic
 weeks of sp' eial favor to the Jews, ending in the fall 
of 36 A.D. the Gospel was to go not merely to the Jews but 
to all, to be delivered to all, as they might have ears to hear 
it. — Luke I2;,S2; r Timothy 2:4, Diaglott. 


CHRISTIAN MISSIONS 


August 17. — Acts 1:8; 13:1-14:28. 

PKKSKCUIION FROM THE RKLTGIOUS CLASS— PREACHING TO THE PEOPLE IN THE FOUUM— THE LAME MAN HEALED— A TEMPTATION 
TO THE MISSIONARIES — PKEACH INC. APPROPRIATE TO THE HEARERS— THE EOKh's ULESS1NG ON THE PREACH INC. 

"Go ye into the world and preach the gospel to the whole creation."— Mark 16:15. 
OTWITIISTAXDING 



the success which attended
 the message at Antioch in Pisidia, the 
spirit of th adversary was aroused in the Jews, 
who stirred up devout and honorable womenCreek
 proselytes to the Jewish religion. They 
worked upon their prejudices, slandering the 
apostles and their work and their motives. 
These women in turn exercised influence with 
the chief men of the city, until finally the missionaries
 were expelled. Their next stop was 
at Iconium, about seventy-five miles southeast. 
Here again they first preached in the synagogue to the Jews, 
and a great multitude, both of the Jews and also of the Greeks 
(Jewish proselytes), believed. But again the unbelieving 
Jews worked upon the Gentile population by calumnies. 
Hence the apostles remained there a "long time" probably 
several months, because there were many converts needing 
instruction and because it was an excellent field of labor every 
way. Finally, however, the chief Jews of the synagogue and 
the Gentiles whom they influenced, formed a plot for the 
stoning of the missionaries and alleged blasphemers. Learning
 of this the apostles followed our Lord's injunction of 
Matthew 10:23, io nee from persecution. Their next stop 
was at Lystra, twenty miles further to the southeast. 

How human nature repeats itself! As it was God's covenant
 people — yea, and the chief of the synagogue who opposed 
the Gospel and maltreated its servants who sought merely 
to do them good— so all through the age the professed servants
 of God have been persecutors of their brethren! And 
so it is today! The slanders, the misrepresentations, come 
not from the politicians and the worldly, but from the Lord's 
professed followers, some of them of large influence. It is 
still true that there are "perils amongst false brethren" and 
a Judas spirit is to be expected now, as well as then. How 
shall we receive these things? If they discourage us or turn 
us aside in fear, it would prove that we are not worthy of 
the kingdom privilege and honors, which are to be granted 
only to those who come off, by the Lord's grace, "more than 
conquerors" ; to those who willingly, gladly, take the spoiling 
of their goods, their good names, earthly reputation, etc., 
rather than prove disloyal to the Lord and to his brethren. 
Nor must wc render railing for railing, nor slander for 
slander. Wc must take maltreatment patiently. 
NO SYNAGOGUE— BUT A MIRACLE 

Lystra was the capital of what was called Wolfland. Its 
people were less civilized than in other places visited. Evidently
 there were few or no Jews there and no synagogue. 
The preaching to the people was in the forum. 

While St. Paul was preaching he p* rceived among his 
auditors a man lame from birth, giving close attention and, 
perceiving that he had faith to cooperate with Inahng, he 
commanded him, "Stand upright on thy feet". The miracle 
astonished the people, who, in their amazement, began to 
speak to each other, no longer in the Greek language, but in 
the Laconian, which the mis nonaries did not understand, 
saying that these were^gods in Imman form. The apostles 
evidently retired to their own dwelling apartments after themiracle
 and were astonished when, a little time afterward, 
the people came together to offer sacrifices to them, catling 
Barnabas Jupiter, and Paul Mercury. The people had certain 
traditions about the gods coming down to earth as men and 
these doubtless led up to their remarkable treatment of the 
missionaries. 

One of these tales was to the effect that Jupiter and Mercury
 once visited this very city of Laeonia. Tlu people took 
them to be vagrants and refused to entertain them, and ridiculed
 and maltreated them. At last two peasants received 
them into their hut with hospitality, gi\ing them their best. 
In return the gods transformed their lint into a gloiious 
temple, over which they were st t as the chief ministers of 
earth, while their neighbors were overwhelmed in a flood. 
The statue of Jupiter stood before Lwra's gale, and it was 
supposed that this story was repeated annually in the hearing 
of the people. Thinking of Paul and Barnabas as later manifestations
 of these same gods, they determined that now was 
their opportunity to show them reverence and bospiulily. 

Now came a temptation to the missionaries- Mich temptations
 as in one form or another are apt to conn to all who 


engage actively in Christian work. Would they receive the 
homage of the people and then, as gods, seek to instruct them 
respecting Christ as the true Son of God come from heaven, 
who had died for the world's redemption, etc., or would they 
stop the procedure forthwith! Such temptations are very 
forceful with many. "Let us do evil that good may follow/* 
Similar temptations of the present time might be suggested. 
A minister might sail under false colors, under denominational 
name, which misrepresented his heart and which he misrepresented
. He might seek thus to do God service and to 
advance the truth, but would it be wise? Would it please 
God to have us thus do evil that good might follow? We 
think not. The truth may be presented as kindly, sympathetically
, harmoniously as possible, but it can never fight 
a good fight under a cloak of hypocrisy. 

The same principle applies to others; the business man may 
put his light under a bushel for the sake of trade and with 
the pumiise to himself that he will use money gained in forwarding
 the truth. But would such a course be acceptable 
to the Lord? We believe not Some affect ignorance of the 
truth or disdain tor it, that they may retain social position, 
and persuade themselves that there are more than compensating
 advantages favorable to the Lord, the brethren and the 
truth, in the course which they pursue. We believe that they 
prove themselves unworthy of a position in the "little flock" 
of overcomers. The principle is of broad application, and it 
is the principle each of the Lord's people should see, and fix 
clearly in his judgment, that he may guide himself accordingly
. 

HONESTY REWAEDED WITH STONES 

The missionaries ran in among the people, dissuading them 
from sacrifice and assuring them that they were ordinary 
men like themselves. They informed them that their very 
mission was to turn them from such works of ignorance and 
superstition and to indicate to them the true God, his true 
character, and his proper worship. They said to them, "We 
bring you good tidings, that ye should turn from these vanities 
unto the living God, which made heaven, and earth, and the 
sea, and all things that are therein". Wisdom from on high 
guided them to know that it would be useless to quote the 
Old Testament Scriptures to these people, who had no knowledge
 of them. They discoursed, therefore, what the people 
could understand and appreciate, and thus they set a grand 
example to all who should ever speak as messengers of the 
Lord. Much of the preaching is far over the heads of the 
heareiw 

They introduced to their attention the God who made the 
hea\en, earth, sea, and all the contents of these. They explained
 that although this great God was interested in his 
creatures always, yet hitherto he had permitted all the nations 
to walk in their own ways untaught, unrestrained. Nevertheless
 he did gi\e them certain evidences of his constant 
care-, in the sunshine and the' rain, with the fruitage of earth 
and its seasons, thus providing mankind with food and occasion
 for gladness and appreciation of life. 

Only a scrap of the diseemrse is given. We may suppose 
that the Apostle here, as elsewhere, proo -tied to explain that 
tlu times ol this ignorance ol the past, * hi. h God had winked 
at or paid no attention to, were now ending; that a new r phase 
or turn of his great divine plan had come. And now all men 
evei\ where are adnmnished to lepcnt, to turn from sin, to 
stri\e to come near to God in reverence and obedience, and 
to hope- for eternal tiie in his provision. Doubtless he explained
 that the foundation J or these hopes and these commands
 to repent were laiel in the great fact that God had given 
his Sun to be man's Redeemer, and by and by man's Restorer. 
\o doubt he explained to them that every effort toward 
rmhte e.usiu <s and truth and godliness would have its reward, 
whih e\eiv wilful Mil woulel surely, at some time, have its 
punishment, either in tin- present age or in the age to come. 
Xo d.aiht aLo he show eel the people that the divine call of 
the pr< -1 nt time is intended merely to call out of the world 
a "lit;; (lock" of saintly followers of Jesus to be his bride 
in lli< kingdom. 

However, it was probably only a few days after this that 
some other .ku- came to Lystra, zealous as Saul of Tarsus 
hmiM-lf had been to oppose the message respecting the 
Xa/.ueiu'. The benighted p*<>ph, who one day were ready 
to do sacrifice hi St. Paul as .; god, shortly afterward, under 


220 


J' i \ n topi 


THE WATCH TOWER 


221 


me envious slanders stirred up by the adversary, stoned him 
:uid thru draped him out of the city and left him to be de- 
\<miic(1 by beasts and birds. Hut evidently some disciples had 
b< n\ made, for as we read, "As the disciples stood around 
■tl» 'ut him, he rose up and came into the city; and the next 
d.u he departed with Barnabas to Dcrhe'\ Such a man w r ith 
Mtt ii a spirit was ncccssariK a force wherever he went; a 
twee tor good, as he had once been a force for evil, because 
"" ,v f be spirit which energized him was a consecrated one, 
a holy one. There is a lesson and example here for all of 
n " uhii'h wc must not miss. He wisely determined that it 
would be unwise lo do more public work at Lystra, so long as 
die public mind was in such a foment. To have done so 
would have been merely to bring needless persecution upon 
the disciples who, young in the faith, might not so well have 
bun able to stand it 

DERBE, THEN HOMEWARD BOUND 

hudently some divine power, some supernatural strength, 
w;h accorded the Apostle, else he never could have recovered 
<y quickly after the stoning. The explanation is first, St. 
1'. uil\ own indomitable will, which mastered his body and 
mad< Jt his servant; and secondly, divine cooperation assisting
 lnm so to do. And will it not be considerably so with us? 
Wd! not faith and courage and zeal and determination effect 
niiuh as io our ability to stand and withstand the trials and 
diiuculues of lite? And will not the Lord's grace he sufficient 
'^r us.-' And whether he permit us to be smitten down with 
literal stones or the symbolic arrows, the bitter words, is he 
ti"t able to succor us, that we be not overwhelmed? 

Apparently the preaching at Derbe resulted in making many 
disciples. Then the apostles turned their faces homeward — 
toward Antioch, the ecclesia which had sent them forth as 
its representatives. Seeking not merely return, but braving 
r< turn by the same way as they went, they had the opportunity 


of meeting with the disciples at the various places and 
strengthening them and encouraging them in the good way, 
the "narrow way". Nor was there any deception in their 
preaching, They did not tell believers that shortly they would 
find themselves prospering in their business interests by becoming
 disciples of the Crucified One. They did not tell 
them that they would find Christianity the passage way into 
the social circles of the wealthy and refined. On the contrary, 
their message was in harmony with our Lord's words: "In 
the world ye shall have tribulation. These things have J 
spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace/' (John 
ih-33) Again, "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate 
you;" (i John 3:13) "Blessed are ye, when men shall 
revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of 
evil against you, falsely, for my sake/'— Matthew 5:11. 

So wc read that, as they journeyed, they "confirmed the 
souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith 
and explaining to them that through much tribulation we must 
enter the kingdom of God"— that this is the divine arrangement
 for the perfecting of our characters and for our testing 
as respects our fitness for joint-heirship with our Lord. Let 
us not forget, dear friends, that the present evil world (age) 
has not yet closed: that Satan is still its prince, and that 
tribulation is still the cost of a place in the throne! Expecting 
this, persecution will not disappoint us when we receive it. 
As with our Lord, we may find that "A man's foes shall be 
they of his own household"— his own people, his own nation. 

"Be strong! 
We Are not here to play, to dream, to drift; 
Wo have hard work to do and loads to lift; 
Shun not the struggle — face it; 'tis God's gift, 

"Be strong! 
It matters not how deep entrenched the wrong: 
How hard the battle Roes, the day how long; 
Faint not — fight on 1 Tomorrow comes the song." 


SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 

August 24.— Luke 10:25-37; Galatians 6:2, o, 10; James 2:14-16. 

low;. THE FULFILUNC OF THE LAW— WHO IS OUR NEIGHBOR?— "BEAR YE ONE ANOTHER'S BURDENS" -FAITH AND WORKS— LOVE 
TtTF. PRINCIPAL THING— SOCIAL UPLIFT A THING OF THE FUTURE. ' 

"As xvc have opportunity, let us work that which is good toward all men."— Galatians 6:10 



UK PARABLE of the Good Samaritan was given 
by our Lord during the last s : x months 01 his 
earthly ministry. The seventy had been sent 
across Jordan into the distric* known as Perea ; 
and Jesus himself went thither shortly afterward
. The purpose of his ministry was to 
awaken all the Jews to a knowledge of the 
tact that the time of their visitation had come. 
We arc informed by the Apostle Paid (I Corinthians
 15:2) that at the time of the Lord's 
death there were about five hundred that could 
tiled brethren. But besides these, the seventy witnesses 
^ib^'qmntly bore other fruit — after Pentecost. 

I ;itcr the seventy returned, expressing joy and confidence 
ilvn t ven the demons were subject to them in the 'Master's 
".true. Jtsus took occasion to tell them that they were overIt
 ^»kin^, their chief cause of joy, saying, "Rejoice, rather, 
*b ii \otir names are written in heaven"— than that demons 
at.- Mij.jcct to your command. So it hould be with all of us. 
^.e. .'.lion is a personal matter with u\ and works and prcachI
'-tf .ire merely incidentals connected with that work of perK
 "'ul salvation. The great time for works will be future. 
Him, it faithful, wc shall be privileged to be associated with 
■ V Iv'dremt r in his work of regenerating the world of maii- 
^"M. breaking the shackles of pin ,uid death, granting de- 
:\!tiiuy to the captives, even as the piophets foretold. 

N'> matter how praiseworthy are the social uplifts of the 
po m nt time, they arc as nothing compared with the great 
"•■u! and moral uplift which God has planned and which 
M- ^iah will institute with his kingdom. Hence the first 
* *'k of all of God's consecrated people is a personal one — 
d;- pnp.iration of their own hearts and characters for divine 
approval, that they may have a share in the sufferings of the 
P"-rnt time and in the glorious work of the future, 

LAWYER AND MASTER OF THE LAW 

•\t thi* point our study foi today opens. A lawyer thought 
*<> rmr.ip the Master by asking the question: "Master, what 
^i <il I do to inherit eternal life?" In those days, when the 
only law of Lrael was God's law, a lawyer was one well 


versed in the teachings of the books of Moses. Jesus therefore
 said to this theological doctor: How do you understand 
the matter? You know what is written in the law. The 
lawyer replied: We shall love the Lord with all our heart, 
with all our soul, with all our strength, with all our mind; 
and our neighbor as ourselves. Jesus approved this, saying 
that it was true. Do this— keep the Law— and you shall live. 
You will never die. — Galatians 3:12. 

The lawyer was caught before he knew it. He knew that 
the people of Israel had been dying for centuries, notwithstanding
 the Law; yet himself and others were outwardly 
claiming that they were keeping the Law. Jesus showed him 
out of his own testimony that he was not keeping the Law, 
as he pretended to do and as the Pharisees in general pretended
 to do. The fact is that no imperfect, fallen human 
being can keep the perfect Law of God; for it is so comprehensive
 that only a perfect man could keep it thoroughly. 

The lawyer sought to make the best of a bad argument and, 
instead of acknowledging his defeat, turned the question to 
Jesus again; "Who is my neighbor" whom I am to love as 
myself? This was one of the points which Jesus had particularly
 made against the Pharisees — that outwardly they 
were pious, religious, they prayed, fasted, etc., yet in their 
hearts they were in. just and would take unjust advantage of 
widows and orphan^, not loving them as themselves. The 
lawyer sought to imply that God's Law did not include everybody
 as his neighbor, but only certain special ones. 

Jesus, however, again out-gencraled him, saying, I will 
give you a parable. A certain man went down to Jericho; 
and on that lonely mountain road he was beset by thieves, 
who stripped him, wounded him and left him half dead. 
There happened that way a priest, one of the highest representatives
 of the Law; and w T hcn he saw the man be passed 
by on the other side. Likewd.se there passed bv a Levite, next 
in relationship to the service of the Law, the service of God. 
lie went a little nearer and looked at the poor man, but did 
nothing. Then came along a Samaritan, an outsider, not a 
Jew at all ; and he was filled with compassion. He bound 
vip the wounds, put the man on his beast, brought him to an 
inn and took care of him, sacrificing his own time and strength 


222 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Vl I 1 SHUKi.H, 1*A. 


in the wounded man's interest. He did more than this. He 
paid for the man's keep until he should return from Jerusalem
. 

Now, said Jesus to the lawyer, I put the question to you, 
Which of these men acted the part of the neighbor to this 
man who fell among the thieves? Which one of these treatments
 of the case would fulfill the requirements of the Law, 
according to your judgment? The lawyer answered that the 
one who showed mercy on the man was the one who had 
surely done the neighborly act. Jesus replied that this should 
be an example to the lawyer, that he should do likewise, that 
he should be kind, thoughtful, generous, toward any human 
being who was in affliction, in need of help. 

LOVE FULFILLS THE LAW 

We do well to remember God's real object in giving laws, 
commandments, etc. He is not taking pleasure especially in 
the number of times that we bow the knee or bow the head, 
nor in the number of times that we attend divine worship, 
nor in anything that we can do along the lines of worship. 
The Lord especially delights to see us cultivate his own spirit 
of love and kindness and generosity. "God is love; and he 
that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God." (i John 4:10) As 
the Apostle says, He that loveth not his brother whom he 
hath seen, how can he claim to love God whom he hath not 
seen? How could he know that he would love God? (1 
John 4:20) Well does the Apostle Paul tell us that love is 
the fulfilling of the Law.— Romans 13:10. # 

We are not to understand the Apostle to mean that simply 
to have love would fulfill God's Law and give us everlasting 
life No 1 It is only for those who have accepted Christ 
that love fulfills the Law. For all those who become disciples 
of Jesus, God has made a special arrangement, that the merit 
of Jesus' sacrifice shall cover their blemishes, so that if they 
cultivate and possess the heart quality of love (God-likeness) 
it will be acceptable— because Jesus' sacrifice makes good all 
deficiency. We are "accepted in the Beloved". "The righteousness
 of the Law is fulfilled in us who are walking, not 
after the flesh, but after the Spiiit."— Romans 8:1. g 

St. Paul remarks that love is the principal thing in our 
character in the divine estimation. He tells us that if we 
should give all of our goods to feed the poor or even if we 
should give our bodies to be burned in some worthy cause, 
and yet not have love— not do these things from the spirit 
or prompting of love— it would all count for nothing in God's 
sight. (1 Corinthians 13) Evidently the great lesson for 
Christian people to learn is to put away all these: anger, 
malice, envy, hatred, strife; and to put on all these: meekness, 
gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love. St. Peter 
declares that if we do these things we shall never fall, but 
that an entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and Savior Jesus Christ will be granted to us.— 2 Pet. I :io, 11. 

THE GOLDEN KULE 

We have found some of the Lord's people disposed to evade 
the force of this requirement of the Law and its illustration 
in the Lord's parable by saying, "Yes the Samaritan who 
showed mercy to the wounded man was indeed his neighbor, 
while the Priest and the Levite "who did not show mercy 
to him should not be considered his neighbors; Hence the 
wounded man upon recovery, should he ever have any dealings
 with that Samaritan who assisted him, should love him 
as himself, should be willing to lay down his life in his service. 
Whereas the other two who did not do neighborly acts ought 
not to be considered as his neighbors, and he should not try 
to love them as himself." 

We answer that this is a distortion of our Lord's evident 
meaning, if not of his language. Indeed he was seeking to 
counteract this very thought, which was common among the 
Jews. He was endeavoring to show that neighborliness consists
 not in hunting around for someone to do us kindnesses, 
but in doing those kindnesses ourselves. There was a proverb 
among the Jews that they should be loyal to neighbors, but 
bitter to enemies. The word neighbor signifies one who is 
near, and the Scribes and Pharisees were in the habit of 
applying this to those who were near hi sympathy, in sentiment
, in faith, in sectarian relationship. Thus a Pharisee 
would gladly serve another Pharisee, and_ a Scribe would 
gladly serve another Scribe, from a clannish, selfish spirit, 
regarding each other as neighbors in the sense of the Law, 
and they claimed that others of a different class were more 
or less opponents, either to go unloved or, if they opposed 
themselves, to be hated. 

As Christians we must take a much higher view of the 


matter than this. We remember our Lord's words in opposition
 to this very thought. He said : "Ye have heard that it 
h.itli been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbor and hate thine 
enemy. But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them 
lhat curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for 
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye 
may be the children of your Father which is in heaven." 
(Matthew 5:43-40 Any who will not come to this standard 
of love, not only for friends but also for enemies, cannot long 
bi 1 recognized by God as his children. 

Our Lord originated the Golden Rule as a fuU statement 
of the divine will on this point of dealing with one's neighbor. 
This Golden Rule must govern all who would be his disciples. 
It does not say that we shall love as brethren merely those 
who have done kindness toward us. Our Lord condemned 
that selfish kind of love when he said: "If ye love them lhat 
love you, what thank have you? Do not even the publicans 
and sinners the same?" Such an interpretation, therefore, 
as would make this parable to leach that we should love as 
our neighbors only those who have ha/arded their lives for 
us would be far beneath the teachings of our Master, and, as 
he says, would be on a parity with the usual sentiments of 
sinners— far from that of proper saints. 

As followers of the Redeemer we are to have the much 
higher standard; we are to recognize everyone who is in 
adversity and needing our help as our neighbor, whom we 
should love sympathetically to the exteait of being ready to 
do for him or her whatever service we might be able to 
render, to the extent that we would he do for us if we were 
in his difficulty. To whatever extent we can get this high 
standard of love, sympathy, cooperation, generosity, kindly 
feeling in control of our hearts and to be the rule of our 
conduct, in that proportion surely we shall be the more Godlike
, the more Christlike, for, as our dear Redeemer remarked, 
God is kind even to the unthankful. 

LOVE YOUR ENEMIES 
Our Lord's requirements of us as his discipleb go beyond 
merely the loving of a neighbor. We must have at least a 
sympathetic love for our enemies, so that we would not only 
not endeavor to injure them by word or deed, but that we 
would be ready and glad to assist them as might be in our 
power. No one, however, is to suppose that the Lord means 
that we are to love our enemies as we are to love our Lord 
himself, or even as we love the brethren. Our love for the 
Lord and for the brethren is love of the very highest typelove
 which appreciates the principles represented in our 
heavenly Father's character, which all truly his are seeking 
to copy. 

Our love for our enemies and for many of our neighbors 
must necessarily be along the lines of their characters: because
 their hopes and their plans are very different from those 
which we have adopted. As is our Lord's so our love for 
them must be of the sympathetic kind, even as is the love of 
God — "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten 
son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish." 
God does not love the world with a love of fellowship, nor 
are we to do so. Like him we arc to have the love of sympathy
 for the world. Realizing its fallen and depraved condition
 we are to be glad to do alt in our power for its rescue 
and for its comfort along lines of justice and mercy. 

There seems to be a limitation to the love commanded by 
the Law, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself" — not 
better than thyself. Hence if it came to the place where a 
neighbor's life were in jeopardy, and we could assist him only 
by the sacrifice of our own life, it would not be a requirement 
of the divine law of love that we should sacrifice our life for 
his; that would be loving him better than ourselves, and 
therefore more than the divine requirement. Neither should 
we expect a neighbor to love us better than himself, so that 
he would sacrifice his life for us. Should he attempt to do 
so it would be our proper attitude of mind to hinder it, not 
to allow him to work a permanent disadvantage to himself, 
more than we would have been willing and glad to do for 
him. It is in ibis particular that our Lord's course in the 
sacrifice of his life on our behalf transcends anything that 
was required of the Law. In giving his life a ransom for 
many, he did more than was required by the Law. It is for 
this reason that it is denominated a sacrifice. To do the 
whole Law was his duty, but when he went beyond this, and 
gave his life a ransom price for mankind, that was a sacrifice
, and as a sacrifice it was appreciated by the Father and 
especially rewarded with more than everlasting life. And 
the same rule applies to us, for as he is so are we to be in the 
world; we are to walk in his footsteps. — 1 John 4:17. 


LETTERS FROM FAR AND NEAR 


FROM AN ENGLISH PRISON 

Beloved Brethren in the Lord: 

Loving greetings in our clear Masters name! May grace 
and peace be multiplied unto you, in your labors of love on 
behalf of the Lord's dear saints all over the world, by the 
God and Lather of our dear Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! 
As you will see by the above address I am privileged to be 
in bonds for the Lord Jesus. At present I am waiting to 
be court-martialed again. I arrived here on May 3rd last, 
after having served 10 months in II. M. Prison, Wormwood 
Scrubs Wia 

Without my asking leave to do so (and hence in the Lord's 
Providence) my mother, who is not of like precious faith, 
<=cnt 111c all my Towens that had arrived while I had been in 
prison; so you can guess J have been having a feast of very 
fat things these last few days. In the Lord's providence my 
attention was called to the article in the August 1st, 1918 
Tower— "Joseph and his Brethren", which, needless to say, 
I enjoyed very. much indeed. 

In the British prisons C. O/s arc allowed their own books 
bat not papers, so you can imagine I took my opportunity to 
study while I could, and hence, though I only came into the 
truth in February, 1918, I have now, by the Lord's assisting 
grace, read the seven volumes through three times, nearly. 
And what a feast it has been! In mid-winter when it was 
very cold 1 used to wrap myself up in my blankets and study 
the truth till my hcait burned within mc (Luke 24:32), and 
thus I kept warm; — in the wonderful warm love of our 
heavenly Father ! 

In my humble opinion, dear brethren, the seventh volume is 
not "one whit behind" the other six. I think it is just grand 
the way it so beautifully combines the winepress feature with 
the "help-to-the-church-in-the-time-of -direst-need" feature. 
Surely blind indeed is he who cannot see that the Watch 
Tower Society is the Angel of Revelation 8:3, etc.! 

Allow mc to assure you, dear brethren, that I am convinced 
that the Lord is using the Society to feed the household of 
faith with that blessed "meat in due season", and that I have 
no reason whatever to expect that the Lord will make a 
change in the channel for dispensing that blessed food for 
the hungry. 

May the Lord continue to pour his blessing richly upon 
you in your labor of love for his saints, is the earnest prayer 
<>f your fellow-servant by his grace, 

Frank Rimmincton. — Eng. 


THE DELIGHT OF HIS HEART 

[.Translated from the French] 

Dear Bretiirkn: 

I take advantage of this occasion to restate to you 
my entire fidelity to the International Bible Students Association
 and my keen appreciation of the articles brought 
forth in our beloved Watch Tower, which are always impatiently
 awaited. They are always the delight of my heart. 

I address my message of fraternal love to at 1 the dear 
ones on that side, but espcen" io those who b '■ charge 
of the direction of the Lord's work. May the Lord continue
 his rich benediction to all. 

Your brother by his grace. Elie Therond. — France. 


FROM A FRIEND OF THE TRUTH 

My Dear Judge Rutherford: 

You will remember that my wife and I had the great 

pleasure of entertaining you at our home in B about 

two years ago. Mrs B. is a consecrated member of the 
LB. 9. A Her acceptance of the doctrines of the Bible 
as set forth and expounded by the late Pastor C. T. Russell 
aroused a great deal of antagonism from me. In order 
to combat these views, which to me seemed revolutionary 
and nonsensical. I delved into the matter as deeply as it 
was possible for me to do and the further I delved the 
more I became enmeshed in 1 lie coils of my own beliefs and 
I finally began to see that there was a great deal of truth 
in their belief. And the more I read the more I am convinced
 that the truth people are the only religious organization
 today that are correctly interpreting the doctrines of 
the Holy Scriptures. 

I was much interested in the arrest and trial of the seven 
men, including yourself, on the charge that you conspired 
to cause insubordination and disloyalty in the military and 
naval forces of the United States. Your trial had a strong 
flavor of a military court martial and not a civil trial. The 
comments of the trial judge could carry no other meaning to 
the jury than that he wished them to convict the defendants. 
All lawyers are agreed that a presiding judge should never 
by word or action give a jury any intimation as to his own 
opinion of the guilt or innocence of the defendant. And 
so the result of the trial was a foregone conclusion — the 
conviction of the defendants. 

Along with thousands of others who believed there had 
been a miscarriage of justice, I signed my name to a petition 
asking the President of the United States to release the 
defendants from prison on bail. Public opinion, which 
was like the force of a mighty river, compelled public officials
 to release you and the other defendants under bail — 
the amount of said bail being fixed at a figure which would 
ordinarily be fixed in the case of men convicted of manslaughter
, and not meek preachers of the Gospel, taught 
by the lowly Nazarcne. 

I consider it a great privelege, although not a consecrated 
member of the prospective body of Christ, that I am able 
to understand so well what these things all mean. "If ye 
would reign with me, ye must suffer with me," also "Think 
it not strange concerning the fiery trials that shall try you," 
etc. The imprisonment of the seven has been a mighty and 
wonderful witness for the truth, and had the seven been 
kept in prison much longer no doubt the greater part of 
the prisoners would have been converted to a knowledge 
of the truth. As in the case of Paul and Silas, the prison 
doors opened in God's due time and we sincerely hope you 
may all remain free to go on and tell the people of the 
justice, wjsdom, love, and power of God. 

Mrs. Bennett joins with me in much Christian love to 
you and the other brethren, 

Very sincerely, Dr. E. L. Bennett. — ALL. 


GRACE ABOVE ALL GRACE 

Dear Brethren ; 

Grace and peace be multiplied to you. Would you kindly 
add to my last order for the Watch Towers in book form 
two mme full sets, making three full sets of books. They 
will be such a valuable work, with rich blessings and helps 
for us, especially us that came into the truth in later years. 

My heart is full of love and gratitude to my dear heavenly 
Lather for his love and mercy, that let the light of his 
truth shine into my heart, and I rejoice in his wonderful 
plan of salvation for all mankind, and above Ml that he 
called me to know him and accepted me in the Beloved for 
the heavenly calling. Grace above all grace! May I be 
found worthy of his love. 

The Lord bless and strengthen you, dear brethren, to send 
forth the message due. The last Tower was so full of exhortations
, as all of them are. We will by the grace_ and 
help of our Lord take heed to his word and counsel striving 
to walk circumspectly in the footsteps of our Lord. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, Hannah Ericson. — Ohio. 


CONSIDERS THE TOWERS A TREASURE 

Dear Brethren : 

Please send me a full set of Watch Tower volumes when 
published. They are just what I have wished for m^ny, 
many times through the five years I have been privileged 
to receive and read the Towers. Early in 1914 a sister made 
me a present of a Watch Tower. I thanked her, Httle 
knowing just at the time what a treasure had been given 
me. But I had not been reading many minutes when I 
determined to have them regularly, clearly seeing that I 
was a most fortunate person to have the sight of one at all. 

I believe there will be many more than five thousand 
interested ones earnestly desiring all back Towers, just as I 
have ever since 1 began to read this journal. 

Yours in the service of our King, Ethel Norris. — Eng. 


the will found a wat 

Dear Brethren: 

I am sending you a list of names on a petition. I got all 
these names myself, except ten. I am crippled in my limbs 
and cannot walk; but I got the names (signatures) just the 
same, by calling people's attention as they passed my door. 
I am truly thankful for the privilege of being used of the 
Lord to get a few names. Only three refused to sign. 

Your brother in Christ. L. N. Peer.— Mick. 


223 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies 


Groesbeek, Tex. 
Thornton, Tex. . 
Lampasas, Tex. . 
Brown wood, Tex,. 
Dublin, Tex. ... 
Stephenville, Tex. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAKER 

July 


24 
25 
27 
28 
29 
30 


Purmela, Tex. 
Gu,stine, T. \. 
Miles, Tex . . 
(Joldsboru, '1 -*x 
Merkel, Tex. . 
Clyde, Tex. . . 


.July 

. All;,', 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H. BARBER 

. .July 


Sharon, Pa July 

Youngstown, O 

Niles, 

Warren, O 

Hudson, O 

Akron, O 


21 
22 

23 

24 

25 
27 


W&dsworth, O. . 
Woodier, O. ... 
Apple Creek, O. ... " 

Daltmi, O " 

Dover, () - . Aug. 

New Philadelphia, (>. " 


Bangor, Me, , 
Blaine, Me. . . 
Portland, Me. 
Wiscasset, Me. 
Kittery, Me. . 
Beverly, Mass. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 

. ..July 


• Aug. 


213 
25 
27 
28 
29 
3 


Saugus, Muss. ._. . 
Haverhill, Mass, , . 
Lawrence, Mass,. . . 
Melrose, Mass. . . . 
Concord Jn. ( Moss . 
Lowell, Mass. . . . . 


Aug. 


Sacramento 
Chico, Cal. 
Paradise, Cal. , - 
Ashland, Ore. . . . 
Rogue Hiver, Ore. 
Medford, Ore. .. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A, 

Cal. . -July 


BOHNET 


.Aug. 


27 
23 
29 
31 

1 


Ashland, Ore 

Tillers, Ore. . . . 
Myrtle Creek, Ore. 
Koseburg, Ore. . . 

Kastside, Ore 

Salem, Ore 


Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. H. BOYD 


Burlington, la July 

Ft. Madison, la. ... " 
Keosauqua, la. .... 
Ottumwa, la. ...... *' 

Moulton, la '* 

Medill, Mo. . x " 


20 Rutlcdge, Mo July 

21 Macon, Mo ' ' 

22 Shelbina, Mo. ..... " 

23 Warren, Mo " 

24 Quincy, fit Aug. 

25 St, Louis, Mo '* 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 


Michigan City, Ind. July 

LaPorte, Ind 

Plymouth, lnd 

Atwood, Ind 

Warsaw, Ind. . . . , . . 
Ft. Wayne, Ind. . . . 


21 

22 
23 
24 
25 
27 


Wabash, Ind. . 

Peru, Ind 

Logansport, Ind 
Kokomo, Ind. , 
Marion, Ind. . . 
KIwood, Ind. . , 


....July 


• Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Lancaster, Pa. . , . .July 
Elizabethtown, Pa.. . " 

York, Pa " 

Plainfield, Pa " 

Northumberland. Pa. " 
Shamokin, Pa " 


20 Mahanoy City, Pa. .July 

22 Pottsville, Pa " 

23 Tamaqua, Pa " 

24 lUzelton, Pa " 

25 White Haven, Pa ..Aug. 
27 Benton, Pa " 


31 

2, 3 

5 

7 

9 

10 


30 
31 


4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
10 


3 

5, ti 

8 

10 

2, 13 

15 


27 
29 
30 
31 
1 
3 


29 
30 
31 

1 
2, 3 

4 


28 
29 
30 
31 
1 
3 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER DANIEL TOOLE 


Pt. ('Hnton, O. 
Fremont, O. . . 
Hellevue, O. . ., 
Attica, \ \. . 
Shelby, o 
Oalion, O 


July 


.Aug. 


27 
IM 
2 l t 

30 

31 
1 


Mansfield, O. 
Tiffin, O. . . . 
Fostona, O. . 
Findlay, O. . 
Defiance, O. 
Bryan, O. . . 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. F. ZINK 


Altoona, Pa July 

Coles Summit, Pa. . . " 

Lewistov, i! r Pa ' ' 

McOlnre, Pa. ...... " 

Harrisburg, Pa ' ' 

Wa-bington, L>. C. . . " 


20 


27 


Boyee, Va. 
Kock I'M en Hprjrs. Va. " 
Hugersiown, ilil. , Aug, 
Calloway, Aid. . , . . " 
Annapolis, Md " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 


KiUanning, Pa, 
Meadville, Pa. , 


• July 


20 
27 


New Kensington l'a Aug. 
Lewistown, I\i 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 


Connellsville, Pa ..July 
Uice' s Landing, Pa. ' ' 


20 
27 


New OafsiJt' Pa. 
Massillon. U 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 


Buena Vista, Pa. inly 20 

K. Palestine, O. . " 27 


7 

8 

10 


Baltimore, Md July 27 


29 

30 

1 

3 


3 

10 


3 
10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 

Barrett, [rui July 27 Canton, O Aug. 3 

Auburn, Ind " 27 Wheeling, W. Va. .. " 10 


Warren, O Aug. 3 

Johnstown, Pa. . , . *' 10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUDGINGS 

Wellsville, O July 20 Clarksburg, W. Va,.Aug. 3 

Cumberland, Md. . . " 27 Youngstown, O . . , . " 10 


ADDRESSES B^V BROTHER JOHS HUTCHUiSOif 

Elizabeth, Pa July 27 Washington, Pa . .July 20 

Sharon, Pa Aug. 10 Duquesne, P& " 27 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMEB 

Bellaire, O July 20 New Brighton, Pa. .Aug. 3 

Oreensburg, Pa. ..." 27 Frie, Pa , . . " 10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERB 


Sedalia, Mo July 

Burton, Mo " 

St. Louis, Mo " 

Indianapolis, Ind. .. " 
Muncie, Ind. ...... " 

Portland, lnd " 


23 
24 
25 
27 
23 


Lima, O. . . 
Toledo. O. - 
Pt. (Minton, 
Vermilion, 1 
Lorain, O. . 
Cleveland, O 


. . .July 


. Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUSON 


Zion City, HI. . . 
Pes Plaines, 111 
Roseland, 111. . . 
Hegewiseh, 111. . 
Chicago, 111. . . . 
Joliet, 111 


.July 


21 


2 7 
28 


Kankakee, 111. 
Aurora, 111. . . 
Batavia, 111. . . 
Klgin, III. . . . 
Belvidere, Til 
Marengo, 111 


.July 


. Aug. 


29 


ATH 

30 



31 

Cincinnati, 

O 

1 

Pittsburgh, 

Pa. 


29 

30 

31 

1 

3 

4 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 


July 


2 
2 7 


Chicago, 111 Aug. 3 

Washington, [>, <J. - " 10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 


Huntington, \V , Va.July 20 

Fairmont, W. Ya. . . " 27 


Indianapolis, Ind. Aug. 
St Louis, Mo 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 


New Brighton, Pa 
Mansfield, O. ... 


. J uly 


20 
2 7 


Columbus, O Aug. 

Toledo, O. . " 


3 

10 


3 

10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W, J. THORN 


Marion, Ini 

Ft. Wayne, lnd. . . . 

Van Wert, O 

Piqua, O 

Covington, O 

Tippecanoe City. O 


July 


2 3 

24 
20 

27 
2 8 


Dayton, O . . 
Columbus, O. , 
Ohiilicothe, O. 
Lancaster, O 
Newark, O, . . 
Dresden, O. . 


July 


Wilmington, N. C, 

Olivia, N. C 

Highpoint, N. C. . 
Welcome, N. C. . . 
Winston Salem, N 
Hickory, N. C . . . 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 

.July 22 


C. 


2 Shelby, N. C July 

24 Charlotte, N. C. . . . " 

25 Spartanburg, S. C. . Aug. 

26 HendersonvilJe, N. C " 
27,28 Asheville, N. C " 

29 Greer, S. C. ...... " 


29 

30 

31 

1 

2, 3 


30 

31 

2, 3 

4 

5, 

S 


I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 


QUESTIONS FROM 

MANUAL ON SERIES SIXTH 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES'* 

STUDY X- "BAPTISM OF THE NEW CREATION" 

Week of Aufc. It .... Q. 31-31 Week of An*. 17 . . . Q. 1 1-45 

Week of Aug. 10 . . Q. 35- 10 Week of An*. 21 . . Q. 10-50 

Wee k uf A u £ . 3 1 . . . Q . 5 1 -55 

Question Manuals on Vol. Vl, Studies in the Scriptures, 10c each, postpaid. 


m 




wJp\ 


*«; 


i%M 


^ ROCK' OF AGES;^v 

Other found at ion can ''\ 
- no man lay-/;^ : 


m K ^i± 


"&J 1 


?/+>** 


'# '.r« 


xm 


~^>*k 


VOL, XL AUGUST 1 No. 15 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919-^AJK. 6047 

CONTENTS 

Blessed are the Fearless 227 

Fear of Man a Snare 227 

Gideon's Triumph 228 

Fearless Faithful Prophets '/..!!!! 229 

The Beast and the Lamb 229 

The Truth our Weapon 230 

Distribution of Volunteer Matter 230 

Spirit of Little Flock 231 

Power and a Sound Mind 232 

The Test of Perfect Love 233 

Scripture for a Purpose 234 

Take Heed unto Yourselves 234 

General Convention: Cedar Point, Ohio 235 

The Wisdom from Above 236 

The Kingdom of God .237 

The Sheep and the Goats 238 

"/ will Uand upon mv -catch, and will set mv foot upon the 
Tower, and will watch 'to see what He will *av unto me, and 
what answer I shall make to them (hat oppose me. —Hah. 2:1. 

- «g^^5 ©wtacT.s. 


Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the s>4. and the wavea (the restless, discontented! roaring; men's hearts falling them for fear and for IooWnif 
to the things coming upon the earth (.society); for the powers of the heavens (ecclesiasticism) shall be shaken. . When ye see these things begin to come to pass, 

then know that the Kingdom of God 13 at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh, — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; Luke 2l:2&31 


THIS JOURNAL. AND ITS SACRED MISSION 

THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or Instruments in tne system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,** now being 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towbb Bible & Tbact Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet In the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and o£ 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Bercan Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Yerbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Hansom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building un on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . , has been 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Aget 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest 
subjection to the will of God In Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in Its columns most be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO VS THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Uospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him, — 1 Cor. 3:16, 17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen, 
28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Kev. 15 :5-S. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies In the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," "in due time."—" 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, G. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is, 1 ' be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hla 
glory as His joint-heir,— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age.— Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 -.14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 :«. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and His glorified 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 

published av even excluding articles which were subsequently seen in clearer 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY Hght, but are endeavoring to indicate by footnotes where the 

119 FEDERAL ST PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A . later presentations may be found. We are also retaining the 

■ — ~r rr — ^77- Z ~~~ old page numbers throughout so that the references as have 

T t^ a T T ™ Eau ° ntU C *"'; dltoria] committee been given in the Berean Bible Comments and elsewhere will 

at iS^ not lose their value. To reduce the bulk we are omitting 

article appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial Committee some Q f t h e j ess important letters and Other relatively Ummare
: J. F. RrniKKKORD, w. e. Van ambukgh, f. h. Robison, Geo. h. portant items ^ such as p ;i gnm appointments, convention and 
Fisher, W. b. a uk. T „. AVriJ business announcements, etc., but in other respects the record 

ANNUA' SUBSCRIPTION PRICK $1 OO IN ADVANCb. uujmv. ^ v. , , r . £ 

send monkv Bv* KXPRFss bank drakt. pustal ORD ER, or registe red is complete— a lasting monument to the taitniul work Ot 
" " T»».t» the 1W» Po»,' » m.w.-AU B ^lTs^d^ts who, bv reason of Pastor Russell, the seventh and last messenger to the Gospel 
old aee or other infirmitv or adversitv, are unable to pay tor this lounuihuil church. These reprints will be bound in seven volumes; 

be supplied Free if ihev send a Postal" Card eadi May *taUns their case and w , ... 

requiting its conynuai.ee. We are not onh willing but anxious, that all y ol t i 8 7 q. i 38 7 Vol. IV IQO1-IQO5 

such be on out Mist continually and nUouch with the S n pn-.s. et c. y Q j ^ 1S88-1895 Vol. V I906-IOIO 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWEE SUBSCRIBERS— PJease remember y ol jij jSgo-igoo Vol. VI IQJI-1915 

that as a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a re^ y , y TT JQI 6_ T9I9 an d Index. 
newal or for a new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are 

indicated within a month by change in date of expiration of the .ub- ^.^ ^^ ^^ voiumes ^{\\ pro bably be ready for shipMriP
 fcUue.TSrc£n7e a or;ddr.«. please give old address as m e nt in August, the next three in October, and the last one 

well as new. This is very important, saving ua much time and un- l ate r. We will print only enough to supply the needs ot the 

necessary correspondence. _ . .. .__ . friends. It is therefore important that those who want them 

" 'knthrfd as ^com)-class"ma™ at PirTSHi-RGH. f* , post-office should order now cash with order ■ as WC know not whether 

i-ndkr Tin: act of MARm ;,rd. ix 7 q. _^ another edition shall ever be printed, 1 he books will De 

„__ ^^ ^^..^-—^ ^_ — ,_ durably bound in two styles, as follows: 

CONCERNING OLD TOWERS IN BOOK FORM RETAIL PRICES: Carriage charges prepaid by us to any part of 

The enthusiastic spirit of the friends in general over the re- the world. 

puScTon of the b'ck Towe*s is very gratifying. We fu.ly **J^^£™ ""«. ".."** . . . $18 ,o 

join with you in this enthusiasm, believing this splendid re- £„$ volu me,. each . .' ." . " ." ! ! ! ! . 270 

ference library will be a spiritual stimulus to the church gen- ^ in 0rjental go , d; 

erally and a wonderful legacy to others. We recall the words • ^ ^ (? ^^ $14 00 

of Brother Russell, written twenty-one years ago : Slngle vo i ume8l each 2.00 

•He [the Lord] sees the dark night of "!?«"? '"l"™^'^ W HOr ES4LE PRICES: For the convenience of class secretaries, or 
before send.ng the people away he '"«'««"»» w ,^ ri "al food » " other, who can send orders for fifty volumes Cor seven comand
 soL encouragement during the dark hour of the tun, of eta... ^ ^ ^^ 

trouble. — Z 99-48. Single volumes, each -. 2.b0 

The truths contained in Studies in the Scriptures will be „,..,„, v .-> no 

grlatly Augmented by these reprint Watch Towers which, Sty* B: ^-P'-set (7 volumes, ............ «•«• 

aside from their able presentation of all phases of the divine . t . , „ . . .. 

olan also contain a historic record of the work, progress, joys, These prices bring the lorty years of Towers, including 

Trials and development of the 'feet of Christ' amid the closing binding, to about one-third the original subscription price 

'*, f th Gosopi a ee Your good intentions which you may have already expressed 

^nm* have inauired whether the issues are to be reprinted merely enabled us to determine whether the reprints should 

veS^^ We answer that all be made; these were m no instance looked upon as orders 

matterTs being reproduced in its original form. We are not unless cash accompanied the request. 



A""" -ju '"^ 



AND HERALD OF CHMSTS PRESENCE 


Vol. xt 


Avgust 1, 1919 

BLESSED ARE THE FEARLESS 

rt Fear not, little flock, for it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom" — Luke 12:32. 


No. 15 


PART I. 



HEN Christ Jesus spoke these words no 
one aside from himself had been begotten 
to the divine nature and to membership 
in the heavenly kingdom. He here made 
clear that God would select a class who 
would be associated with him in the kingdom
. It is evident from the Master's 
words that those who inherit the kingdom 
will be not only a "little flock", but that 
they will be a fearless class and especially will those 
be fearless who are developed during the time of stress 
or persecution. The Scriptures afford abundant reasons
 as to why this is true. The rule laid down, however
, is contrary to that which governs man, and when 
the reason for the divine rule is understood the wisdom
 and love of God is made manifest in the rule. It 
is inherent in fallen man to fear. Since Adam was 
driven from Eden with the divine judgment of death 
against him it was ever thus and it will continue so 
until mankind knows, loves and obeys the Lord fully. 
(Genesis 3 18,24) But the class addressed by the 
Master in the text are no longer men from the divine 
viewpoint. These new creatures, however, so long as 
they are in the earth dwell in an imperfect fleshly 
organism and the mind of the flesh wars against the 
mind of the spirit. The mind of the flesh sometimes 
is uppermost, and for a time controls the new creature. 
Those who would enter the kingdom must of necessity 
overcome fear and have the new mind in control. The 
more one grows in the likeness of the Master, the 
more he is filled with the Master's spirit, the more 
completely is fear overcome. 

The pure in heart are those who love God supremely
, love the brethren to the degree of laying down 
their earthly lives in behalf of them, and love their 
enemies to the extent of never doing them evil but 
always doing good as opportunity affords. The pure 
in heart are without fear of man. "Blessed are the 
pure in heart for they shall see God." Blessed are 
the fearless because these are they who have a pure 
heart. They fear no man, because they know the Lord 
is with them. (Hebrews 13:6) Their trust in the 
Lord is implicit. Such are pleasing to the Father and 
to the Lord Jesus. 

GODLY TEAR 

There is a fear which is very proper, and which 
everyone must have who is pleasing to God, and this 
is known as "Godly fear". It means a holy reverence 
for Jehovah and a fear lest we should displease him 
and come short of the blessings he has promised us. 
"The fear [reverence] of the Lord is the beginning of 
[true] wisdom." Such fear is not only valuable as 
the beginning of wisdom, but is valuable throughout 
the Christian's journey. Some of the pertinent Scriptures
 on this point are : "But fear the Lord, ye saints." 


(Psalm 34:9) "Ye that fear the Lord, praise him." 
(Psalm 2:22,23) "Like as a father pitieth his children
, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him." (Psalm 
I0 3 :I 3) "I will forewarn you and ye shall fear." 
(Luke 12:5) "They that feared the Lord spake often 
one to another." (Malachi 3:16) "Unto you that 
fear my name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise 
with healing in his beams." (Malachi 4:2) But none 
of these Scriptures indicates that the new creature in 
Christ is to fear man, or any man-made organization. 
We know, therefore, that the fear mentioned by the 
Master in the text does not mean a godly fear, because 
he admonishes the little flock to fear not. We must 
then conclude that he meant that the new creature in 
Christ should fear no man or anything that man produces
. Nor should we be terrified by our adversaries, 
nor should we fear to forsake all things on earth and 
confidently follow in the Master's footsteps. 

FEAR OF MAN A SNABE 

It is announced in God's Word as a fixed principle 
or governing law of conduct that "The fear of man 
bringeth a snare". (Proverbs 29:25) Early in his 
dealings with mankind God began to encourage those 
who believed his promises to have full confidence in 
him and to fear no creature. The Scriptures abound 
with testimony that those whom God approves do not 
fear man nor any other creature, but have a holy, 
reverential fear of Jehovah. In times of old Jehovah 
justified some men to friendship with him, and the 
record of his dealing with them was written for 
the benefit of the church. "Whatsoever things were 
heretofore written were written for our learning that 
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures 
might have hope." (Romans 15:4) In other phrase, 
all these lessons recorded in the Old Testament were 
so written that the new creation, to whom the kingdom 
is promised, might, without fear, cheerfully endure 
the fiery trials that beset their pathway, and, while 
so enduring, be greatly comforted by the recorded examples
 and precepts and the precious promises and 
have an increased hope of an inheritance in the glorious
 kingdom. Seeing that God intends his children to 
learn lessons from these recorded experiences of his 
friends, it is proper that we consider the recorded 
facts concerning them. 

JOSHUA A TYPE 

Moses was dead, and Jehovah had appointed Joshua 
to lead the children of Israel across the raging river of 
Jordan and into the land of Canaan, there to face and 
overcome a belligerent enemy. Joshua, like Moses, 
was a meek man, having little confidence in his own 
strength, but he had great faith in God and manifested 
such faith by encouraging the people to go forward 
and possess that which God had promised them. But 
Joshua needed encouragement and the people whom he 


227 


228 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


would lead needed encouragement to perform the 
deeds which Jehovah had set before them. God began 
such encouragement by saying; "Now, therefore, 
arise, go over this Jordan, thou and this people, into 
the land which I do give to them, even to the children 
of Israel. Every place that the sole of your foot shall 

tread upon that have I given unto you Have not 

I commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage; 
be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord 
thy God is with thee whithersoever thou goest." 
(Joshua 1 :2,3,9) While it is true that Canaan was 
promised to the Israelites, yet be it noted that it was 
theirs only when they set their feet upon it and thereby
 took possession. The condition named in this 
command of the Lord required that Joshua and the 
people must have confidence in the promise made to 
them, must rely upon that divine promise and show 
their faith by acting according to the command. They 
must cross the Jordan amidst great obstacles and 
actually set their feet upon the land and take possession
 of it, and to do this required a fearless and implicit
 trust in Jehovah, because not only was the Jordan
 swollen, but the enemy was great and equipped 
for war. In the face of all the obstacles before him, 
Joshua exercised full confidence and faith in God, led 
the people across the Jordan, caused them to encamp 
at Gilgal and there prepare to lay siege to Jericho. 
Let us suppose that the elders and leaders of the tribes 
of Israel had said to Joshua, Behold, how great are 
our enemies, how strong! If we go over the Jordan 
into their country, surely we will offend them and 
they will do us injury; therefore let us send messengers
 and ask the Canaanites whether or not we may 
pass over and march around Jericho and blow our 
horns. Had such course been followed the army of 
Israel would never have crossed the Jordan. Such a 
course might have been the exercise of human wisdom 
and caution, but it would have shown a lack of faith 
and confidence in God. Let the new creature in 
Christ learn a lesson therefrom. 

God has given to us better promises, greater rewards
, exceeding great and precious promises, but 
these promised rewards are ours only in proportion
 as we claim them and appropriate them to 
ourselves and act upon them. We must prove 
our faith and confidence in God and his promises 
by our acts and by our works. God has set 
before the followers of Christ Jesus the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the kingdom, and, says 
the Master, it is his good pleasure to give to them this 
unspeakable reward, but those who receive this inheritance
 will be such, and such only, as confidently 
rely upon his promises and act upon them and who 
do not fear what man or man-made ecclesiastical systems
 or any other system may or can do unto them. 
Such will seek always to know what is the will of God 
and, knowing, will go forward without fear, and in 
confidence, calmly, soberly and prayerfully doing the 
will of the Lord through Christ who strengthened 
them. 

GIDEON'S TKIUMPH 

The Israelites had been slack in their faith and 
obedience to Jehovah, and the Midianites were permitted
 to come and threatened to take possession of 
the most fertile part of their land. Faithfulness on 
the part of Israel would have prevented this 
threatened invasion. The Midianites came in a great 
host, more than 200,000 strong and encamped preparatory
 for battle against the Israelites. Jehovah 
purposed to achieve a great victory over these enemies 
of his people and to drive them out of the promised 
land* In doing this he would again show that such a 
victory could not be achieved by human power, but 
by the might and power of God. He purposed to 
honor certain individuals in this battle who would 
show their faith and confidence in him and their zeal 
for his cause in obeying his orders. Jehovah afforded 
Gideon the great honor of being the instrument in 
his hand for the deliverance of Israel, Gideon was 
put to certain tests to prove his faithfulness and he met 
them in an approved manner. At the direction of 
Jehovah, Gideon then called for volunteers from 
amongst the Israelites to fight the hosts of Midian. 
To this call for volunteers approximately thirty-two 
thousand Israelites responded. Human reasoning 
would say, What could a little band of thirty-two 
thousand do against two hundred thousand wellequipped
 warriors, and yet God said to Gideon, "These 
are too many, put them to a test." It was God's purpose
 to demonstrate clearly that the victory would be 
his and not man's. It is to be marked that the first 
test applied was that Gideon, under divine direction 
told all who were fearful to go back home and such a 
number went that only ten thousand remained. Still 
these were too many, and Gideon was directed to apply 
another test, that being a test of their zeal or faithfulness
 in action. Only three hundred were selected in 
this test 

This little company of 300 represents a class who 
not only have great faith in God's promises, but who 
eagerly watch for opportunities of service and who 
never stop to ask the reason why, but hearing the 
command they cheerfully go forward. This little 
band of 300 possessed the very elements of character
 pleasing to Jehovah. They were faithful, trustful 
and for this reason were fearless. Under the Lord's 
direction Gideon armed them with peculiar instruments
 of warfare, towit, each was supplied with a 
ram's horn, a pitcher and a lighted lamp placed inside 
of the pitcher. Gideon divided them into three companies
 and approaching the sleeping enemy he stationed
 them at such places that they would practically 
surround the enemy. Agreeable to previous arrangement
, Gideon gave the command. Each one blew his 
horn, broke his pitcher and let his light or torch shine 
forth, and then shouted, "The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon". The result was a complete routing of the 
enemy. 

We can scarcely imagine a little company of 300 or 
any of them saying to Gideon: "Before we attempt to 
surround the enemy and blow our horns and break our 
pitchers we think it would be wise and prudent to 
send a deputation of our little band to the leaders of 
Midian and ask them if we will be permitted to make 
a noise at night, .blow our horns and break our 
pitchers, because if we do not do so we may offend 
them and, by offending, break their law in disturbing 
their peace." 

Would they have shown full faith in the promises 
of God? They certainly would not Such a proposition
 sounds absurd to us now. Had there been such a 
disposition in the minds or hearts of any of the 300 
they would not have been with Gideon in the fight. 
On the contrary, the 300 were fearless. We must 
give them credit for knowing that they could not 
possibly overcome the hosts of Midian in their own 


August i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


229 


strength, but their unfaltering faith in God led them to 
say by their action when hearing the command ; 
"[Ours] not to reason why, 
[Ours] but to do and die." 

"Gideon's band may be considered a figure or illustration
 of the overcomers of this Gospel age — the 
church, the little flock— so Gideon himself would evidently
 represent the Captain of our salvation, whose 
example we are to follow and whose character ought 
to impress all his followers/' (Z '07-327) Just so 
surely as Gideon's band pictures the church, just so 
surely the Lord has some important lessons in this 
record or incident that he desires the little flock to 
learn, and it seems clear that that lesson is absolute 
confidence in God and his arrangement and a very 
courageous spirit or disposition, devoid of any fear of 
man or anything man-made, or anything that man 
might do unto the children of the Most High. Such 
will not fear to do with their might and with a burning
 zeal all that their hands find to do. They will be 
watching for opportunities of service and will not stop 
to argue the question when the opportunity appears. 

FEABLESS FAITHFUL PROPHETS 

From Abel to John there was developed a class of 
fearless men who hesitated not to do the will of God 
and to receive Jehovah's approval. Reading the 
record of Hebrews nth chapter thrills the heart of 
every true Christian and puts to shame every new 
creature who would quail before his enemy or draw 
back from doing the Father's will because of fear. 
These men of old had set before them the single 
promise of a "better resurrection", yet they exhibited 
such faithfulness and loyalty, such love and such fearless
 zeal for righteousness as finds no parallel in profane
 or sacred history concerning man. They heard 
the promise of God and believed it. They relied upon 
that promise, left their homes and positions and endured
 the greatest persecutions and hardships, that 
they might attain unto the promised reward, and they 
permitted no obstacle to deter them from doing God's 
will insofar as it lay within their power. 

The king of Egypt had made an unrighteous law requiring
 that all the male babes of Israel should be 
killed at birth. When Moses was born, because of 
their faith in God, his parents "were not afraid of the 
king's command" and hid Moses that his life might be 
preserved, having faith that God would bless their efforts
. Reared by the king's daughter and given all 
the advantages of royalty, when Moses reached the 
time of his majority he refused to be counted a member
 of the king's household, chosing rather to suffer 
affliction with his own people. The pomp and riches 
of Egypt did not allure him from his duty, nor did the 
flatteries of those who ruled the people thus affect him. 
When the time came he by faith boldly led the 
Israelites, forsaking Egypt "not fearing the wrath of 
the king". Chased by the hordes of Egypt he fearlessly
 led the children of Israel into and across the 
Red Sea. His faith in' God made him absolutely 
fearless. The record then discloses a long list of 
fearless men of Israel (verses 33-36) who not in their 
own strength, but because of their unwavering faith in 
God, "subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained
 promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched 
the violence of fire, had trial of cruel mockings and 
scourgings, yea, moreover, of bonds and imprisonment 
— of whom the world was not worthy," and because 


of their faithfulness and loyalty these all obtained a 
good report and were approved by Jehovah. These 
were not boastful men. They made no claim to 
physical courage -or bravery, but their calm, abiding 
faith in the Lord and loyalty to him made them fearless
 of man or man-made institutions, and won for 
them from Jehovah the verdict of approval. 

THIS BECOED FOE THE CHURCH 

It is not a forced interpretation to say this record of 
the faithful prophets was made for the benefit of the 
church. The opening argument of the succeeding 
chapter shows that it was intended to teach the church 
the great lesson that those whom God approves are 
true, loyal, faithful, and fearless, with such complete 
love for Jehovah that they calmly and joyfully obey 
his comands, not fearing what might result to them at 
the hands of their adversaries. If the manifestation 
of such faithfulness was required in order to receive 
the approval of Jehovah, with stronger reasoning will 
such a degree of fearless faithfulness be required of 
the little flock. That "wise and faithful servant" of 
the Master has well said: 

"In proportion as the Lord's people are filled with his holy 
spirit or influence, and expanded more and more by it and 
enlarged, they have the less of the spirit of fear. The spirit 
of fear in the Christian is a spirit of doubt and marks a 
lack of faith, a lack of the holy Spirit. The spirit of fear is 
a fruitful source of evil in spiritual matters, in every feature 
of the Christian's growth, individually and as a church. The 
child of God who is filled with the holy Spirit is a giant in 
comparison with his own natural self, because his fears are 
quelled, his heart is established and his faith is rooted and 
grounded and his soul is anchored sure and steadfast within 
the vail. Thus he is held from being driven on the rocks 
of disaster when the storm winds of trouble prevail. The 
holy Spirit is thus a power to those who possess it, which 
has often caused amazement to their enemies," — E-249 

THE BEAST AND THE LAMB 

War has been declared between the beast and the 

Lamb. As to who will be victorious is not a question 
open for discussion. The beast is an instrument of 
Satan and will be destroyed, and ultimately Satan must 
be destroyed. The beast is another name for the 
Antichrist. The Revelator describes the beast as having
 appeared for a time, then going into the abyss, and 
later reappearing. Originally the beast was constituted
 of the Papal hierarchy exercising persecuting 
power through the civil authorities, and commonly 
known as the Holy Roman Empire — church and state. 
It exercised dominion until 1799, at which time it received
 a fearful setback and withdrew itself and went 
into the pit. In 1918 it reappeared, the same beast, 
yet with something added. It now consists of the 
Papal hierarchy, which includes the various suborganizations
 together with a goodly proportion of the 
unfaithful so-called "Protestant clergy", all working 
together yet dominated by the Papacy and exercising 
influence through political power to persecute those 
who do not bow to its behest and worship at its shrine. 
All systems sympathetically united or actually cooperating
 with the Papacy in the exercise of persecuting
 power through the channel of civil authorities constitute
 a component part of the beast, which is an 
abomination of the earth in the sight of Jehovah. 
(See Volumes IV and VII) It is concerning this combined
 power exercised in a beastly manner that the 
Revelator wrote : "These [combined elements, ecclesiastical
, political, etc.] shall make war with the 
Lamb". That time has come when the war is on, and 


230 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


has been for some days. How should we expect the 
beast to make war with the Lamb? We answer, By 
warring upon the members of his body this side the 
vail, by fighting against the "little flock", to whom the 
promise is given and who are admonished to fear not, 
by endeavoring to suppress the message which the 
Lord is causing to be proclaimed by and through those 
whom he has called and chosen. (Revelation 19:19) If 
the followers of Jesus are to fight against the beast 
what kind of weapons are they to use? "For though 
we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh, for 
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty 
through God to the pulling down of strongholds" of 
error. (2 Corinthians 10:3,4) The greatest stronghold
 of error on earth is the Papal hierarchy, aided 
and abetted by her political subordinates and her allies, 
the dishonest' class of Protestant clergy. Thus "the 
seed of the serpent" does make war against those who 
are the "seed of promise". This adversary is seeking 
to destroy the class to whom Jesus said: "Fear not, 
little flock, it is the Father's good pleasure to give you 
the kingdom/' It is true this adversary is a mighty 
foe if looked at from the human viewpoint. But 
when we consider that the Lord is on the other side, 
the enemy seems insignificant. "Zion need not fear, 
for God is in the midst of her and will help her." 

THE TRUTH OUE WEAPON 

Referring to this warfare between the aforesaid adversary
 and the followers of the Master St. Paul said: 
"Finally, my brethren, be strong in the Lord and in the 
power of his might". We are not admonished to be 
strong in our own might. In ourselves we can do 
nothing, but we can do all things through Christ who 
strengthened us. The presumption is that all addressed
 at this stage of the conflict have on the armor 
of God. They must retain that armor and use it, and 
the chief weapon of offense and defense is "the sword 
of the Spirit", the Word of God. If the stronghold of 
error is about to fall, and our weapons are mighty to 
the pulling down of such strongholds, it follows then 
that those who will ultimately stand triumphant with 
the Lamb must use the weapon according to the commands
 of the Captain of our salvation and use it fearlessly
 and with full faith and confidence in the Lord 
that he will bless such efforts according to his promise. 
The Lord has put these weapons in various forms that 
all who have the love and zeal incident to his "house" 
may have some part in using the weapon. While it 
is one weapon and one message, yet it is put in the 
form of volunteer matter, tracts, papers, books, being 
used through the printed page and by word of mouth. 
The "horn" is therefore made available for each one 
who desires to sound it. Each new creature has the 
light of truth in him in his earthen vessel, which is 
to be broken in the Master's service, his "reasonable 
service". (Romans 12:1) When the opportunities 
arise it is his privilege to sound the message of truth, 
let his light shine and use his strength and energy to 
the end. 

DISTRIBUTION OF VOLUNTEER MATTEJR 

By volunteer matter is meant such tracts and papers 
as the Society from time to time prepares and sends 
out for free distribution. Are we all compelled to 
engage in this free distribution when asked? No, we 
answer, no one is compelled to do anything. It is all 
purely voluntary service, performed by love for the 
Lord and his cause of righteousness. Jehovah never 


drafts anyone. When the volunteer matter is announced
 by the Society should not the elders procure 
copies and meet and determine whether or not it is 
proper for the respective classes to distribute it? We 
know of no Scripture which even intimates that such 
an obligation rests upon the elders or even upon the 
class. Let us remember that "God hath set the members
 in the body as it pleaseth him". (1 Corinthians 
12:18) This means that he has placed the various 
members in the body this side the vail to perform certain
 duties. If the hand assumes to do the work of the 
foot the person finds himself standing on his head. 
Each member must perform his own part. Let us 
ask ourselves: Did the Lord, through his wise and 
faithful servant create and organize the Society as an 
instrument for the conducting of his work? We believe
 that the most of all the readers of the Watch 
Tower would agree that such is true. If true, then 
has not the Lord designated certain things for the 
Society, through its duly constituted servants to do, 
and is it not the duty of the Society to determine what 
shall be issued as volunteer matter for free distribution
? If not, who shall determine? If this question 
is to be determined by the various elders or leaders 
of the diverse and numerous classes, when would the 
duty ever be performed? Does it not appeal to the 
reasonable mind of the new creature that the obligation
 devolves upon the Society to issue for free distribution
 such volunteer matter as seems to be the 
Lord's will ? Should not then everything be done decently
 and in order? 

What then shall be done when volunteer matter is 
received by your class? We answer: The volunteer 
captain should report to the class the quantity of 
volunteer matter on hand, how much is allotted for 
each district and invite all the members of the class 
who desire to participate in its distribution to do so. 
Then let all who desire thus to participate give their 
names to the volunteer captain for the territory assigned
 to them and do the work, and let all those 
who do not desire to engage in it remain silent and 
not interfere with those who do wish to serve. There 
will be some probably who will decline, some who will 
hesitate and be indifferent, while others will be on the 
alert, eager for service and will quickly seize the opportunity
. Let each take the course that he thinks the 
Lord would have him take. 

But should not the elders or some prominent 
brethren go to the officials and ask permission to make 
a distribution of the volunteer matter? We might 
answer that by asking another question, which we 
have heretofore asked. Would it have been proper 
for Joshua to send some of the elders and prominent 
ones of Israel to the Canaanites to ask them for permission
 to enter Canaan? Would it have been proper 
for Gideon to send some of the elders or prominent 
ones of his company to the Midianites and ask if they 
might surround the camp at midnight, break their 
vessels and shout, "The sword of the Lord and of 
Gideon"? With equal propriety and force we ask, 
Should the servants of the Most High God, who have 
been commissioned to make proclamation of the message
 of the truth, go and ask permission of the agents 
of the "beast" whether or not it is lawful and proper 
to preach the Gospel? Do we think the Lord would 
be pleased to have us do that? And do we think that 
those who are opposed to the proclamation of the truth 
would likely give their consent? If we seek to serve 


THE WATCH TOWER 


231 


the Lord only when the "beast" approves does not 
that show the "fear of man that leadeth to a snare" 
and lack of faith in the Lord? God intended us to 
learn some lessons from the examples of the Old 
Testament, and here is the lesson of overcoming fear. 
In the first place, no official has any power to grant 
permission for the distribution of religious matter. If 
the paper contains anything in violation of the law the 
official would have no power to grant permission to 
distribute it, for the reason that no one has the power 
to grant permission to violate the law. If the paper 
contains nothing violative of the law, such official 
would have no power or authority to prevent its distribution
. Quoting the language of a high official in 
the Department of Justice: "It is not our province to 
advise people concerning the law, but to prosecute 
them after they have violated the law". 

EVERY CHRISTIAN SHOULD DO RIGHT 

Every Christian should do right, and when he is doing
 the Lord's will he is certainly doing right. It is 
the duty of officials to protect Christians while pursuing
 their vocation of preaching the Gospel. An example
 of the proper course was had in New York city. 
Brother Russell, early in the harvest period, issued 
the "hell" booklet and made arrangements to have it 
distributed in New York city by messenger boys. He 
called upon a high police official and began to tell him 
what he was going to do and the officer interrupted 
saying, "Well, sir, you cannot get permission to do 
that;" to which Brother Russell replied: "I am not 
asking you for permission and I am not required to 
get permission in this country to preach the Gospel ; I 
am merely telling you as the head of the police department
 of this city that I am going to have messenger 
boys to distribute these papers and came to ask you as 
an official to see that these distributers are protected 
and not interrupted by the clergy or anyone else". The 
distribution was made on schedule time. 

Our attention has been called to some officials who, 
dominated by the Papacy and for selfish reasons, desired
 to prevent the proclamation of the truth, have 
notified Bible Students to cease distribution of proper 
volunteer matter, and have even gone so far as to require
 them to bring their books in to them. No official 
has such authority in America, no matter what his 
position. 

The Society has never yet issued volunteer matter 
that is in any manner violative of the law and does 
not expect to do so. Where there is a question about 
the legality of it the Society will be advised upon such 
question by competent lawyers who are our friends 
and who will give an honest opinion. The friends 
therefore may depend upon it that when volunteer 
matter is issued for distribution it is properly and lawfully
 issued and that it is proper to distribute it. If 
any' still have doubt and desire advice let them go to 
some friendly lawyer who is honest and who is not 
interested in aiding the beast in its warfare against the 
"Lamb". It is to be expected that there will be interruptions
 from over-zealous officials who are anxious 
to please certain constituents and desire to suppress 
the truth, because this is the time, as the Scriptures 
indicate, when such will take place. We cannot expect 
war to be made by the "beast" against the "Lamb" and 
his followers without some discomforts, but let us remember
 the admonition of the Lord: "Be not afraid, 
but be ye very courageous". When David approached 


Goliath he did not say, "Goliath, will you permit me 
to strike you in the head with one of these stones?" 
No, but he did say boldly and fearlessly, "Thou comest 
to me with a sword and with a spear and with a shield, 
but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, 
the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied
", (i Samuel 17:45) The stone that David used 
seems to picture other stones that must be subsequently 
used (Revelation 16:20) and the Lord seems to have 
reserved some of these "stones" for this very time. — 
Job 38:22,23. 

"Doubtless it requires courage in the field of battle facing
 enemies and dangers of every kind: but surely it requires 
still greater, still more honorable courage thus to take one's 
stand for the Lord and for an unpopular truth and to be seen 
and known as a tract distributor of the same. It takes real 
courage to stand for the light when the great adversary with 
a world-wide influence brands it as darkness and leads an 
assault against it. It takes real courage to denounce the 
darkness meekly, persistently, when it has on its side wealth, 
culture, influence, and churchianity/' — Z '07-283. 

There is danger in looking at and trying to please 
the beast. There might be great danger to one who 
has shown bravery on the battlefield and in other 
places, in looking so intently at the "beast" and its operation
 that they would lose a large degree of courage 
incident to a follower of Christ and become fearful of 
performing their full duty. To such we would suggest
, Look away from the "beast" and look to the perfect
 pattern and hear the command of the Captain of 
our salvation, "Fear not. . . .and follow me". It would 
be a fearful thing, after one had sacrificed all and for 
a time fought valiantly, then to become frightened at 
the "beast" or any man-made institution, which 
would lead to a compromise of conduct and thus a 
failure to gain the prize. There is a class of called 
ones who are fearful and for this reason draw back 
from the service, and concerning such we read: "But 
though not voluntary overcomers the Lord loves them 
and delivers those who through fear of death (fear of 
contempt, fear of reproach borne by the bullock and 
the goat beyond the camp, in the wilderness or 
separated or dead condition) were all their lifetime 
subject to bondage — bondage to fear of men and 
men's traditions and opinions, which always bring a 
snare and keep back from full obedience to God even 
unto death. (Hebrews 2:15)". T-70. 

SPIRIT OF LITTLE FLOCK 

Does the "little flock", those who will inherit the 
kingdom, have a greater measure of the spirit of the 
Lord than the class above mentioned? Concerning 
these we read: "For ye have not received the spirit of 
bondage again to fear; but ye have received the spirit 
of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father". — Romans 
8:15. 

It is to be expected that the adversary, through his 
various agencies, particularly that of the "beast", will 
make every possible effort to frighten and discourage 
the followers of the "Lamb". But these know the 
voice oi their Master and cheerfully follow whithersoever
 he leadeth. For their encouragement the Lord 
hath put these words in their mouths: "Therefore will 
we not fear though the earth [organized society] be 
removed, and though the mountains [kingdoms] be 
carried into the midst of the sea [disorder], though the 
waters thereof roar and be troubled, and though the 
mountains shake with the swelling thereof. God is in 
the midst of her: she shall not be moved; God will 
help her and that right early." (Psalm 46:2-5) 


2ilL> 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pi nsBt'Ri.H. Pa. 


Again : "Though a host should encamp against me, my 
heart shall not fear; though wars should rise against 
me in this will I he confident. One thing have I desired
 of the Lord and that will I seek after, that I 
might dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of 
my life, that I may behold the beauty of the Lord and 
inquire in his temple/' (Psalm 27:3,4) Clearly here 
the Psalmist describes the class who fearlessly follow 
the Master and are looking forward to entering the 
kingdom. Those possessing the zeal peculiar to the 
Lord's house, the zeal that is prompted by love, will 
not fear hardships in his service but will rejoice to be 
counted worthy to fill up some of the sufferings of 
Christ left behind, as they go forth sounding their 
trumpets, breaking their vessels and letting the light of 
truth shine out through their lives. Of them the poet 
has beautifully said: 

''Happy objects of thy grace 

Destined to behold thy face, 
Hallelujah! Hallelujah! 

Hallelujah ! Amen." 

POWER AND A SOUND MIND 

Again, says the Apostle concerning this class: "For 
God hath not given us the spirit of fear; but of power, 
and of love, and of a sound mind. Be not thou therefore
 ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me 
his prisoner." (2 Timothy 1 7,8) It is not to be understood
 that those composing the little flock will be 
fool-hardy and indiscreet, making themselves the objects
 of just criticism, but on the contrary such possess 
the spirit of a sound mind and this spirit of a sound 
mind, the spirit of the Lord, leads the possessor to be 
calm, sober, watchful, and always prayerful, and like 
the little band of Gideon's 300, always on the alert to 
do the will of the Lord at the proper time and to do 
it discreetly and wisely and without fear. Such, when 
railed upon by the enemy, do not indulge in railing but 
calmly and trustfully use the sword of the spirit, and 
thus participate in the pulling down of the strongholds 
of error. They are not puffed up by words of praise, 
nor abashed or affrighted by the storming words of the 
clergy, nor those in authority. They realize that in 
self there is no strength and that their strength cometh 
from the Lord. (Psalm 121:1,2) Thus "the weak 
things of this world are made mighty through God, 
(through the spirit, the power of God) to the pulling 
down of strongholds of error and sin, and to their endurance
 of a good fight as good soldiers of the Lord 
Jesus Christ, much to the surprise of those naturally 
their superiors. This was true in times past, when 
the weak ones of the world espoused the cause of 
Christ, and were firm to the very end of life, as 
martyrs, enduring unwaveringly trials and difficulties 
before which the strongest of the world quailed. And 
the same thing is still true of the same class, for although
 the particular features of persecution have 
greatly changed, nevertheless it is still necessary to 
"endure hardness as good soldiers.' " — E-250. 

WHY FEARLESS APPROVED 

Why do the Scriptures everywhere mark with approval
 the fearless? Surely not because the Lord is 
pleased with a boastful class. On the contrary, God 
is displeased with the boastful. The fearless are approved
 by the Lord because they thus show an abiding 
faith and confidence in him. "Without faith it is impossible
 to please'* God. The more complete our faith 
the more pleasing are we to the Father. "According 


to thy faith be it done unto thee." The more fully we 
realize that we are children of the King, the more 
fully shall we appreciate the fact that even our body 
of flesh is immortal until his due time for its dissolution
. What a wonderful Father we have — a refuge 
for every time of trouble, our strength in all times of 
weakness. These words of confidence he has put in 
the mouth of his children: "Thou hast seized hold of 
me by my right hand, with thy counsel wilt thou guide 
me and afterwards take me home to glory." (Psalm 
73 -23,24, Leeser) When we look away from our 
Father and forget that he is holding to our hand, we 
are weak and fearful. Then it is that faith is weak; 
then it is that we are terrified by the roar of the beast. 
If our faith recovers, then as the needle seeks the pole, 
so our hearts, if perfect, will immediately seek the 
Lord and when it does again are we strong. At times 
it seems that the enemy is about to overwhelm us, but 
when we remember that our hand is in the Father's the 
enemy's power immediately fades into insignificance. 
Truly and sweetly the poet wrote : 

"God, our refuge, we cry to thee 
Whose love our redemption hath planned, 
Lord, strengthen our faith, lest we forget 
We are held by a Father's hand." 

INCREASED FAITH 

When we first came to a knowledge of the truth and 
consecrated ourselves to do the Father's will we had a 
measure of faith. As we increased in knowledge and 
trust we increased in faith. When the storms of persecution
 arose and the waves began to beat against us 
we found that we needed more faith. The same rule 
must of necessity apply to the end. It must be expected
 that the "beast" will continue its wicked persecutions
 until it is overthrown by the "Lamb". All 
who follow the "Lamb" through these experiences to 
ultimate victory will have their faith put to the severest 
test. At one time when you went forth in the volunteer
 service and when everyone smiled and took from 
your hand the tract it was easy to go out in the work. 
When they graciously bowed to you with thanks for 
what you had given them it was not difficult to distribute
 the tracts. But when some began to scowl and 
others to rail, while others threatened you with 
violence and imprisonment, you found it required 
more faith to go calmly forward in the work. When 
the persecution increased and you were apprehended 
and charged with crime because you told the truth, 
when you were unjustly condemned as malefactors and 
cast into prison, and the sunlight was shut out by day 
and not even the stars were permitted to peep in upon 
you at night, and in loneliness and silence you sat and 
indulged in meditation, more faith was required to 
know that the Lord still loved you and that he held 
you by the right hand and that all was right. Truly 
the poet has described it thus: 

"It is easy to sing with loved ones near, 

When sunshine lies over the land; 
But to sing in the dark with a lonely heart 
We must feel the touch of His hand." 

The spirit of the Lord is not the spirit of fear, but 
the spirit of courage, faith, love. May zve not expect 
that as we advance further and further into the final 
conflict with the beast that greater courage will be required
 of these who are overcomers and who enter the 
kingdom? Will it not require a double portion of the 
Elijah spirit firmly, calmly, and serenely to meet the 
enemy in battle and present the sound message of 


AUI.UST I, lyiu 


THE WATCH TOWER 


233 


truth? We think so. That the "beast" will further 
exercise her persecuting power we believe, but "Zion 
need not fear", because she is on the Lord's side and 
victory and triumph is certain. Though the persecutions
 increase, those who have his spirit in the greatest 
measure will persist in making proclamation of his 
message of truth. Does it not seem that the Lord directed
 his wise and faithful servant to write concerning
 that time? "It will probably be in an effort at 
self-preservation on the part of great Babylon 
(Christendom) when she sees her power in politics, 
priestcraft and superstition waning, that the work of 
truth-spreading will be stopped as detrimental to her 
system and probably at this juncture the Elijah class, 
persisting in declaring the truth to the last, will suffer 
violence and pass into glory/' (C-231) These words 
should be an encouragement to everyone who hopes to 
be in the kingdom to press earnestly on and persistently
 make known the message. 

THE TEST OF PERFECT LOVE 

St. Peter makes it clear that judgment must begin at 
the house of God. (1 Peter 4:17) That the judgment 
of the nations is at hand every student of divine 
prophecy can see ; that judgment upon the house of the 
Lord has for some time progressed, none of the Lord's 
"little ones" can doubt The chief purpose of this 
judgment of the house of the Lord is to test out and 
determine who have developed character pleasing to 
the Father, that which will insure his abundant entrance
 into the kingdom. Is the element of fear involved
 in this test? It is, and it proves whether or 
not our love for God and our Lord Jesus is supreme. 
St, John having this day of judgment in mind wrote 
to the church : "Herein is our love made perfect, that 
we may have boldness in the day of judgment ; because 
as he is, so are we in this world. There is no fear in 
love; but perfect love casteth out fear; because fear 
hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in 
love." (1 John 4:17,18) The word "boldness" in this 
text is rendered by Dr, Strong as "outspokenness, 
frankness in publicity and speech with confidence". 
There could be no severe test of our love without seme 
experience that would have a tendency to cause us to 
fear; hence the Lord in this concluding hour of the 
church's earthly experience permits fiery trials to come 
and St. John tells us here that if our love for God is 
perfect we will have no fear, but will have boldness 
and confidence in this hour of testing and will speak 
forth the message of truth frankly and with confidence
, sounding out our horns and using our earthen 
vessels and letting our light shine. Our lives, our all 
belong to the Lord. We owe him all we have, and he 
gives us the opportunity now to prove that we love 
him with a pure heart supremely. 

WHO SHALL RECEIVE THE KINGDOM 

"Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good 


pleasure to give you the kingdom." Before the foundation
 of the world God ordained a little flock to 
whom he would give the kingdom, and destined that 
such should be "holy and without blame before him 
in love — perfect in love, without fear, unwavering in 
faith". (Ephesians 1 4) No creature or power could 
make war upon this little flock without the Father's 
permission, because they are the apple of his eye and 
he holds them in the hollow of his hand. In the exercise
 of his wisdom and love he permits fiery experiences
 to come to test their loyalty and love. He 
permitted his beloved Son to suffer an ignominious 
death and then exalted him to the highest pinnacle of 
glory. He has permitted the "beast" to appear again 
from the abyss and make war with the "Lamb" by 
making war against his followers. To them the 
Master said: The beast "shall make war with the 
Lamb and the Lamb shall overcome them; for he is 
Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are 
with him are called, and chosen, and faithful". When 
the earnest, loyal follower of the Lamb reads these 
words his heart is thrilled with joy, because he knows 
that the fight having now begun, soon the victory will 
be complete and when that victory is complete those 
who stand on Mount Sion triumphant with the Lamb 
will be not only the called and chosen but will be the 
faithful, the loyal ones, even unto death, those who 
have not feared to speak his name, and who in the 
hour of stress have joyfully proclaimed, "The kingdom
 of heaven is at hand". 

"Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see 
God." Blessed are the fearless, for they have pure 
hearts. In the above text St. John proves that only the 
fearless, that is those who confidently trust in the Lord, 
are perfect in love. It is only the pure in heart that 
are perfect in love, therefore it follows according to 
Jesus* words, that the fearless — perfect in love — pure 
in heart, are the ones who will be received into the 
kingdom and see Jehovah. What a glorious prospect 
is set before them I "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, 
neither have entered into the heart of man, the things 
which God hath prepared for them that love him, but 
God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit." (1 
Corinthians 2:9,10) By faith such now behold the 
majesty and beauty of the King and the indescribable 
glory of the kingdom. By faith then, let us, without 
fear, as the battle rages, hold firmly our Father's hand 
and boldly cry out, "The sword of the Lord and of 
Gideon", Proving our faithfulness to the end, it will 
be our Father's good pleasure to grant unto us an 
abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom, where 
there will be fullness of joy and pleasures forevermore
. 

[In Part II we will consider Elijah and Elisha as 
types and the relation of these types to the subjects 
oi fear and perfect love], 

(To Be Continued) 


SONG OF CYRUS' MEN 


When the great finger writes across the wall : 
"Thou in the balance weighed and wanting art"; 

Let me not then be in the feasting ball, 
But from th' accursed city far apart. 


Yes, rather with that vig'lant band of men, 
Xurtured in trial, persecution, doubt. 

To smite th' ill-fated ramparts when the sands 
Within the measuring glass bave all run out. 

Fearless I tread in unaccustomed ways, 

When comes the quickening call to the attack; 
May I not of the terror be afraid, 

Since I would stand in those transcendent days, 
When they, who in the balance nothing lack, 

The fair foundations of the free bave laid. 


SCRIPTURE FOR A PURPOSE 



"All Scripture is given by inspiration of God; that the 

all good works" — 2 

HE WHOLE world is in a condition of 
alienation from God. Mankind is steeped 
in ignorance and superstition. When we 
inquire why this is so, the Bible informs 
us that it is the result of our great ancestor
 Adam's disobedience to the just 
laws of his Creator. We see, then, that 
God is not responsible for present conditions
, although for a wise purpose he has 
permitted them to come about. He created man under 
favorable conditions and with sufficient knowledge to 
enable him to take the proper course. Man brought 
the curse of death and all its concomitants upon himself
 by taking heed to Satan, the original sinner; and 
this course brought the entire race of Adam into divine 
disfavor. 

Satan's lie in Eden first misled Mother Eve to doubt 
the truth of God's statement. (Genesis 2:17; 3:1-5) 
While Adam was not deceived, yet he deliberately disobeyed
 the divine command, and thus brought the 
penalty of death upon himself and all of his posterity. 
Separated from God, mankind gradually came under 
the influence of the adversary of God, who has brought 
them more and more under the power of superstition 
and ignorance. This is true of all classes, in all lands. 
But while God does not purpose to permit the veil of 
ignorance to remain forever upon humanity, yet he 
prefers to leave them in this degraded condition for a 
time, knowing that it is better for them to be in ignorance
 while present conditions exist. Knowledge 
brings a responsibility which the race in its present 
condition is unable to bear. 

THE GOSPEL INVITATIOK LIMITED 

Through the Gospel God has issued an invitation to 
a certain class. This invitation presupposes the existence
 of a class that is dissatisfied with the present evil 
things, and that is yearning to come into favor with 
God. As the Apostle said, they are "feeling after 
God, if haply they might find him". (Acts 17:27) 
God has a bountiful arrangement through which every 
human being will bye and bye have a full opportunity 
to receive a blessing through our Lord Jesus Christ; 
but this will be accomplished in the future. Now the 
only ones whom he invites are those who are feeling 
after God and striving against sin. The self-satisfied 
are not invited. All the promises of the Bible are designed
 for those who come to the place where they 
long to get away from sin and to draw near to God. 

In dealing with this class whom he has called out 
from the world, God has a variety of methods of operating
. Of old he has spoken through the prophets; 
in later times he speaks through his Son and through 
the apostles. There is a larger sense in which God 
speaks to all mankind, but not in a special way. He 
sends his rain on the just and the unjust. His sun 
shines on good and bad alike. "Day unto day uttereth 
speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge." 
But all these expressions are indefinite. With the 
message to the called-out class, however, the reverse is 
true. In the words of the Son of God and the apostles 
we have a clear, succinct revelation that God is perfect 
in Justice, Wisdom, Love and Power; and that in proportion
 as any come to understand their Creator, in 
that same proportion will they come to understand his 
benevolent plans and purposes. 


man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto 
Timothy 3:16,17. 

NECESSITY FOB OVERCOMING OTTR WEAKNESSES 

The question might very properly be asked as 
to the influence of the holy Spirit of God in enlightening
 our minds and clarifying our understanding 
to appreciate his Word, and as to how this enlightenment
 affects the whole life in the battle against the 
weaknesses of the flesh. We understand that God preferably
 operates with his people along the lines of their 
human will, the human heart, (their determination and 
affections), and that he has given them incentives, suggestions
, to enable them to fight the good fight to the 
very end of the way. 

Or, as we are instructed through the words of 
the Apostle Peter: God has given us the exceeding 
great and precious promises, that by these we may become
 partakers of the divine nature. (2 Peter 1:4) 
The mere reading of these promises, however, will 
never give us that great boon. We must set our 
hearts and our affections on things above; and if they 
are properly understood, we are led by them to conform
 our lives to the conditions which are attached to 
the promises. 

This course of action results in our putting away 
those things which are displeasing to God. Moreover, 
we learn to add to our faith fortitude, knowledge, selfcontrol
, patience, brotherly kindness, love, as the 
Apostle suggests in this connection; for if we do these 
things, we shall have an abundant entrance into the 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. (2 
Peter 1:5-11) We are to permit the promises of the 
Scriptures to exercise a power in our hearts and lives. 
Our Lord prayed: "Sanctify them through thy truth; 
thy Word is truth". (John 17:^7) This is the power 
which is to sanctify our hearts. 

"TAKE HEED UNTO YOTTRSELVES" 

The question, then, might arise, Does God ever exercise
 an outside influence in order to have us conquer 
some weakness of the flesh which we would never have 
conquered ourselves? The reply is, If God saw that we 
would not conquer if we were to continue to pursue a 
certain course, he would provide the help in order that 
we might do so — on condition that we trust him for 
it. But if he saw that we could conquer, he would 
say: "My grace is sufficient for thee" — fight it out for 
thyself. Those who would do so would get the greater 
blessing, and thus would become the stronger in the 
Lord. But when we have done what we could to 
conquer our weaknesses, we should ask him for the 
needed grace to help in time of need. Furthermore, 
we are enjoined to grow in grace and in the knowledge 
and the love of God — to grow up into him who in all 
things is the Head of the body, even Christ. 

Whoever does not submit his own heart to the leadings
 and the teachings of the Lord has no authority 
from the Father to teach others to do so ; and for such 
to presume to do so, as did the Pharisees and the 
Doctors of the Law, is hypocrisy, as the Master plainly 
indicated. Only those who are fully consecrated to 
God, and who have received the anointing of his holy 
Spirit, are commissioned to preach the Gospel and to 
serve the household of faith. And only such as continually
 and faithfully submit themselves to the leading
 of the Spirit of God, which brings them out of the 
old paths of sin and uncleanness into the paths of 
holiness, are either worthy or able to perform the skilful
 service of ministering to the Lord's household. 


234 


GENERAL CONVENTION: CEDAR POINT, LAKE ERIE 



HE IMPORTANCE of assembling ourselves
 together, as the Lord's people and 
in the spirit of the Master, cannot be 
overstated, especially as we see the end 
of the earthly journey of the church 
draw near. It has long been recognized 
that a general convention affords opportunity
 for wider acquaintance among the 
brethren, enabling them to get into closer 
touch with each other and to sympathize more fully 
with each other in the blessed service the Lord has 
committed unto them. It has been the custom of the 
Society to hold one general convention each year. 
Last year we missed this, because of conditions prevailing
 at that time. Notwithstanding the local conventions
 held during the present year, it is seemingly 
pleasing to the Lord that the International Bible Students
 Association have one general convention, affording
 opportunity for the friends to attend from all 
parts of the United States and Canada. 

It seemed most appropriate to hold this convention 
the early part of September, since at that season many 
friends might find it more convenient to be away from 
their homes; hence the time set for this convention is 
September I to 7 inclusive, a period of seven days, 
but with the program opening on the afternoon of 
the 1st This will allow most of Labor Day in which 
friends from nearby points can travel. 

In looking about for a place we had at first thought 
of Put-in-Bay Island, where eight happy days were 
spent in convention in 1908. But upon closer investigation
 arrangements there did not seem to promise 
all that could reasonably be expected; for one thing 
the trolley car line which did operate from the docks 
to Hotel Victory has been torn up, thus making the 
hotel less accessible than formerly. Finally arrangements
 have been made for the convention to be held at 
Cedar Point, which is on a slender peninsula jutting 
out from the Ohio mainland, only a short distance 
from Put-in-Bay. Cedar Point is really more accessible
 than Put-in-Bay, for regular boat lines run 
from Cleveland, from Toledo, from Detroit, and from 
Buffalo; hourly ferry trips are made from Sandusky, 
these ferries landing within what would be about one 
city block from the commodious hotel which has been 
placed at our disposal, and in which is situated the 
auditorium w r here the meetings will be held. Furthermore
, a splendid concrete autoroad leads out from 
the mainland and makes the place thus accessible for 
auto passengers from either east, west, or south. 

The management has placed at our disposal its 
large and quiet auditorium, which has the benefit of 
both eastern and western breezes. There are no railroads
, no streetcars, and no autoroads beyond the end 
of the main road ; so there will be no untoward 
noises from sources very fruitful of distraction in 
cities. For those who will be coming in autos, there 
is a spacious garage just near the hotel, which will 
charge 50 cents for each machine per twenty- four 
hours for irregular stand-ins, or $2.00 for the whole 
seven days. The northern extremity of the Point, 
from the hotel on, is wooded with virgin forest, 
through which, however, well-built walks are laid and 
which will furnish opportunity for rest and conversation
 between the meeting periods. 

Hotel "The Breakers" is the place of chief entertainment
, and is so called from the fact that it is 
situate directly on the magnificent seven-mile strand. 
The hotel has one thousand outside rooms and a special
 rate has been made of $2.50 per day per person 
for room and board, two people occupying one room. 
The rooms will not be available at this special rate 
until the night of September 1st, as that is the day on 
which the hotel is closed to the public in general. The 
management has pledged itself to do all in its power 
to provide for the comfort and well-being of the 
guests. If necessary, further accomodations can be 
arranged, either on the Point or in Sandusky, some 
fifteen minutes removed by ferry. 

Those travelling long distances by rail are advised 
to purchase their tickets to Sandusky, Ohio, as the 
most frequent boat service is obtainable from that 
point. Special cars arriving at Sandusky over the 
New York Central Lines are usually brought to the 
ferry piers ; passengers arriving over the Big Four, 
Pennsylvania, Baltimore & Ohio, or Lake Erie & 
Western Railways will find themselves within a few 
blocks of the ferry landing. 

We expect to secure special railway rates for this 
Convention on what is called the certificate plan. 
When purchasing one-way ticket, buy it to Sandusky, 
Ohio, securing at the same time a certificate from the 
agent showing that the ticket was purchased account 
of I. B. S. A. Convention, If, perchance, the agent is 
not instructed regarding our convention, then secure a 
receipt showing that such a ticket was bought. Full 
regular fare will have to be paid to Sandusky, and 
with the certificate or receipt return trip can be secured
 for one-third of the regular rate. This will 
make the round trip average about two cents a mile 
each way. Inquiry might well be made of local agents 
as to whether there is any regular summer round- trip 
rate to Sandusky which would be more advantageous 
than the fare-and-a-third certificate plan. 

Reports from various parts of the country show 
that the friends are very much enthused over the 
prospect of this general convention. It is probable 
that several special cars will be chartered by friends 
from the Pacific coast Many are expected from all 
parts of the United States and Canada. Practically 
all the Pilgrim brethren will be present and will address
 the convention during the period of seven days. 
Several classes in the Central States had thought of 
holding local conventions over Labor Day, but now, 
doubtless, the majority will prefer to attend the larger 
gathering at Cedar Point. 

The Society has provided a committee on arrangements
, and this committee will be glad to do, and will 
do everything possible to insure the comfort of those 
who attend. It is important, however, that the committee
 know in advance how many to expect. We 
therefore request the friends to address a letter or 
postcard to the convention committee at Pittsburgh, 
stating the number in the party, whether male or 
female, those who prefer to room together, etc. With 
this information the committee will be on the ground 
and receive the friends as they come, assigning them 
to their quarters without difficulty or confusion. 

It is expected that this will be the largest and most 
helpful general convention that has been held for 
many years. It will afford opportunity for discussion 
and preparation for the future great work that is before
 us. We suggest that the classes throughout the 
country immediately ascertain how many in their districts
 are expecting to attend, and that they arrange 
the journey in parties as nearly as possible. 

Please address communications to Convention Committee
, I. B. S. A, 119 Federal St., Pittsburgh, Pa. 




THE WISDOM FROM ABOVE 

August 31. — Daniel i :8-20. 

an ancient example of self-control — four noele young men — good blood from cheap food — the secret of the young 
princes' wisdom— daily opportunities to emulate daniel and his companions— abstinence for the sake of others. 
"Every man that striveth in the games exerciseth self-control in all things"— I Corinthians 9:25. 


E HAVE noted the cruelty of the kings of olden 
times. It is therefore appropriate that we 
also note certain instances in which they manifested
 great breadth of generosity and wisdom. 
Today's lesson illustrates this. Among the 
earlier captives brought by Nebuchadnezzar 
from Jerusalem some twenty years before its 
destruction were four young men of evidently 
noble birth and religious training — Daniel, 
Hananiah, Mishael and Azariah. These captives
 were neither maltreated nor enslaved, in 
the ordinary sense of the terrrr. Their intellectual qualities 
were discerned; and "they were put into a superior school 
that they with others might be fitted to constitute a board of 



wise men, counsellors oi the king. 


So different is all this 


from the nepotism, "graft'' and "pool" of our day that it 
seems almost incomprehensible. 

At the same time the instance was an overruling of divine 
providence by which not merely rebels against God in Israel 
were suffered to be captured and deported, but some who 
were most loyal of heart to the principles of the divine law. 
We may here learn a lesson of how God is able to make 
even the disasters of life work out blessings for those who 
are truly loyal to him, even as Daniel and his companions 
were blessed and prospered in the enemy's land and advanced
 to positions far higher than they would ever have 
attained in their own country. 

ADVANTAGES OF ABSTEMIOUSNESS 

The young Hebrews were attached to the king's household
, and were provided with extraordinary delicacies, including
 spirituous liquors. The policy of the king in providing
 sumptuously for all the students, who were from 
various lands, was that they, being well nourished, might be 
in their best physical and mental condition. This lesson 
shows that it is a mistake to suppose that high living is 
especially conductive to intellectuality, not to mention spirituality
. 

From the very beginning, under God's providence, the deportment
 of Daniel brought him into special favor with the 
prince of the eunuchs who had in charge the temporalities 
of these students. There is something in a meek and quiet 
spirit that is impressive; and as a rule such a spirit comes 
only from a proper religious training. Daniel, and his associates
 through him, appealed to this eunuch, requesting 
that instead of the fine food and liquors provided they might 
have a plain vegetable diet. The eunuch replied that he 
would be very glad to comply with the request, only he 
feared that when examination time should come, these four 
Hebrews, fed upon the plainer fare, would appear at a disadvantage
, and cause a reflection upon himself and possibly 
cost the loss of his position, if not indeed the loss of his 
life. Daniel, however, appealed for a trial of the matter 
for ten days, agreeing to abide by the results. At the end 
of this short time, comparison showed that the four young 


men who practiced abstemiousness were fairer and fatter in 
flesh than were those who shared the king's bounty. So 
their request was granted. 

Of them we read: "Now as for these four youths, God 
gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom; 
and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams/' 
At the end of the period of their preparation, the king communed
 with the students, "and among them all was found 

none like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah And 

in every matter of wisdom and understanding concerning 
which the king inquired of them he found them ten times 
better than all the magicians and enchanters that were 
in his realm." 

What was the secret of this wisdom and understanding? 
Did not the secret lie in the blessing of God and in the fact 
that these young men sought to devote their lives to the 
doing of the divine will, to the doing of righteousness? 
Thus we see that our hearts and minds can be free from 
selfish motives, free from superstition, free from fears, free 
to do the will of God at any cost. Such minds anywhere, 
at any time, are scarce. Such minds always develop wisdom
. On the other hand sensuality, selfishness, the grinding 
of personal axes, always becloud the judgment. What we 
need today in every walk of life is consecrated men of the 
stamp of Daniel ^ and his companions, whole-hearted men 
who will give their best for the service of their fellowmen in 
whatever sphere their lives may be cast. The world has 
grown wiser (?), however, since those days. Today a Daniel 
would not get into such a position of influence; or if, perchance
, he did get there, it would be a miracle if he were not 
removed. Such a miracle kept Judge Lindsay of Colorado in 
office for several years in spite of every pressure of highhanded
 politics which sought to crush him because of his 
faithfulness to the principles of righteousness. 

Although ancient Babylon has passed away, although few of 
us can be Daniels or have his high position and wonderful 
opportunity, nevertheless the thing that is really needed is 
the Daniel spirit; and that is a possibility with every man 
and with every woman, young or old. "Dare to be a 
Daniel !" Alas, how few appreciate the privilege ! How few 
are emulating the Daniel spirit! 

"WHEREBY THY BROTHER STUMBLE W* 

In Romans 14:21 the Apostle Paul gives the thought that 
in addition to our consideration of what is best for ourselves 
in the way of food and drink, to enable us best to serve 
the Lord, we should also have a mind as to the effect of our 
influence on our neighbors. The more noble our character, 
the greater will be our influence upon those who are naturally
 weaker than we are. And that influence should be 
always used for the good of others, for the lifting up of the 
highest possible standards of thought, word and deed. Whatever
 will assist us in this direction should be considered, 
and should be to us as a command from God, who has said: 
"Do good unto all men as ye have opportunity, especially 
to the household of faith". — Galatians 6:10. 



Convention Hall, Cedar Point, Ohio. See Convention announcement on preceding page. 

236 


THE KINGDOM OF GOD 

September 7.— Matthew 13 131-33, 44-50. 

parabolic pictures of the kingdom of heaven — likened to a mustard seed — to the leavened bkrad — to a treasur1 
hid in a field — to a priceless pearl — to a net containing fish of every kind — the end of the age the time for 
sifting and separating those unfit for the kingdom.— this work of separating now practically finished. 

"Seek ye first his kingdom and his righteousness" — Matthew 6:33. 



ET US keep in memory the fact that the Master
's parables of the kingdom of heaven relate
 to the class of people that he is calling out 
of the world of mankind to be associated with 
him in his Millennial kingdom soon to be inaugurated
. Let us remember that sometimes 
this class is spoken of as including, nominally, 
not merely the saintly, the wheat class, but 
also to some extent the tares, as shown in our 
context. These different parable-pictures represent
 the same subject from different standpoints
, just as we take a photograph of a building from the 
north, the south, the east and the west, internally and externally
. 

LIKE A GRAIN OF MUSTARD SEED 

As a mustard seed is very small, yet produces a large bush, 
so that the fowls of the air may lodge in its branches, so 
this parable illustrates how the Gospel of the kingdom would, 
from a small beginning, attain to a considerable size. Its 
size would not be great among the trees, but among bushes 
or herbage. Thus the message of Christ, received at first 
only by the poor and the few of Israel, has finally grown to 
such important dimensions that the fowls like to gather in 
its branches. But let us remember that according to our 
Lord's interpretation of a previous parable (Matthew 13:4, 
19) the fowls represent the servants of the wicked one. So 
then the teaching of this parable would lead, us to conclude 
that at one time the church of Christ was so unimportant in 
the world that it was considered a shame and a dishonor 
to belong thereto; but that ultimately it would become great 
and honorable, and that the adversary's servants would 
disport themselves in its shelter. 

This development the Scriptures represent as being Babylon, 
declaring that as a whole the nominal church, with its various 
branches and denominations, is Babylonish. Hearken to 
our Lord's words: "She has become the hold of every foul 
spirit and the cage of every unclean and hateful bird". 
(Revelation 18:2) The intimation is that there is a large 
outward development of the church which is not to her advantage
 and glory, but contrariwise. Nevertheless this is 
nominally the church of Christ. However his spirit may 
have been mispresented and however improper the development
 may have been ultimately the great Head of the church 
will bring order out of chaos and confusion, and will glorify 
and use his elect. 

The parable of the leaven illustrates the process by which, 
as was foretold, the church would get into the wrong condition
. As a woman would take her batch of flour for 
baking and would put leaven (yeast) into it with the result 
that the mass would become leavened, so it would be with 
the church of Christ. The food of the entire household 
would become leavened or corrupted. Every portion would 
become more or less vitiated with the leaven of false doctrine, 
which would permeate the entire mass. Thus today nearly 
every doctrine inculcated by Jesus and his apostles has become
 more or less perverted or twisted by the errors of the 
dark ages. 

TREASURE HID IN A FIELD 

The desirability of obtaining joint-heirship with Christ in 
his Millennial kingdom is pictured in the parable of "the 
treasure hidden in the field*'. Realizing its value, the 
finder desired it for himself, and had such faith in it that 
he disposed of all his property in order to buy that field which 
he believed to contain the precious treasure. Only those who 
will appreciate the Gospel message will gain its glorious 
promises. It we love the present life with its joys and 
prospects, its hopes and ambitions, then we will labor for 
these. But if we intelligently hear and by faith believe the 
Gospel offer of this age, the offer of a share with Christ in 
his Millennial kingdom, then in proportion to our faith and 
our appreciation will be our self-sacrificing zeal to attain that 
prize. 

Whoever believes the message of the kingdom will find 
his faith an inspiration, indeed a necessary inspiration, to the 
attainment of the prize; for it will cost all that he has of 
earthly blessings. And unless he has faith that he will win 


the prize, he will surely be unwilling to sacrifice all that he 
has for it. The field belongs to God. He has put the 
treasure there. He offers it for sale to any one who is 
willing to pay the price. The buyer is our Lord and those 
who accept his invitation to join with him in the sacrifice 
of their earthly interests that they may be sharers with him 
in his heavenly glories, in the work of the Millennial age, 
to unearth all that treasure in the blessing of the world of 
mankind. The hiding of the treasure is necessary. Our 
Lord said: "Cast not your, pearls before swine". They 
will not understand you, They will think you foolish, and 
in their disappointment may do you injury. "Hast thou 
faith? Have it to thyself before God/' Make your sacrifice
 of earthly things to him; and he who seeth in secret 
shall reward you openly. 

THE PEARL OF GREAT VALUE 

In ancient times pearls occupied greater prominence among 
the values of earth than now . Pearl buyers traded in 
these gems and carried them to market, where they were 
highly estimated. The parable represents one of these pearl 
merchants as coming across the finest pearl that he had ever 
seen. He considered it so priceless that he was quite rejoiced
 to sell or to trade all of his other pearls and property 
in order that he might become the owner of that pearl. 

This parable represents the Gospel offer of a share with 
Christ in his kingdom as being superior to all propositions of 
the world. Worldly honor, name, fame, position and wealth 
are indeed desirable. As the Scriptures say: "A good name 
is rather to be chosen than great riches". (Proverbs 22:1) 
But when our eyes behold "the pearl of great price", the 
kingdom offer of joint-heirship with our Lord in his heavenlyglory
 and the association with him in his work of blessing 
all the families of the earth, we realize that this is a priceless 
thing, worth more by far than all the honors, dignities and 
pleasures of the world. Those worthy to buy this pearl 
will gladly exchange all earthly things therefor — even their 
good name ; and this will be necessary, as the Master forewarned
 them, saying, "They shall say all manner of evil 
against you falsely for my sake; Rejoice and be exceeding 
glad, for great is your reward in heaven ; for so persecuted 
they the prophets which were before you". (Matthew 5:11, 
12) He that is not willing to have the kingdom at such a 
cost is not worthy of the kingdom. The Apostle has said: 
"Through much tribulation must we enter the kingdom" . 
(Acts 14:22) Only those are overcomers who willingly endure
 such tribulation for righteousness' sake, for the sake of 
truth, in obedience to the heavenly calling. And only to 
the overcomers has our Lord given the exceeding great 
and precious promises". "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne." — Revelation 3:21. 

THE NET GATHERED OF EVERY KIND 

Another parable of the kingdom represents the Gospel 
message as a net. Only one kind of fish is desired, but 
the net gathers every kind. Not every kind will inherit 
the kingdom as joint- heirs with Christ Jesus. Hence the 
end of this Gospel age will be a sifting, separating time, 
as represented in the parable. The desirable fish will be 
gathered into vessels ; and the remainder will be cast back 
into the sea as unfit for the kingdom, but not necessarily as 
unfit for any purpose . During Christ's Millennial reign 
that class unfit for the kingdom will be dealt with and blessed 
and, if possible, be made useful and fit for life everlasting. 

Here, as in the parable of the wheat and the tares, the 
furnace of fire, and the weeping and gnashing of teeth in 
connection therewith, symbolizes the great time of trouble 
with which this Gospel age will end, giving place to the 
Millennial kingdom, the kingdom for the establishment of 
which upon the earth the church has been praying unceasingly
 for nineteen centuries : "Thy kingdom come ; thy 
will be done on earth, as it is done in heaven". What a 
kingdom that will be ! It will be a kingdom entrusted to a 
"little flock". "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's 
good pleasure to give you the kingdom." (Luke 12:32) 
And it will be fully empowered to rule among mankind 


237 


THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS 

September 14. — Matthew 25:31-46. 

JUDGMENT OF THE NATTONS— DESCRIPTION' OF THE WORK OF THE MILLENNIAL AGE — ORDER IN THE RESURRECTION — HOW THE 

WORLD WILL BE GATHERED BEFORE CHRIST S JUDGMENT TH RONE— TWO CLASSES GRADUALLY DEVELOPED CHARACTER THE 

BASIS OF JUDGMENT — CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SHEEP CLASS — THE RESURRECTION — CHURCH NOW ON JUDGMENT. 

ki For we must all be made manifest before the judgment-seat of Christ." — 2 Corinthians 5 :io. 

AVING given his disciples many parables illus- kingdom will exercise its power and disseminate the knowtrating
 the experiences of the church, the king- ledge of God and of righteousness, with a view of encouragdom
 class, in their development and preparation
 for kingdom honor, it was eminentlyproper
 that Jesus should give the parable of 
this lesson to illustrate the work of this kingdom
 after its establishment, to show its purpose
 and its effect upon the world of mankind. 
In the past many of us read the Bible too carelessly
. Our minds were sluggish respecting 
spiritual things. For instance, todays's lesson 
was at one time applied to the church: and this thought was 
evidently held by those who selected the lesson, since they 
have cited a Golden Text which applies to the church. Many 
fail altogether to notice that the parable says not one word respecting
 the church, but is entirely applied to the world, to the 
nations, to the heathen. 

For centuries the Jews had been accustomed to think of 
themselves as God's nation, God's people. All others they 
styled heathen, Gentiles, the people, the nations; and in the 
prophecies God treated the matter from this standpoint. So 
when spiritual Israel was received into divine favor as the 
royal priesthood, the holy nation, the peculiar people, all 
the remainder of mankind were properly enough to be thought 
of and described as the nations, the Gentiles. In line with 
this, our Lord in the parable tells us what is to befall after 
his kingdom shall have been set up, after the selection of the 
true church class to be the bride, the Lamb's wife and jointheir
 in his kingdom, in his throne. This, we notice, is very 
clearly stated by the Master, saying, "When the Son of Man 
shall come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, 
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory". After 
proper consideration who will say that this is a matter of 
the past? Who will dispute that this is a description of 
Messiah's kingdom following his parousia and his epiphania 
at his second advent? 

APPUCATION OF THIS PARABLE 

Then follows a description of the work of the Millennial 
age. "Before him shall be gathered all nations." This 
means all people of the world outside of the Lord's holy 
nation, his peculiar people, the church. Everybody except 
the church will be before his great white throne of justice, 
mercy and love; that will be their judgment time. 

Six thousand years ago Adam and his entire race were 
judged in Eden, and the sentence was death. Not one of 
the fallen human race is worthy of everlasting life. All are 
sinners. In due time God sent his Son to die for Adam's 
sin, in order that "as by a man came death [o~f the entire 
racel, by a man [Jesus] also (will come) the resurrection 
of the dead [the entire race]. For as all in Adam die, 
even so all in Christ shall be made alive. But every man in 
his own order." (r Corinthians 15:21,22) The first order to 
be made alive in Christ is the church, called out of the 
world, separated, "begotten again" of the holy Spirit. These 
pass their judgment, their trial, for life everlasting or death 
everlasting in the present time. Hence the worthy ones, 
with characters formed- pleasing and acceptable to God, 
will be quite ready to be Messiah's bride class, joint-heirs 
with him in his kingdom and in his work of judging the 
world. He has promised that all the faithful shall sit with 
him in his throne, the very throne pictured in the words of 
our text, the throne before which all the nations, all the 
people outside of the church, will be gathered. 

The gathering of the world will be the result of knowledge. 
Following the confusion of the time of trouble the outpouring
 of docl'- "Spirit on ail Flesh" will lead on to great enlightment
, in which all the blind eyes will be opened, all the deaf 
ears unstopped, and the knowledge of the glory of God will 
fill the whole earth. Some there will be who, resisting this 
knowledge, will decline to accept Christ and will not come 
into this judgment. But after a hundred years of resistance
, these will be destroyed. Those in the parable are 
such as have accepted Christ's terms and desire to be on 
judgment, or on trial, for everlasting life. This will include
 all that are in their graves, who the Master tells us 
will come forth, not all at once, but gradually. Messiah's 


ing, helping and uplifting all the willing and obedient. All 
such may rise more and more out of sin and death conditions
, out of imperfection of mind and body and out of 
immoral conduct to the full image of God, as possessed by 
father Adam in the beginning. 

It will be the work of the entire Millennial age to bring 
this about. Righteousness will reign then, as sin reigns 
now. That is to say, it will be in control, in the ascendency; 
and whosoever will sin then will suffer promptly. Hence 
all the nations will be avoiding sin. Then the world in 
general will be a grand place, where nothing "shall hurt 
or destroy"; where "the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick"; 
where the curse shall be gradually rolled away, and there 
shall be no more crying, no more sighing, no more dying; 
and where the blessing of God, bringing perfection, will prevail
. O happy day! we exclaim. And surely it will be 
such; for all who live through those thousand years will 
have a great blessing. 

LAW OF RETRIBUTION OPERATIVE 

"But", some will inquire, "what about the sins of the 
world? Will there be no chastisements, no punishments, for 
these?" We answer that it will be equally as just for God to 
forgive the sins of the world for Christ's sake as it has been 
for him to forgive the sins of the church for Christ's sake. 
If the one is joist, so will be the other; for God is no respecter
 of persons, and is equally as willing to forgive the 
sins of the world as the sins of the church, when the world, 
repenting of sin, will turn from it, accepting Christ as their 
Redeemer. This does not mean, however, that justice is 
to be ignored. In the case of the church, note how the sins 
of youth may leave their scar and sting to the end of life. 
And so we may reasonably assume that certain stripes, or 
punishments, will be permitted to follow the world in just 
the same manner. It will be from these weaknesses and 
frailities that they will gradually be raised up to perfection 
during those blessed thousand years of Christ's kingdom, 
when Satan will be bound and not be permitted to deceive 
any during that period. 

But what about heart condition? If conformity to the 
divine law in an outward way will bring blessings to all, 
will there not be still a difference between people, some coming
 heartily into accord with the Father, and others merely 
into outward harmony, because this outward harmony will 
be the way to restitution, perfection? 

Undoubtedly this is correct reasoning. It is along this 
line that the parable before us teaches; namely, that outwardly 
the sheep and the goat classes have much the same appearance
 and demeanor, except to the Judge, the King, who will 
read the heart and ultimately will manifest to all that there 
has been a real heart difference between the two classes, all 
of whom will have been on trial during the thousand years, 
receiving blessings from the kingdom. 

THE BASIS OF JUDGMENT 

All the while each individual will be making character. 
This character will be fully appreciated by the great Judge, 
and the individual will be rated either as sheep or as a goat. 
*A11 the sheep class will thus be received at the right hand 
of this perfect Judge; and all of the goat class will be rated 
as out of favor with him, even though all the while they 
will be receiving the blessings of the Millennial kingdom and 
outwardly rendering obedience to its laws. Not until the 
conclusion of the Millennium will the decision of the Judge 
be made manifest. Then great surprise will be shown at 
his decision — by both parties. To the sheep class at his right 
hand he will say: "Come, ye blessed of my Father [the kind 
that my Father is pleased to bless and to grant everlasting 
life], inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
 of the world." 'When God laid the foundation of the 
earth and planned its human habitation, it was his design to 
give it to you. Now the time has come for you to enter 
into this kingdom and to possess it.' 

This is the kingdom which God gave to Adam, and which 
Adam lost through his disobedience, but which Christ redeemed
 by the sacrifice of himself. It will be given to those 


238 


August x, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


239 


alone who will have developed the God-like character, those 
who will have become the Lord's sheep during the Millennium. 

Then the other class, the goats of the parable, will be 
sentenced: "Depart, ye accursed ones [doomed ones], into 
everlasting punishment". Granted all privileges, blessings 
and experiences of a thousand years of contact with righteousness
, truth and the Spirit of God, you indeed render 
an outward obedience; but at heart you have not come into 
harmony with God. I cannot recognize you as my sheep. 
I cannot present you to the Father as blameless and irreprovable
. You must be destroyed. The punishment is the 
second death, everlasting destruction. The penalty upon 
you is an everlasting one because there will be no further 
provision made for your redemption or for your resurrection 
from the second death. You will be as though you had 
never been. You have utterly failed to appreciate the goodness
 of God and to copy his character likeness. Eternal life 
is only for those who have God's likeness and God's spirit. 
"The Father seeketh such to worship him as worship him 
in spirit and in truth. ' ' 

Both classes, the sheep and the goats, were surprised at 
what the King, the Judge, declared to be the basis of his 
judgment. To the sheep he said: "I was an hungered, and ye 
gave me meat. I was thirsty and ye gave me drink ; 
I was a stranger and ye took me in ; naked and ye 
clothed me ; I was sick, and ye visited me ; I was in 
prison, and ye came unto me." To the goat class he said : 
"I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat; I was thirsty, 
and ye gave me no drink ; I was a stranger, and ye took me 
not in; naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison, 
and ye visited me not." Both sheep and goats claimed that 
they had no knowledge of any such experiences. 'When 
did we minister unto thee?' 'When did we fail to minister 
unto thee?' The answer w r as 'Inasmuch as ye did it unto one 
of th<; least of my brethren, or did it not unto him, ye did it, 
or did it not unto me.' 

CHABACTEBISTICS OF THE SHEEP CLASS 

Now who are these respecting whom there will be a test 
upon the sheep class and upon the goat class? Will there 
be people sick, hungry and in prison during the Millennium? 
Does the Lord wish us to understand that there will be such? 
We have, on the contrary, always assumed that sickness, 
poverty, hunger and prisons will then be gone forever. What 
does it ail mean? 

The meaning is plain. With the establishment of the Millennial
 kingdom all who come into harmony with it will have 
the great privilege of doing something to help others. The 
world is blind and starved now, for lack of spiritual food 
and of the anointing eye-salve of the truth. While the 
Millennial blessings will be showered upon those who accept 
the Lord's terms, there will be others who will need assistance
. Those who have the spirit of God, the spirit of 
love, will be glad to carry the heavenly message of reconciliation
 to all humanity, glad to apply the eye-salve to the 
blind, glad to unstop the ears of the deaf, glad to help the 
sin-sick back into harmony with God — to the blessings of 
Messiah's kingdom, to the way in which these may be obtained
 — helping them to cover their nakedness with the merit 
of Christ. All who will take pleasure in this work will 
thus be manifesting that they have God's spirit and are colaborers
 with him. All these will be the sheep. On the 
other hand those who are careless in respect to their vow, 
who merely enjoy the Millennial blessings themselves, will 
be of the goat class and will thus be marking themselves as 


goats, and correspondingly will be out of favor with the great 
King of kings, their Judge, the Lord of Glory. 

THE WOELD'S RESTJBRECTION 

The prison referred to in the parable is undoubtedly the 
great prison-house of death, into which approximately twenty 
thousand millions have already gone. All these are to come 
forth. But the Scriptures declare that they will not all 
come forth at once, but "every man in his own order". 
Only the church will be in the first resurrection. During the 
Millennium the awakening from the sleep of death, the prisonhouse
, will come about by divine power, of course, but we 
believe in answer to prayer. Each family circle, as it can 
prepare for another and another member, will be glad to do 
so, and will make request for his return. Thus the race 
will come out of the prison-house of death in the reverse 
order to that in which they entered, and will be acquainted 
with, identified by, and prepared for by friends or relatives. 

While the blessing of the Lord will provide an abundance 
for all, nevertheless we may safely assume that the provision 
will be in the hands of their fellows. It will be the sheep 
class that will be especially interested in, praying for and 
preparing for, those who are in the great prison-house of 
death. And by so engaging their time and energy these 
sheep will be manifesting a purpose, a will, in harmony with 
that of the Creator. God has willed that all in the graves 
shall come forth at the command of Jesus (John 5:28,29); 
and those in sympathy with God and Christ will be colaborers
 with God in accomplishing the work for which Christ 
died. Any not interested in that work will be lacking in 
God's spirit; and this is exactly what is charged against the 
goat class. 

He who sits upon the throne, having redeemed the world 
of mankind and having provided for the resurrection of all 
these redeemed ones, counts them as in a certain sense representing
 himself; as he says in the parable, "I was hungered, 
and ye fed me; I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me," 
ministered unto me and helped me. Likewise the reproof to 
the goat class: to these he said: 'You were not interested in 
the things of God. Your interest was merely personal, a 
selfish one. You have enjoyed the blessings of these glorious
 thousand years, and that is all which God has provided 
for you. You are not of the kind to whom he is pleased 
to grant everlasting life. You will therefore die. You 
have more or less of the selfish spirit, which is the spirit 
of Satan; and as God's provision is destruction for all who 
will not be in fellowship with him in spirit, this is to be 
your portion, the second death.' 

The eternal fire is the fire of God's jealousy or anger, 
which burns against and destroys everything antagonistic 
to his righteousness. (Zephaniah 3:8,9) It is, of course, 
merely a figurative expression representing complete destruction
. 

The Golden Text given with this lesson has no connection 
whatever with the parable of the sheep and the goats. It 
has reference to the "reckoning" which Christ makes with 
his own body members and which is pictured by the parable 
of the talents. To each of his "servants" the Lord has 
entrusted certain capacities and opportunities for service and 
account is to be rendered to him in connection with such 
stewardship and the final degree of honor or dishonor of 
the individual determined on the basis of his faithfulness or 
unfaithfulness in his service of his Master. But all this 
transpires before 'the Son of Man comes in his glory' and 
begins the work of dealing with all nations. 


TWO LETTERS OF APPRECIATION 


Dear Ones In The Lord: 

Words can't express to you the great blessing I received 
from reading the July 1st Watch Tower. Without a doubt 
to my mind the Lord sent it, for it is just what I needed. 
In examining myself after reading the article "Test of Sonship
" I find by God's grace I do have the proofs of sonship. 
I had been a little discouraged over my many mistakes, but 
after examining myself I find deep in my heart my desire 
to prove faithful to the Lord to the end. Be assured that I 
love you all and appreciate your labors of love; I will cooperate
 with you to the end of the way. I remain with true 
Christian love, 

Your servant in Christy 

Gregory Sakatos, Colp. 


Dear Brethren : 

I wish to express my gratitude for the first article, "God's 
Covenants and Blessings," in the June 15th Tower, to the 
dear brethren of the Editorial Committee. This convinces 
me more and more that the Lord is still using the same 
channel which he has been using for the last forty-three 
years for the feeding of his people with food in due season. 
I received much light and encouragment through the reading
 of this article already mentioned. May the Lord grant 
you more and more of his divine wisdom, so that you may 
be able to continue to be used of the Lord faithfully even 
unto death. 

Yours in his service, 

A. S. Zakian, N. Y. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAKER 


Gustine, Tex Aug. 

Miles. Tex " 

GoldBboro, Tex. _. . " 
Merkel. Tex. ...... " 

Clyde, Tex " 

Weatherford, Tex. .. " 


2, 3 

5 

7 

9 

10 

11 


Fort Worth, Tex. . 

Graham, Tex 

Bowie, Tex 

Stoneburg, Tex. . . 
Wichita Falls, Tex. 
Archer City, Tex, . 


Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H. BARBER 


Salem, 

Lisbon, O 

Negley, O 

Columbiana, O. 
Alliance, O. . - 
Massillon, O. . . 


5 

7 
8 

9 

10 


Painesville, O. . . 
Ashtabula, 0. 

Elyria, O 

Wellington, O. ... 

Shelby, 

Marion, O 


.Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


Beverly, Mass. . . . 

Saugus, Mass 

Haverhill, Mass. . . 
Lawrence. Mass. . . 
Melrose, Mass. . . . 
Concord Jn., Ma&s. 


Aug. 


Lowell, Mass. 
Nashua, N. H, 
Manchester, N. H, 
Pittsfield, N. H. . 
Laconia, N. H. 
Ashland, N. H. 


. .Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 


Myrtle Creek, Ore. Aug. 
Rosenborg, Ore. 

Eastside. Ore 

Salem, Ore 

Vancouver, Wash. . 
Portland, Ore. 


8 
10 
12, 13 
15 
10 
17 


Chehalis, Wash, 
Olympia, Wash. 
Puyallup, Wash, ... 
Tacoma, Wash. 
Bremerton, Wash. 
Seattle, Wash. ... 


. . Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. 0. BOWIN 


Cromwell, Conn. ...Aug. 
New Britain, Coan. " 
Hartford, Conn. ... " 
Waterbury, Conn. . . " 
New Haven, Coon. 
8. Norwalk, Conn. . " 


1 Port Chester, N, J. Aojg. 

2 Stamford, Conn. . . 
8 Bridgeport, Conn. . 

5 Patchogue, N. Y. , 

6 Greenport, N. Y. . 

7 Westerly, R. I. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. H. BOTH 


Quincy, 111. . . — 
St. Louis, Mo. . - . 
Cartersville, 111. . 
Creel Springs, IU. 
Mounds, 111. .... 
Thebes, 111 


.Aug. 


1 Anna, 111 Aug. 

3 Ceatralia, HI " 

4 Patoka, IU 

5 Vandalia, 111 

6 Pana, HI 

7 Taylorville, ni 


13 

14 
15 
16 
17 
18 


11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
17 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 


19 
30 
31 
22 
23 
24 


8 

9 

10 
11 
12 
13 


9, 10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHIXMAN 


Anderson, Ind. 

Honcie, Ind 

LosantsviUe, Ind. . 
Richmond, Ind. . . . 
Indianapolis, Ind. . 
Crawfordsville, Ind 


. . Aug. 


5 Brazil, Ind ...Aug. 

6 Terre Haute, Ind. . . * * 

7 Vincennes, Ind. .... " 

8 Washington, Ind, .. " 

10 Alfordsville. Ind. . . " 

11 Mitchell, Ind. . .^ . . '* 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Whitehaven, Pa. ..Aug. 

Benton, Pa " 

Canton, Pa *' 

Elmira, N. Y. ...... " 

HammondBport, N.Y. *' 
Batavia, N. Y. " 


Perry, N. Y 

Rochester. N. Y. 

Auburn, N. Yt . . 
Ithaca, N. Y. 
Cortland, N. Y. . . 
Syracuse, N. Y. 


. . Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUSON 

Marengo, HI Aug. 4 Kewanee, 111 

Rochelle, 111 " 5 Rock Island, IIL . 

Ashton, 111 '* 6 Davenport, la 

Peoria, 111 " 7 Muscatine, la. ... 

Canton, 111 " 8 Keithsburg, III. . . . 

Knoxville, 111 " 9 Burlington, la. ,.. 


Au£. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. D. SEXTON 


Ottawa, Kans. . . . 
Kansas City, Mo. . 
Leavenworth, Kans. 
St. Joseph, Mo. . . 
Des Moines, la. . . 
Waterloo, la 


Aug. 


8 Cedar Rapids, la. ..Aug. 

4 Clinton, la 

5 Chicago. 111. 

6 South Bend, Ind. . 

7 Detroit, Mich 

8 Cleveland, Ohio . . . 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 


Lancaster, O. . . 
Newark, O. . . ... 

Dresden, O 

Zanesville, O. . . 
White Cottage, O 
Neiaonville, 0. . . 


. . .Aug. 


1 
2,8 

4 
6 

e 

7 


Wellston, O 

Portsmouth, 0. 

Ironton, O ^ . 

Ashland, Ky 

Huntington, W. Va. 
Pliny, W. Va 


Aug. 


12 
13 
14 
15 
10, 17 
18 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 


9, 10 
11 
12 
13 

14 
15 


8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 


Spartanburg, N. C. Aug. 
Hendersonville, N. 0. " 
Asheviile, N. C. ... " 

Greer, S. C *• 

Westminster, S. C. . '* 
Atlanta, Ga " 


2,3 Dallas, Ga Aug. 

4 Rockmart, Ga " 

5, 6 Cedartown, Ga " 

8 Tallapoosa, Ga. .^ . . " 

9 Chattanooga, Tenn. 
10 Rome, Ga 


11 

12 
13 

14 
15, 17 

18 


Galloway, Md. . . 
Annapolis, Md. . 
Cumberland, M(L 
Frostburg, Md. . 
Westernport, Mdl 
ParsonB, W. Va. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. P. ZINK 

. Aug. 3 


Morgantown, W.Va. Aug. 

Burton, W. Va '« 

Mannington, W. Va. " 

Brown, W. Va " 

Clarksburg, W. Va. " 
Buckhannon, W, Va. ' ' 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. 


NewKensington.Pa. Aug. 
Lewistown, Pa. M .. " 


3 
10 


Akron, 0. . . 
Monessen, Pa 


BAEtTERLEIN 
.Aug. 


New Castle, Pa. 
Canonsburg, Pa, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 
. . Aug. 


3 
10 


Wellaville, O Aug. 

Duquesne, Pa *' 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 


Evansville, Ind. . 
Wheeling, W. Va. 


• Aug. 


S 

10 


Washington, D. C. .Aug. 
Baltimore, Md. „ . . . " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZUBTT 


Warren, O 

Johnstown, Pa. 


.Aug. 


3 
10 


Fairmont, W. Va, .Aug. 
Clarksburg, W. Va. ** 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUD GIN GS 


Fairmont, W. Va. .Aug. 
Clarksburg, W. Y». •• 


Youngstown, O. 
Kit tanning, Pa. 


.Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. L. HUTCHINSON 


Pittsborgh, Pa. ...Aug. 
Sharon, Pa " 


3 

10 


Connellsville, Pa. . .Aug. 
Eluabeth, Pa " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
Frostburg, Md Aug. 17 E. Palestine, O. ...Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 


New Brighton, Pa. Aug. 
Erie, Pa rt . . *' 


3 
10 


East Liverpool, O. Aug. 
Brownsville, Pa. ... " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 


Buffalo, N. Y Aug. 

Crooksville, O " 


3 
10 


Washington, Pa, 
Altoona, Pa. . . . 


.Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 


Canton, O. 
Butler, Pa. 


. .Aug. 


3 

10 


Mansfield, O Aug. 

Toronto, O " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 
Columbus, O Aug. 3 Toledo, O Aug: 


10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 


17 
24 


17 
24 


24 
24 


24 
24 


10 
17 


17 
24 


24 


17 
24 


17 
24 


17 
24 


10 


- --- - . _ . . --'_■' 

__ 

MORNING HYMNS FOR SEPTEMBER 


After the close of the hymn the Lord's people may 

well 

have the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord", ther 

join 

in prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is 

considered. Hymns for September follow: (1) 

140; 

(2) 95; (3) 114; (4) 233; (5) 193; (6) 

120; 

(7) 112; (8) 326; (9) 249; (10) 267; (11) 

279; 

(12) 266; (13) 23; (14) 205; (15) 322; 

(16) 

106; (17) 136; (18) 124; (19) 74; (20) 

244; 

(21) 226; (22) 235; (23) 44; (24) 8; (25) 

333; 

(26) 332; (27) 277; (28) 119; (29) 229; (30) 

165. 




if S 



mmmm 




wm 4. 






'■mm 


|— ROCKOFACES^y 

l\ Other foundation can '1 
no man lay- ';,%£' 

[/ A, RANSOM FOR ALL'^ 


*i» 


'*um 


v-,-- 



i 


\ 




f/»^% 


■^■■■■■j-x . 


, : m? ■ 


*^.:\X^-. 


WaM?f&F- . 



L^j;' 


s^s 


^fe=*g%^ 


-J ^ S^ rff -'rfv^V* - — — ' —* 


Seeming &>m$^ f amda%{7tal5oH.«.2>:)>fi 

VOL. XL AUGUST 15 No. 16 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — AM. «047 

CONTENTS 

Blessed are the Fearless 243 

Elijah a Type 243 

Suddenly Become Fearful 244 

Elijah Regains his Courage 245 

Deeds of Elisha 246 

Whom does Elisha Type ? 246 

Twice as Fearless 247 

Invisible Cohorts 247 

The Mantle 248 

The Gleaning Work 249 

Opportunities for Service 250 

Is there Work to Do ? 250 

Work for the Little Flock 251 

Benefits of Assembling Together 252 

In Re General Convention 253 

The Holy Scriptures 254 

Effects of True Bible Studv 254 

" 7 will stand upon mv watch, and will set mv foot upon the 
Tower, and will watch 'to see what He will say unto me and 
what answer I shall make to them, that oppose me. '—Had. 2 1 . 

JIS 

~)W.T.B.£T.S. 



Upon the earth distress ■ 
to the things coming upon the 
then know that the Kingdom ol God 13 at nana. 


«ss of nations with perplexity; the «» and the wavea (the restless, discontented) roanns; ^^^^^^Jj^J^^^^ 1 ^^ 
the earth <soclet>): for the powers of the heavens (ecclesiasticisro) shall be shaken. . . . *% n > e h !?J \K e fo .^fijt i£%- Luke 21°2?31 
.„!„, r-_rtrf \ a ..t h.h,i Trink 11 n lift, u n vnur heads, rpuiiw. for vour redemution draweth nigh. — Mattnew -±.6S, Mar it u.-y. Luue zi.^o--oi 


Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, lor your redemption drawetn nign 


THIS JOURNAL, AND ITS SAGRED MISSION 


THIS Journal Is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now beinfi 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and Qt 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to ail who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz,, Verbi Dei Minister (VDM) which 
translated into English, is Minister 0} the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered Indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated— 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ranaom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all." (1 Pet. 1:10; 1 Tim, 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15* 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has been. 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which* in* other Area 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 -.5-0, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men. while It seeks more and more to bring its every utterance Into fullest 
•ubjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed In the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
fcatn spoken— according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude Is not dogmatical, but confident • for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust to be used' only In 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear In its columns must be according to our ludjrment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
urge our readers to prove all Its utterances by the Infallible Word to which reference Is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple through which 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him.— 1 Cor. 3:16, 17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen! 
28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses * and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
In the First Resurrection; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. ^ 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for event 
5 a ?' n o R * nsom * or al i" and wil1 be "the true Light which Hghteth every man that Cometh into the world," "In due time'*— 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the Hope of the Church Is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share His 

glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom, 8:17; 2 Pet 1:4. 
That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop In herself every grace; 

to be God s witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age.— Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 .14 ; Rev. 1:6; 20 *«. 
That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial* Kingdom— 

the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and His glorified 

Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa 35 


PUBLISHED BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

110 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Waick Towct Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these columns, The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rcthkrkord, W. E. Van Amburgh, F. H. Robison, Gko. H. 
Fishkr. W. E. Pagk. 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $I.OO IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS. BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Terms t* the Lord'* Poor as follow*— All Bible Students who. by reason of 
old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay for this journal, will 
be supplied Fre« if they send a Postal' Card each May stating their case and 
requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all 
such be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS— PJease remember 
that as a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal
 or for a new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are 
indicated within a month by change in date of expiration of the -ub- 
■cription on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please give old address as 
well as new. This is very important, saving us much t^me and unnecessary
 correspondence. 


It is absolutely essential to have your name and full address 
on each communication you send. Even if there are people 
in the office who know you, there is no assurance whatever 
that any of those persons will be handling your mail; and 
even if they should it cannot be expected that they will remember
 the many thousands of addresses. No foreign address
 is complete without bearing the name of the country; 
and no domestic address is complete without the name of the 
state or (in the case of Canada) the province. 

Furthermore, it is a great assistance to us if your name 
and address be not only somewhere on the letter, but if t hey 
both be at the head of the letter. This simplifies our filing 
very much and tends to make possible better service in response
 to your correspondence, especially if it be of a business 
nature. 

Married women should be careful to use the same name 
in all their letters. No small trouble and confusion can be 
avoided by using either the personal name or that of the 
husband, but not both alternately. We have no means whatever
 of knowing that it is the same person. 


ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA , POSTOFFICE 
I'NDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3RD, 1S79. 


YOUR COMMUNICATIONS TO THE SOCIETY 

Several times in the past we have called attention to the 
fact that all communications should be addressed to the Society
, and not to individuals ; but new correspondents are 
constantly appearing on our lists, thus making necessary the 
reiteration of what has been often said. 

In all matters of business relating to the Society, please 
address the SOCIETY and not individuals who may be occupying
 various positions in connection with the Society's 
work. This is not only the usual and preferable business 
way, but it works more nearly to the advantage of all concerned
. 

But in addition to using on your envelope the Society's 
general address (Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, 119 
Federal Street, Pittsburgh, Pa,) it will expedite the proper 
distribution of your mail to indicate on the envelope the department
 for which it is intended, if the subject matter is of 
a special nature, as Pilgrim Dept., Colporteur Dept., etc. 
Especially is this true with respect to the Pilgrim Department, 
and class secretaries can usually receive a much prompter 
reply if this suggestion is observed. 


ADDED FEATURE TO TOWER REPRINTS 

In addition to the subject matter already announced for 
the seven Tower reprint volumes, we are now able to inform 
the friends that seven full-page portraits of Brother Russell, 
one in each volume, will be reproduced in fine half-tone 
photo-engravings. These portraits show the likeness of the 
seventh messenger to the church as he appeared in the years 
1879, 1888, 1896, 1900, 1906, 1910, and 1916. This is the first 
time a series of this kind has been presented and it adds very 
largely indeed to the historical interest and value of the work. 
No increase is made in the price: see price list for Reprint 
Towers in August 1 issue. 


I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 


QUESTIONS FROM 

MANUAL ON SERIES SIXTH 

"STTJMES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY XI-"PASSOVKR OF THE NEW CREATION" 

Week of Sept. 7....Q. 1-5 Week of Sept. 21 . . Q. 12-1S 
Week of Sept. 14 .... Q. 6-11 Week of Sept. 28.. . . Q. 17-22 

Question Mnuilt m Vol. VI, Studies in th« Seriptarw, 10c iwh, p*«tpfci4. 



AND HEPAID OF CHRISTS PRESENCE 


Vol. xi. 


ArousT 15, 1919 

BLESSED ARE THE FEARLESS 

: Ttw not, little flock, for it is the Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom"— Luke 12:32. 


No. 16 


PART II 






VAT 


• 




HEN prophecy has been fulfilled or is in 
the course of fulfillment the consecrated 
child of God may understand it. The 
world has no faith in the Word of God, 
hence even though men of the world behold
 events transpire in fulfillment of 
prophecy, they do not believe the 
prophecy, and it means nothing to them. 
Knowing the inspired words of the 
prophets were written aforetime for the instruction 
and comfort of the church and particularly for the 
benefit of those upon whom the ends of the ages have 
come, the faithful Christian is enabled, by reason of 
the illumination of the holy Spirit, to see and have 
some appreciation of fulfilled prophecy. In this part 
of the subject under examination we will consider the 
life, deeds and words of the prophets Elijah and 
Elisha from the viewpoint of type and antitype. 

There has been much discussion among Bible students
 concerning these prophets and what class or 
classes of persons they represented. Since we are 
assured that the pathway of the just is as a shining 
light that shines more and more unto the day of perfection
, the searcher after truth may with confidence 
expect to get further light as the end of the pathway 
is approached. The honest searcher for truth does 
not irrevocably commit himself to an interpretation 
of unfulfilled prophecy ; for he realizes that the Lord 
may be pleased, from time to time, to grant a clearer 
vision of the subject, and as prophecy unfolds and the 
events transpire in fulfillment thereof the vision does 
become clearer. (2 Peter 1:19-21) What we state 
herein is not dogmatically given ; but in the light of the 
great underlying principles or governing taws of conduct
, as set forth in Part i of this subject, we submit 
the thoughts herein expressed for the careful consideration
 of the truly consecrated. 

ELIJAH A TYPE 

It seems to be definitely settled in the minds of 
practically all Bible students that Elijah was a type of 
the church in the flesh. (1 Kings 17; B-250-256) As 
to whether or not Elisha was a type of something, and 
if so of what, has not been definitely determined by 
students of divine prophecy. When we find that God 
uses a man to typify or picture events to happen in the 
future, it is of interest that we consider the words, 
deeds and character of that man. See Z '15-285. 

Ahab, King of Israel, the chosen people of the Lord, 
influenced by his unrighteous queen, Jezebel, had led 
the people into idolatry ; and God sent to him the 
prophet Elijah, who boldly stood before the king and 
delivered his message, to the effect that for a period 
of three and one half years there would be no rain in 
the land, wherein dwelt the people of Israel. After 


delivering this message the prophet concealed himself 
for the period of the drouth. At the end of the three 
and a half years God sent him back to Israel, directing
 him to appear before Ahab, the king. On the way 
he met Obadiah, the king's most trusted servant, whom 
he requested to go to the king and tell him that Elijah 
had returned. Obadiah was exceedingly fearful of 
his life, fearing to report the presence of the prophet 
lest the prophet would fail to appear before the king; 
hence he begged to be relieved of the responsibility. 

After being assured by Elijah that he would certainly
 appear that day before King Ahab Obadiah 
yielded to his request. A meeting of the prophet and 
the king resulted. King Ahab accused the prophet of 
being responsible for the drouth. Elijah with boldness
 responded by declaring that the king himself was 
responsible for the drouth of rain because he had forsaken
 the Lord and had led the people into idolatry. 
At the instance of Jezebel the prophets of Baal held 
sway in Israel, and the people followed them. Elijah 
now made a most startling and bold proposition to 
Ahab; namely, that King Ahab should summon the 
prophets of Baal who should build an altar and place 
upon it a slaughtered bullock and put no fire under it; 
that he himself (Elijah), would do the same thing and 
that then the prophets of Baal should call upon their 
God to consume the sacrifice by fire and Elijah would 
call upon Jehovah to consume his sacrifice by fire ; and 
that whosoever's God responded by consuming the 
sacrifice should be accepted by the people. 

The king acquiesced and summoned 450 prophets of 
Baal. At an appointed time the meeting was held. 
The false prophets of Baal builded their altar and 
placed upon it a slaughtered bullock, and then called 
on their god Baal to consume the sacrifice. But they 
failed. Elijah then was not only careful to see there 
was no fire under his sacrifice', but he filled the trench 
with water. Then after he had offered up a prayer 
to Jehovah, fire descended from heaven and consumed
 not only the sacrifice, but the stones and the 
dust, and even licked up the water in the trench. The 
people then and there acknowledged Jehovah as God. 
Elijah, singlehanded and alone, boldly ordered that all 
the 450 false prophets of Baal should be taken and 
killed. They were taken, brought to the Brook Kishon 
and there were put to death. There then followed a 
great deluge of rain. 

ANTITYPE 

We have heretofore seen that these experiences of 
Elijah foreshadowed the experiences of the church in 
the flesh; that the lack of rain for three and a half 
years foreshadowed the lack of truth, living waters, 
during the period of 1260 years of Papal supremacy 
and wicked persecution of the saints, which ended in 
the year 1799. Then followed a great deluge of truth 

243 


244 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


in the earth, the wide distribution of millions of Bibles 
and the proclamation of truth by word of mouth. 

In his dealings with King Ahab and in his boldness 
in slaying the false prophets of Baal, Elijah exhibited 
a wonderful degree of courage and fearlessness. 
Herein he pictured the spirit and disposition of those 
composing the church who are pleasing to the heavenly 
Father. "Elijah seems to have been a most courageous
 servant of the Lord in executing whatever commands
 he received from the Great King * * * Elijah 
was courageous for the Lord and for the truth; 
Obadiah was less courageous and in some respects 
weak-kneed, lacking many of the qualities approved 
of the Lord ***** There are Christians of both of 
these types to-day, but Elijah stands for or represents 
the 'little flock' with whom the Lord is especially 
pleased and who, with the Redeemer, will constitute 
the kingdom class by and by." — Z '04-220,221. 

"A general lesson may be drawn from these incidents by 
the Lord's people of the new creation. The Elijah-like class 
have the lessons of courage and faithfulness and trust. Let 
us be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might; let 
us speak his Word plainly and show forth, on every possible 
occasion and by every proper means, the glories of him who 
hath called us from darkness to light. It is not for us to 
vanquish the enemies of the truth and put them to death as 
did Elijah, but it is for us to slay and utterly expose the errors 
and false teachings which are deceiving the people. The 
Lord's 'little ones', as the Scriptures declare, may be mighty 
through his power to the pulling down of the strongholds of 
error and to the turning back of the tide of dissipation and 
sin from those who are in a reasonable attitude of mind to 
receive the Truth."— Z '04-234, 235. 

FALSE PBOPHETS SLAIN 

The undaunted courage and fearlessness exhibited 
by Elijah in slaying the false prophets of Baal surely 
pictures something in the experiences of the church. 
Such an important event would not have been given 
prominence in the record unless it was intended to 
picture something or teach some lesson. We suggest 
the following: For many years the clergy, both 
Catholic and Protestant, operating under the name of 
Christ, have taught false doctrines and led the people 
into idolatry. They have taught the God-dishonoring
 doctrines of eternal torture, spiritism, the "doctrine
 of devils", evolution, higher criticism, etc; and 
have so turned the minds of the people away from 
God and his pure Word of truth that even one of 
their own modern writers recently published this statement
: "Christianity in its present form will have to go 
into the war scrapheap". There are exceptions to the 
rule, of course, but, to quote the words of an earnest 
Bible student: "In the aggregate, the clergy are the 
greatest bunch of hypocrites that have ever afflicted 
the peoples of earth". Surely there is nothing in all 
history that more clearly fulfills the picture of the 
false prophets than the majority of the clergy class 
of our own day. They have established a great 
stronghold of error and gnash their teeth and war 
against everyone who dares hold forth the truth. 

Jehovah has armed the antitypical Elijah class; and 
their chief offensive and defensive weapon is the 
"sword of the Spirit", the message of truth. The 
prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation contain the most 
scathing arraignment of these false prophets that has 
ever been written. Volume VII of Studies in the 
Scriptures, "The Finished Mystery," unfolds these 
prophecies so that even the unconsecrated may understand
, and thus exposes these false prophets to 
the world as they have never before been exposed and 


deals a mortal blow to their false teachings and fraudulent
 deceptions. When this weapon was placed in 
the hands of the antitypical Elijah class, boldly and 
fearlessly they went forward and used it. 

SUDDENLY BECOME FEARFUL 

Ahab pictured the civil powers ; Jezebel pictured the 
ecclesiastical elements. Ahab was not particularly interested
 in the false prophets of Baal. He cared for 
them only as they might serve his purpose, but he did 
not suffer much by reason of their loss. It was his 
unrighteous consort, Jezebel, who particularly desired 
to maintain these false prophets. The disloyal, unfaithful
 ecclesiastical systems of today are really the 
only ones that care particularly to maintain the false 
prophets ; namely, the clergy. 

In the type Jezebel sent word to Elijah that she 
would have him put to death in twenty-four hours because
 he had slain her prophets. This frightened him 
and he fled. This disposition of fear suddenly developed
 by Elijah seems strange in the light of the 
courage and fearlessness he had previously exhibited. 

"Poor Elijah, so courageous previously, so ready to risk his 
life, now was panic-stricken and fled to Beersheba, the farther 
part of Judah. Even then he did not feel himself safe because 
Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah was a close friend of Ahab, 
King of Israel, so leaving there his servant he continued his 
flight southward to the wilderness of Mount Zion. It is useless
 for us to speculate as to how Elijah might have done 
otherwise than he did, or how he might have boldly stood up 
for the Lord, denounced the queen, rallied the heads of the 
tribes of Israel and carried forward to a general completion 
the reform movement which he began. We are to remember 
that Elijah was a type; and that hence his doings, as well as 
his words, in a particular sense and degree were ordered of the 
Lord, beyond any knowledge or motives of his own. It is 
only when we view this entire narrative of Elijah, Ahab and 
Jezebel from the standpoint of a type of more wonderful 
things coming afterward on a larger scale, only then can we 
grasp in any measure the force and meaning of the lessons 
taught through these types." — Z '04-236. 

We emphasize the statement above made: "We 
must remember that Elijah was a type; hence his doings
 as well as his words were in a particular sense 
ordered of the Lord." What experience has come to 
the church which seems to be pictured by this experience
 of fear and lack of courage that overtook Elijah? 
During the year 1917, and up to the spring of 1918, 
the church was unusually zealous in using the sword 
of the Spirit, particularly the point of the sword which 
had been prepared and "wrapped up for the slaughter" 
with which to assault Babylon's strongholds of error 
and to expose her false prophets. Referring to that 
time it had been prophetically written: "Thou, therefore
, son of man, prophesy, and smite thine hands together
, and let the sword be doubled the third time, 
the sword of the slain; it is the sword of the great 
men that are slain, which entereth into their privy 
chambers". (Ezekiel 21:14) The "sword of the 
Spirit" was to be wielded by Pastor Russell twice 
three times in six volumes of Studies in the Scriptures
. The weapons of destruction will pursue all 
the great ones of earth, penetrating into all their most 
secret places. The sword of the Spirit will search 
out all of the lords over God's heritage (1 Peter 5:3), 
the clergy, exposing their numerous ideas contrary to 
Jehovah and his plan. "I have set the point of the 
sword against all their gates, that their heart may 
faint, and their ruins be multiplied. Ah ! it is made 
bright. It is wrapped up for the slaughter." 
(Ezekiel 21:15) The point of the sword is Volume 


August 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


245 


VII, Studies in the Scriptures, "The Finished 
Mystery", because it contains the essence of the 
weapons of all the writings of Pastor Russell and the 
explanation of the prophecies of Ezekiel and Revelation
 against the false systems that encumber the earth, 
particularly the false prophets, towit, the clergy. 

JEZEBEL WAXED ANGBY 

Immediately following the wide dissemination of 
this message of truth against the false prophets the 
antitypical Jezebel waxed exceedingly angry, and 
threatened and bullied and bluffed the Elijah class 
throughout all the country, and, by enlisting the aid of 
Ahab, so frightened the Elijah class that under the 
unrighteous persecution that followed upon them they 
laid down the sword and fled. Much persecution 
followed, instigated, pushed on by Jezebel, the mother 
harlot and her daughters associated with her, by the 
antitypical Ahab; and so great was the discouragement
 of some of the Elijah class that they said: 
'Would that we might die and end this terrible ordeal'. 
For some time there was much despondency among 
the Elijah class. How like the experience of their 
prototype, Elijah! 

"The antitype of Ahab, civil government, has to a considerable
 extent recognized the general truth of the matter (the 
refreshing that has come to the people from spreading the 
truth) but they are more or less closely affiliated with and 
under the influence of the Jezebel system ; and, alas ! as Revelation
 clearly points out, Jezebel today has daughters (systems 
termed Protestant), which nevertheless copy largely the 
mother's spirit. It is through the influence of the daughters 
that the antitypical Elijah may expect future persecution, instigated
 by the mother, accomplished through the daughters, 
as typically represented in the case of John the Baptist, beheaded
 by Herod at the instance of Salome and at the instigation
 of Herodias — Jezebel. This, however, is looking 
down to a period in the future." — Z '04-237. 

In view of the events above related, does it not seem 
that Brother Russell wrote the above paragraph prophetically
? Again we quote from him: 

"Elijah, under the juniper tree, praying God that he might 
die because he had been no more successful than his fathers 
had been in the mission of restoring Israel to the true worship 
of God, is almost amusing when we think of the fact that the 
prophet had fled panic-stricken a few days before to escape 
Jezebel's threat against his life. Why thus flee from death 
and yet pray the Lord for death ? The prophet's experiences 
and conduct are but an illustration of what frequently occurs. 
Amongst the Lord's people some of strong faith at times become
 discouraged, panic-stricken, fearful. For a moment 
they seem to forget whose servants they are and the almighty 
power that is behind them, able and willing to make' all things 
work together for good to his faithful ones. The fact of the 
matter is that all of the Lord's consecrated servants devote 
their lives to sacrifice when they become followers of the 
Lamb; and if they could but realize their consecration continually
 they would be ready for the consummation at any 
moment at the Lord's pleasure and by whatever means or 
channel his providences may permit. The Lord's consecrated 
ones of the Elijah class are to remember that not a hair of 
their heads could fall without their Father's knowledge and 
permission ; and the attitude of their hearts should be that 
experienced by our dear Redeemer: 'The cup which my Father 
hath poured for me, shall I not drink it?'" — Z '04-237. 

Of course the Lord foreknew the trying experiences 
that would come to his people in the spring of 191s 1 — 
at the close of the forty year harvest period, and it 
seems that he purposed that the trying and fearful 
experiences of Elijah when he fled from the threats 
of Jezebel should represent and picture the church's 
experiences at that time. Then be of good courage. 

ELIJAH REGAINS HIS COUEAGE 

Subsequently Elijah regained his courage; and let 


the Lord's people take courage from this. Afterwards
 King Ahaziah, who was injured, sent a 
messenger to Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, to inquire 
whether he would recover. The angel of the Lord 
directed Elijah to go and meet the messenger and to 
tell the king that he would not recover. This Elijah 
did. Thereupon the king sent a captain with fifty 
men to Elijah, evidently for the purpose of apprehending
 him, and at Elijah's instance fire came down 
from heaven and devoured them. A second fifty 
went up and presented themselves to Elijah, with the 
same result. Then the third fifty came and humbly 
bowed before Elijah; whereupon the Lord directed 
Elijah to go down to the king, saying, "Go down with 
him, be not afraid of him." And Elijah rose and 
went down with him unto the king. (2 Kings, 
Chapter 1) Evidently he had lost his fear and regained
 his courage. 

We must keep in mind that no human being could 
be so manipulated as to make one continuous picture 
showing every feature of the church's experiences. 
As often stated by Brother Russell, there are pictures 
within pictures, and where one picture ends another 
begins. Therefore we must mark well the different 
pictures so as not to confuse them. The experience 
of Elijah while being taken up in the whirlwind must 
of necessity appear last in the picture; but whether 
or not that experience pictured the last experience of 
the antitypical Elijah class is entirely a different 
matter. Elijah typed a class of persons ; and the fiery 
chariot and whirlwind might not be the last earthly 
experiences of the persons composing that class. He 
could not have exhibited the spirit of fear after the 
fiery chariot experience. Hence that fear must be 
pictured first, on the same principle that Jesus as a 
man could not institute the Memorial Supoer after 
his death, and that hence it must precede his death. 
The taking away of Elijah in the whirlwind might represent
 a marked point in the church's career, and yet 
many of the persons composing the church might remain
 in the flesh for a time after having that antitypical
 experience. 

GREAT COMPANY CHABACTE BIS TICS 

It has been suggested that Elisha was a type of the 
great company class. It is therefore important that 
we examine the characteristics of the great company 
class, and then see whether the events in the life and 
experiences of Elisha foreshadowed these characteristics
. We here append some pertinent statements by 
Brother Russell: 

"We have already pointed out that God does not make very 
particular mention of the great company in the Bible, and we 
have found out the reason for this, namely, that if the great 
company were treated on the same plane and with the same 
degree of interest and explicitness as the little flock it would 
imply that God had offered both and said, Here they are ; take 
your choice. But that is not so. The Lord's statement is: 
'Ye are all called in one hope of your calling' — to be members 
of the body of the Anointed. Thus the Scriptures merely 
give the hint that there are some who constitute the great 
company and who^ will get a great blessing, to which there 
never was an invitation. Everyone of that great company 
receives the grace of God in just the same way as the little 
flock, but they do not use it in the proper way, which was to lay 
down their lives with the Lord Jesus ; for in carrying out the 
plan it must be laid down in death." 

"What are the chief things that will draw us from the little 
flock to the great company class? 

"My answer would be 'Lack of zeal, lack of love for God, 
lack of love for the brethren; that is to say, coolness on the 
part of your heart. The little flock will be the class without 


246 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


spot, etc., while the great company will be the class with robes 
that are spotted and wrinkled and not fit to be of the Bride 
class." 

"But though not voluntary ovcrcomers, the Lord loves them 
and will deliver these who through fear of death (fear of 
contempt, fear of the reproach borne by the bullock and the 
goat beyond the camp in the wilderness, the separated or dead 
condition) were all their lifetime subject to bondage, bondage 
of fear of men and men's traditions and opinions, which always
 brings a snare and keeps back from full obedience to 
God, even unto death." — T-70. 

Summing up, then, the chief characteristics of 
the great company are negligence or indifference in 
fulfilling their covenant of sacrifice, lack of zeal, fear 
and falling away from perfect love. Do we find any 
of these characteristics manifested by or in the experiences
 of the Prophet Elisha? 

DEEDS OF ELISHA 

After the anointing of Elisha to be a prophet we 
find him walking with Elijah, seemingly to indicate 
that they were in perfect harmony. They journeyed 
from Giigal to Bethel, from Bethel to Jericho, then 
to the Jordan; and the two crossed the Jordan together
. When Elijah was taken up by the whirlwind 
Elisha saw it, and then "he took up also the mantle 
of Elijah that fell from him and went back and stood 
by the bank of the Jordan. And then he took the 
mantle of Elijah that had fallen from him and smote 
the waters and said: Where is the Lord God of 
Elijah? And when he also had smitten the waters 
they parted hither and thither, and Elisha went over." 
—2 Kings 2:13,14. 

Other recorded deeds of Elisha are, the healing of 
the brackish waters (2 Kings 2:21,22); pronouncing 
of a curse upon some of his persecutors (2 Kings 
22:24) ; causing a miraculous supply of water to flow 
into the ditches of the Israelites (2 Kings 3:13-20); 
increasing the widow's cruse of oil (2 Kings 4:1-7) ; 
blessing the barren Shunamite woman with a son (2 
Kings 4:17); raising from the dead the Shunamite's 
son (2 Kings 4:37) ; healing the poisoned pottage (2 
Kings 4:44) ; healing the leper and causing leprosy to 
come upon his own servant (2 Kings 5:14-27) ; causing
 the iron wedge to swim in water (2 Kings 6:6) ; 
and then came the experience at Dothan. In the examination
 of these acts and words of Elisha we find 
nothing of the characteristics of the great company. 

It may be suggested then that these deeds do not 
seem to typify the great company class. Would it 
not indicate a restitution work on the part of Elisha 
and that Elisha would type the ancient worthies? The 
answer to this is that Elijah did a similar work in this, 
that he miraculously increased the widow woman's 
barrel of meal and cruse of oil so that "the barrel of 
meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil, according
 to the word of the Lord which he spoke by 
Elijah". (1 Kings 17:11-16) Later the son of the 
same woman fell sick and died, and Elijah awakened 
him out of death "and the soul of the child came into 
him again and he revived". (1 Kings 17:18-23) In 
this connection we are reminded that during the three 
and a half years of Jesus' ministry he opened the 
eyes of the blind, unstopped the ears of the deaf, 
loosed the tongue of the dumb, healed the sick and 
afflicted, and awakened some out of death. 

In speaking to his disciples on one occasion he said : 
"Verily, verily I say unto you, he that believeth on 
me, the works that I do shall he do also, and greater 
works than these shall ye do, because I go to my 


Father". (1 John 14:12) Instead of these works of 
temporary blessings done by Elijah, and subsequently 
by Elisha, representing restitution work to be done by 
the ancient worthies, may it not be that it typified 
or represented the privileges that the Elijah class have 
had during the Gospel age of bringing blessings to 
those to whom they brought the message of truth 
through the opening of their eyes of understanding, 
etc? Commenting upon the words of Jesus that his 
disciples should do greater works than he had done, 
his "faithful and wise servant" wrote: 

"It may perhaps be proper to think that some of these 
greater works will occur after the kingdom has been established
, the greater work of awakening the world of mankind 
from the sleep of death; but in our opinion this is not the 
only sense in which the Lord's followers are to understand 
that their works are to be greater than those of the- Master. 
When the holy Spirit was given after Pentecost, the Lord's 
people, in his name and as his representatives, began to do 
greater and more wonderful works than those which he himself
 had performed. Did the Lord open the eyes of the blind? 
His followers were privileged to open the eyes of men's 
understandings. Did the Lord heal the physically sick? His 
disciples were permitted to heal the spiritually sick. Did the 
Lord cure physical leprosy? It was the privilege of his followers
 to heal spiritual leprosy, sin. Did our Lord revive the 
dead? It was the privilege of his followers to preach the 
Gospel, by which many passed 'from death unto life' in a 
higher sense." — Z' 99-90,91. 

It would hardly seem reasonable, then, for us to 
conclude that Elisha, merely because of the deeds 
above recorded, would typify the great company class, 
for the reason stated in the last paragraph and for the 
further reason that during the Millennial age the 
ancient worthies will do for the human race only as 
the visible agents of the Christ, and not as the agents 
of the great company. 

WHOM DOES ELISHA TYPE? 

If Elisha, then, was a type, whom did he picture? 
Our answer to that question is that we believe he was a 
type of the little flock; that Elijah typed the little 
flock up until a certain stage of the work done and 
performed by the followers of Jesus ; towit, up to the 
time the fiery trials came upon the church in 1918, at 
which time the mantle, that is, the message of truth, 
particularly represented in "The Finished Mystery", 
was thrown down and the remaining work to be done 
by the church in the flesh is pictured by Elisha, and 
in support of this position we submit the following: 

It is interesting to note the Scriptural references 
concerning the anointing of Elisha. The Lord directed 
Elijah to anoint Elisha. The King James version 
says: "Thou shalt anoint him to be prophet in thy 
room." It appears that both Dr. Strong and Dr. 
Young failed to define the word "room" in this text; 
but in the Leeser translation we read that God said 
unto Elijah : "And Jehu, the son of Nimshi, shalt 
thou anoint to be king over Israel; and Elisha, the 
son of Shaphat, of Abelmeholah, shalt thou anoint to 
be prophet in thy stead". ( 1 Kings 19 :i6) If 
Elisha was anointed to be prophet instead of or in 
place of Elijah, then it would manifestly follow that 
where the picture made by Elijah ceases, there Elisha 
would begin to picture or type the identical class, 
namely, the little flock. When Elijah was taken 
away and Elisha took his place then and there Elisha 
became Elijah for all intents and purposes and would 
represent the same class. No where in the Scriptures 
is the great company given such prominence as the 
anointing of a prophet in representation of that class. 


Ai/i.t'sr is. iuio 


T H E W ATC H TOWER 


It will be further observed that when Elisha and 
Elijah were walking together Elisha knew that he 
was shortly to be separated from Elijah. After they 
had crossed the Jordan together Elijah said unto 
Elisha; "Ask what I shall do for thee before I be 
taken from thee, and Elisha said: I pray thee, let a 
double portion of thy spirit be upon me". (2 Kings 
2 :g) Unlike the picture of the wise and foolish virgins
, Elijah did not say to Elisha, 'Your request is an 
impossible one to comply with. You must go to the 
market and buy that for which you ask/ But mark 
what he did say: "Thou hast asked a hard thing; if 
thou see me when I am taken from thee it shall be so 
[given] unto thee, but if not it shall not be. And it 
came to pass as they went on, speaking as they were 
going, that, behold, there came a chariot of fire and 
horses of fire and parted them asunder and Elijah 
went up by a whirlwind into heaven. And Elisha 
saw it and cried, My father, my father, the chariot of 
Israel, and the horsemen thereof." (2 Kings 2:10-12) 
The fact that Elisha saw or discerned what was 
transpiring at the time Elijah was separated from 
him met the condition specified by Elijah which would 
insure him (Elisha) of the receiving of a double portion
 of the spirit of Elijah. The Hebrew word here 
translated "double" does not mean a duplication or 
something similar, but it does mean, "twice as much," 
"double what the other one had." If, then, Elijah represents
 the little flock and Elisha also represents the 
little flock, wherein could Elisha antitypically have 
double the spirit of that manifested by Elijah? 

TWICE AS FEARLESS 

Again we ask the reader to refer to Part I of this 
argument, the essence of which is that those who will 
be honored with an abundant entrance into the kingdom
 must be a fearless class, and the fearless class is 
the class who are perfected in love. Furthermore, the 
experiences that would come to the church in the 
closing days of its earthly pilgrimage would be such 
as to require double as much courage, faithfulness, 
loyalty and love to overcome those difficulties as was 
required prior thereto. We have observed in the experiences
 of Elijah that notwithstanding he was bold 
and fearless throughout most of his earthly journey, 
yet there came a time when Jezebel threatened his 
life and he became very fearful and fled, but afterwards
 recovered his courage. The experiences 
through which the church passed during the year 1918 
would have a tendency to make one become timid and 
fearful who had not absolute confidence in the Lord 
and who did not realize that his battle is not his own, 
but the Lord's. It would require, therefore, an increased
 spirit of love, fearlessness, and faithful devotion
 to the Lord and his cause to grasp the mantle 
that had fallen from the Ebjah class, or in other picture
 the sw^ord, "The Finished Mystery," and any 
added message in harmony therewith, and boldly and 
fearlessly carry it forward and use it as the Lord 
would have us do. 

In the examination of Elisha's experiences we fail 
to find anything that indicates fear; but, on the contrary
, his whole experience down to his death indicates
 a disposition of full faith and confidence in the 
Lord and absolute loyalty to him. One of the most 
striking experiences which proves this point of 
Elisha's fearlessness is that which occurred at Dothan. 
At that time wars between Syria and Israel were frequent
. The king of Syria determined to invade 


Israel. Several plans of attack were devised to raid 
the cities, and each time these raids were frustrated, 
the Syrian army finding to their astonishment that 
these cities were freshly prepared for defense. The 
king concluded that there was a traitor in his court or 
camp who disclosed his secret plans and arrangements 
to the king of Israel; so he instituted a search for the 
traitor. It is not unusual for civil powers to overreach
 themselves while hunting for supposed traitors. 
Some of the king's counselors advised him that it 
was quite probable that the prophet Elisha had revealed
 to the king of Israel all the plots and schemes 
of the Syrians. The king, therefore, having learned 
that Elisha was at the town of Dothan, sent a whole 
army, including horses and chariots, for the purpose 
of arresting Elisha, and taking him in custody. 
Elisha showed that he was absolutely fearless. Elijah
 had fled when Jezebel threatened his life. It 
would seem therefore that it would take a double 
portion of the spirit of courage, fearlessness and faithfulness
 to stand firm when a whole army came with 
the avowed purpose of capturing and slaying the prophet
 Elisha, but his trust and faithfulness to the Lord 
caused him to remain calm. We quote the following 
pertinent remarks on the subject: 

"As soon as the king learned that Elisha was at the little 
town of Dothan he sent an army, including horses and 
chariots, to surround the city and to make sure the capture 
of the prophet. The latter doubtless understood in advance; 
but working in harmony with the Lord's arrangement, he did 
not flee the city. He was entirely restful in mind respecting 
the matter, but his servant was greatly alarmed. He thought 
ol the prophet and himself as being carried prisoners to Syria 
to thenceforth be bondsmen, etc. Elisha, however, comforted 
him with assurance respecting the divine power which encompassed
 them, much greater than the power of their enemies. 
Then, not only as a lesson to the servant, but also doubtless 
intended of the Lord as a lesson for his people all the way 
dozen through the ages, Elisha prayed that the young man's 
eyes might be opened that he might see and realize the true 
situation. 

"At once the servant perceived the city and entire hills amply 
protected against the surrounding hordes, — horses and chariots 
and fire around about Elisha and himself. We assume that 
the horses and chariots of fire were in the nature of a vision 
granted to the servant, and to us, as an illustration of the 
divine power and protection. Thus viewed, what the servant 
saw was an active parable, a picture similar to the symbolic 
pictures of Revelation — serving the intended purpose most 
thoroughly, most completely, and giving to the eyes of his 
understanding a proper conception of the divine power present 
with the prophet. "— Z' 04-302, 303. 

INVISIBLE COHORTS 

The vision that the servant of Elisha was here permitted
 to see most assuredly was seen by Elisha himself
; otherwise he would not have asked the Lord to 
permit the servant to see it. In addition to what is 
above stated, this vision might further represent that 
the church, discerning the application of the pictures 
of Elijah and Elisha and their relationship to each 
other, might in the closing days of their earthly pilgrimage
, have a clearer vision and appreciation of the 
wonderful power manifested on their behalf by the 
Lord under whose banner they fight. And thus having
 such a mental vision of God's protecting care, they 
could say to each other and to those about them who 
might fear, as did Elisha to his servant: "Fear not, 
for they that be with us are more than they that be 
with them". (2 Kings 6:16) In harmony with that 
same thought we believe: He that is for us is greater 
than all they that be against us. — Cf. 2 Chronicles 
32:7,8; Romans 8:31; 1 John 3:20. 


248 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Tf this experience of Elisha pictures anything it does 
not seem at all reasonable that it would picture the 
great company class, because it does not contain one 
element of the characteristics of the great company 
class. We notice in the experiences of Elijah that 
Obadiah is mentioned as one who served the Lord, yet 
feared Ahab and Jezebel, and therefore did not take 
his stand boldly with the prophet Elijah. Obadiah 
therefore seems to represent the great company class. 
We quote the following in support of this proposition : 

"We rejoice also with the believers represented by Obadiah; 
yet we could sincerely wish for them the blessings of greater 
zeal in the Lord's service, less care for the friendship of those 
who are God's enemies and greater boldness in the advocacy 
of the Lord's cause and in proclaiming themselves in every 
proper manner his servants. We fear for such that being 
ashamed of the Lord and to some extent preferring advantages 
as respects the present life — to be in a prominent position, in 
good society and surrounded by luxury maintained at the 
expense oi failure to properly confess the Lord — will mean 
eventually to such the loss of the great prize for which we 
are called to run in this present life. As already intimated, 
our expectation would be that such a class would eventually 
get a blessing from the Lord and a good position; but such 
a class surely, unless they turn about and become more courageous
, will lose the great prize for which we have been 
called to run— jointheirship with God's dear son in the kingdom
." — Z' 04-221. 

ELISHA'S SEBVANT FEA&FOI* 

In Elisha's experiences we find a servant with him 
who also was fearful. This servant, when he saw the 
city where Elisha was compassed about with a great 
army, quaked with fear and cried unto his master, 
"My master, how shall we do?" thus indicating that 
there would be associated with the antitypical Elisha 
class a class of Christians serving who are fearful and 
who will be of the great company class. We are reminded
 also that the Lord makes it plain that the 
great company class will be a servant class, serving 
the Christ in the kingdom of glory, and this is another 
reason why the servants of Elijah and Elisha in these 
experiences picture the great company. 

It is conceded by all Bible students that the Psalms 
were written chiefly and prophetically for the benefit 
of the church and represent the church, namely, the 
little flock. It seems not overdrawing the matter 
when we state that the Psalmist seemed to have in 
mind Elisha's experiences when he wrote the following
 beautiful words which express absolute confidence 
in the Lord and his sustaining grace and power : "The 
Lord is the light of my salvation, whom shall I fear? 
The Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall 
I be afraid? When the wicked, mine enemies and my 
foes, came upon me to eat up my flesh they stumbled 
and fell. Though an host should encamp against me, 
my heart shall not fear. Though war should rise 
against me, in this will I be confident" (Psalm 
27 : 1-3) Those who stumble and fall are usually blind ; 
and we note in Elisha's experiences at Dothan that 
when the great host encompassed about htm he prayed 
unto the Lord and said : "Smite this people, I pray 
thee, with blindness, and he smote them with blindness 
according to the word of Elisha, and then Elisha led 
them to Samaria and into captivity to Israel". 

Another evidence that Elijah and Elisha represented 
the same class is found in the fact that Elijah was 
commanded by the Lord to anoint Jehu king over 
Israel. (1 Kings 19:15) Elijah did not anoint Jehu, 
but subsequently Elisha did, or had it done under his 
direct supervision, and therefore did it himself, a 


procedure which seemed to be entirely pleasing to 
the Lord. (2 Kings 9:1-6) In other words Elisha 
completed that which Elijah was directed to do. 

The fiery chariot that separated Elijah and Elisha 
did not indicate that any animosity existed between 
the two, or the class represented by the two. On the 
contrary, Elisha was fully devoted to Elijah at all 
times. The chariot, as a vehicle, is symbol of an organization
 and therefore would well represent the 
Society which the Lord, through his faithful servant, 
organized, used, and is using as a vehicle to bear his 
message to his people. Horses represent doctrines. 
A whirlwind is a symbol of great trouble, war. In 
the picture the fiery chariot with horses of fire appeared
 and parted Elijah and Elisha, and Elijah went 
up (was taken away) by a whirlwind. In the spring 
of 1918 the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society was 
bearing a fiery message, a message due at that time. 
At the same time there was great trouble. There 
ended the work which Elijah pictured and the taking
 away of Elijah indicates such ending. This does 
not mean the taking away of individuals, but it would 
mean the cessation by the Lord's people for a time 
at least of certain work pictured by Elijah, Elisha 
standing by the Jordan would indicate a period of 
time, however short or long, lapsing until Elisha would 
take up the mantle — the message borne by Elijah— 
and use it according to the Lord's direction. 

THE MANTLE 

We note that the mantle of Elijah is prominently 
mentioned in this narrative. What does the mantle 
represent? We answer, It evidently represents something
 that the Elijah class has possessed throughout 
their journey, and particularly the journey during the 
harvest period of the Gospel age. Elijah and Elisha 
journeyed together from Gilgal to the Jordan, and not 
until they reached the Jordan did Elijah wrap up his 
mantle and smite the waters (people). As the Watch 
Towers heretofore suggested, the mantle represents 
the message of truth, and particularly the message contained
 in Volume VII, "The Finished Mystery/' 
which in truth and in fact is the condensed statement 
of the entire message relating to Babylon, and clearly 
distinguishing the antitypical Jezebel from the true 
church. It is also designated, and properly so, as "the 
point of the sword" wrapped up, or in a compact 
form. The message of truth, therefore, contained in 
all the seven volumes and particularly in the Seventh, 
the pointed part of it, therefore seems fitly to represent 
Elijah's mantle wrapped up. We mark that the distribution
 of the message contained in Volume VII 
did cause a wide division of opinion among the peoples 
who came in contact with it. At the time Elijah was 
taken up by the whirlwind we read concerning Elisha : 
"He took up also the mantle of Elijah that fell from 
him and went back and stood by the bank of the 
Jordan [the standing there suggesting a period of 
waiting, whether long or short, before using the 
mantle] ; and he took the mantle of Elijah that fell 
from him, and smote the waters and said: Where is 
the Lord God of Elijah? and when he also had smitten 
the waters they parted hither and thither, and Elisha 
went over". — 2 Kings 2:1-14. 

We conclude, therefore, that the Prophets Elijah 
and Elisha both typify the same class, towit, the little 
flock; that where the Elijah picture ended the Elisha 
picture began, and in the antitype two parts of the 


August 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


249 


same character of work done by the same class of 
people are shown. We mark that twice the Scriptures 
make the statement: "The mantle of Elijah that fell 
from him Elisha picked up". The message of truth, 
particularly that pointed part of it relating to Babylon, 
did fall from the hands of the Elijah class. There 
has been a period of waiting; and this picture seems 
to indicate that the time must come ere long when 
the Lord's people, pictured by Elisha, must take up 
again this mantle, this message of truth, and use it. 

PERILOUS TIMES COME 

Time arid again we have been reminded that in the 
last days perilous times would come, and that during 
that time "of your own selves shall men arise speaking 
perverse things to draw away disciples after them". 
Again and again we have been reminded in what 
marked degree this prophetic statement of the Apostle 
has been fulfilled. Influenced by those who have 
arisen speaking perverse things, by twisting and perverting
 the Scriptures and misapplying them, some of 
the Lord's dear people have been much confused and 
some have even been induced to cease all efforts at 
performing service. These have been induced to believe
 that the work is now over and that they must 
stand still, not move, not do anything, not make any 
more proclamation of the message of truth nor declare
 to the world the incoming kingdom. How unwise
, how foolish ! Let such ask themselves the question
, Did I consecrate to work until a certain time? 
Where in the Scriptures do I find warrant for my 
ceasing activity in the Lord's service as long as he 
keeps the door of opportunity open? If I remain 
silent and inactive would my conduct be pleasing to 
the "beast" or to the Lord? Let each one remember 
that the adversary will deceive, if possible, even the 
elect; but we are sure that the elect will not be deceived
, otherwise they could not be the elect. Let no 
child of God then be deceived by this ruse of the adversary
, namely, that all opportunities for service are 
over. Let every true follower of Jesus remember that 
the war is now on between the "beast" and the "Lamb" 
and will not end until the "Lamb" is completely victorious
 and that those who are to be victors with him 
must continue faithful in service even unto the end. 

If, therefore, our conclusion is correct, that Elisha 
pictures the church during the last of her earthly experiences
, it means that there must yet be another 
smiting of the waters with the mantle of truth, and 
that during such smiting it must be expected that the 
"beast" will use all the power against the church that 
the Lord will permit it to use. But Zion need not 
fear. It is true that the forty-year period of the harvest
 has ended, but that does not mean that there is 
not yet some work to be done. In the Jewish natural 
harvest, used by the Lord to illustrate the harvest of 
the church, there was a gleaning work to be done, and 
also the burning of the tares. 


THE OI^ANINO WOEK 

The gleaning work of the Gospel harvest is progressing
. The tares are also being burned. All these 
figures of speech represent the proclamation of the 
message of truth in whatsoever form the Lord permits 
his people to use it. The mantle which Elijah used 
was used by Elisha later. Antitypically, then, the 
message of truth which was used effectually up to 
the Spring of 1918 must again be used with whatever 
additional message the Lord provides. And those who 
will be victors with the "Lamb" must use that message 
as opportunity is offered, and use it vigorously and 
without fear. 

Summing up the argument of Parts I and II of this 
subject, we find that God foreordained a little flock 
to be developed during the Gospel age to whom he 
would have great pleasure in giving the kingdom ; that 
he has been developing that class throughout the 
Gospel age and particularly in the harvest period 
thereof, and that he has been teaching them by pictures
, types and illustrations, as well as by direct 
statements, that the class to whom he purposes giving 
this grand and wonderful prize will be those whose 
faith and confidence in him is absolute, and who are 
without fear of man or man-made institutions and 
whose love is perfect. Viewing the church's situation, 
then, in the light of the Scriptures, and in the light of 
the events that have transpired during the past year, 
and knowing that through much tribulation must the 
kingdom class enter in, let everyone who is now in the 
race for the prize of the high calling gird up the loins 
of his mind and be sober and wait for the command 
of the Lord, the Captain of our salvation, ready, willing
, and anxious at all times to obey that command at 
the cost of reputation, good name, fame, riches, or 
even life itself. 

OTTB KING KNOWS NO DEFEAT 

This little band of Christians are fighting the greatest
 fight of all times. There will never be another like 
it. The great God of the universe has arranged it; 
the great Redeemer, the King of kings and Lord of 
lords, is the Captain and Leader of this little band. 
We know that he is absolutely certain of victory, and 
we therefore know that after being called and chosen 
to run in this race, if we continue faithful, fearless, 
prompted by love in our actions, serving him at every 
possible opportunity loyally to the end, we shall ultimately
 stand victors with him and hear the approval 
of the Father, "Well done, good and faithful servants
." Let us then fear not, for "the eternal God is 
our refuge and underneath are the everlasting arms". 

The chief purpose of this article is to prove that 
Elisha typifies the little flock, the faithful and zealous 
Christians, and also to prove what constitutes the 
double portion of the spirit of Elijah. In a subsequent
 article we will examine the details. 


MAHANAIM— TWO HOSTS 


The mountain horizon was burning with light; 
On its brow stood the Syrian, in glory and might ; 
Proud waved to the sunset the banner's rich fold: 
Proud blazed the gemmed turbans, and corselets of gold. 
And loud rose the taunt of the infidel's tongue: 

"Ho! Israelite slaves, 

This night sees your graves ; 
And first from your walls shall Elisha be flung!" 


At the word stooped a cloud from the crown of the sky! 
In its splendors the sun seemed to vanish and die. 
From its depths poured a host upon mountain and plain ; 
There was seen the starred helm, and the sky-tinctured vane, 
And the armor of fire, and the seraph's bright wing; 

But no eyeball dared gaze 

On the pomp of the blaze, 
As their banner unfolded the name of their King! 


OPPORTUNITIES FOR SERVICE 

"Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary, the devil, as a roaring Hon, wclketh about seeking whom he may devour' 

i Peter 5 :8. 


' — - — 


HILE the writings oi St. Peter have been 
applicable to the church throughout the 
age. yet his epistles seem to apply with 
special force at the end of the journey of 
those running for the prize. We may be 
sure that the Lord directed the message of 
the Apostle that it might be helpful to the 
Lord's "little ones" in time of need. The 
context shows that the Lord's people, being
 in the flesh, are subject to temptations of a similar 
character to those which are inflicted upon the world. 
With each succeeding day the intensity of feeling and 
excitement increases. This is true because we are in 
the time of the judgment of the nations of earth, when 
the heavens (ecclesiasticism) are passing away with a 
great disturbance and the elements, rich and poor, 
strong and weak, are melting with fervent heat. It is 
a time when the sea and the waves are roaring — when 
all humanity is being disturbed and excited because of 
conditions. 

The Christian comes in contact with these conditions
 and necessarily must meet them. If he permits 
himself to be excitable, easily disturbed, he lays himself
 open to the successful attack of the adversary. 
Therefore the Apostle admonishes all the followers of 
the Master to be sober. Sobriety of mind means a 
well-balanced mind, one that after coolly, calmly and 
soberly studying conditions from various viewpoints 
and carefully weighing them, determines what is the 
wisest and best course to pursue. A mind that is not 
sober, but excitable, jumps at conclusions, determines 
upon some course without proper consideration, seeing
 the whole world in a state of unrest, may be led 
to the false conclusion that inactivity is the best thing 
for him. The Apostle admonishes the new creature, 
however, that he must not take this course, but being 
sober-minded, he will carefully weigh the conditions 
and environments and then seize the opportunity for 
activity in service that will bring the greatest amount 
of glory to his Lord and the greatest blessing to himself
. The safety of the Christian, therefore, lies in 
the fact that he holds to the hand of the Lord and that 
he is guided wholly by the counsel of the Lord, namely 
his Word, and pursuing this course he is certain ultimately
 to win the conflict and be received into glory. — 
Psalm 73 :23,24. 

The sober-minded Christian, therefore, giving consideration
 to the counsel of the Lord through his 
Word, sees that he cannot with safety to himself and 
honor to his King remain idle, but at all times should 
be active, diligent and vigilant in the performance of 
whatsoever duties the Lord may lay upon him. The 
sober-minded will be watching for opportunities and 
will be able to grasp them when they appear, and being
 vigilant he will see such opportunities and enter 
the door of service as quickly as possible. It has been 
truly said that "An idle brain is the devil's workshop", 
and the Jiegligent Christian is therefore an easy mark 
for the adversary. And above all things, the follower 
of the Master desires to honor his Lord and King because
 he loves him. 'This proves our love for God 
that we keep his commandments with a joyful heart." 
The Christian therefore who is anxious to see and be 
with Jesus delights to do his will and the will of the 
Father, and not only seeks opportunities of service 
but joyfully avails himself of all such. 


IS THERE WORK TO DO? 

As has heretofore been stated in The Watch 
Tower, the forty-year period of the harvest has 
ended, as we believe. Noting that the harvest began
 in the year 1878 and covers a period of forty 
years, of necessity that period must end in 1918. 
There came upon the Lord's people at that time a 
period of severe trials and fiery testings. Fire enveloped
 the chariot — the Society — because of the fiery 
horses (doctrines) "meat in due season" that the 
chariot was then bearing to the people. A great 
whirlwind was in progress at the same juncture and 
there a certain period of the work of the harvest, particularly
 that part which was pictured in the experiences
 of Elijah, ceased, and for some time there was 
a period oi inactivity, a period of waiting. Many 
wondered if such meant that the work was all done 
and there is nothing more for the church to do, but 
to stand and wait until glorified. 

The mere fact that the forty year harvest period 
ended in the spring of 1918 does not at all mean that 
the church would be taken away at that time, nor does 
it mean that the harvest work ceased. The Lord 
uses the natural harvest of the Jews to illustrate the 
gathering of his people. It is proper, therefore, to 
consider all things in connection with the natural 
harvest to enable us to get a clearer vision of things 
pertaining to the harvest of the church and the work 
in connection therewith. Following the general 
natural harvest came the gleaning work. It is not 
unreasonable, therefore, to expect that following the 
forty year period of harvest there would be a gleaning
 work; that is to say a work performed by the consecrated
, which would enable those in a consecrated 
attitude of mind and heart to seize the opportunity of 
presenting themselves to the Lord. As long as there 
is a likelihood of some who are in the race falling out 
there must be some gathered in to take the place of 
those removed from the race. This would explain 
why since the Spring of 1918 some have come to a 
knowledge of the truth and consecrated themselves 
and have given evidence of having been spirit-begotten
 and energized to participate in God's service. 

TAKES BEING BOUND 

In addition to this work the tares must be bound together
 and destroyed. We have marked the binding of 
these tares during the past year more firmly than ever 
they have heretofore been bound and we have likewise 
witnessed the burning of many of these tares. The 
great Master of the Harvest shows that before the 
members of the wheat class are gathered into his 
garner they must participate in the binding of these 
tares for destruction. (Matthew 13 130) It is the 
message of truth that does such binding and burning. 

But in order to determine more fully what the 
Christian's duty is we have but to refer to the commission
 that God has given to those who make a covenant
 with him by sacrifice and who receive the anointing
 from him. To anoint means to clothe w^ith 
authority to do certain things. The church is 
anointed or clothed with authority to preach the glad 
tidings unto the teachable, to bind up the brokenhearted
, to proclaim liberty to the captives, the opening
 of the prison to them that are bound, to proclaim 
the acceptable year of the Lord and the day of vengeance
 of God, to comfort all that mourn. (Isaiah 


250 


August is, iqiq 


THE WATCH TOWER 


251 


61 :i) This part of the commission or authority seems 
particularly to apply at the end of the harvest period. 
Never before have there been in this earth so many 
broken hearts. The trouble that has come upon mankind
 has humbled the hearts of many and put them in 
such condition that they are more readily taught. 
That we are in the day of God's vengeance all must 
freely admit, and if the proclamation of this is to be 
made surely it must now be made by God's people 
commissioned thus to do. There are probably 
millions in Babylon who are restrained of their liberty 
of thought and action, who are therefore captives and 
yet to be liberated by the message of truth given to 
them by the faithful followers of the Master. There 
are millions who need comfort because of the conditions
 of sadness, and no one has the Balm of Gilead 
that brings this comfort except those who bear the 
sweet message concerning Messiah's kingdom of blessings
 which will bring liberty, peace, happiness and lifeto
 humankind. It is therefore easy to be seen that 
there is much work for the church yet to do while this 
side the vail. 

WORK FOE THE LITTLE FLOCK 

Corroborative of what is above said, we note that 
the Lord has pointed out through his Word that in 
the time of trouble there would be work for the little 
flock to do, saying, "Behold the days come, saith the 
Lord, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper and 
the treader of grapes him that soweth seed". (Amos 
9:13) The plowman here symbolizes trouble that will 
plow up the hearts of the people and humble them so 
that they will be of a teachable mind, and while the 
plowman has not nearly completed his work it is very 
clear that it has begun and did begin with the great 
war of 1914 and before the close of the harvest. 
Hence in fulfillment of this prophetic statement the 
plowman did overtake the reaper. The general reaping
 continued until the spring of 1918, while the plowman
 continued to break up the ground preparatory to 
further work and another crop. It is therefore clearly 
to be seen that at least the following character of work 
is to be performed, namely, the gleaning work or the 
gathering in of the few remaining ones that shall constitute
 the kingdom class; the proclamation of the day 
of God's vengeance upon the present unrighteous institutions
; the announcement of the incoming of 
Messiah's kingdom which will bring comfort to broken 
hearts and the proclaiming of liberty to those who are 
captives in Babylon. 

The method of doing such work is of the same general
 nature as that pursued in times passed, towit, 
thrusting in the sickle of truth. This message of truth 
is put in various forms, namely, books, booklets, 
tracts, etc. The Lord has also provided that some 
shall make proclamation by word of mouth in a more 
public way. Thus he has arranged that each one of 
his little ones who are sober-minded and who are 
vigilant may participate in this work and thereby resist
 the devil who is using all of his instruments and 
powers to thwart the purpose of the Lord, and particularly
 to destroy the seed of promise. To be strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might; to be able 
to resist the adversary, it is necessary for each child 
of God to have on the whole armor and to use it fearlessly
 and faithfully. Hence, everyone who has the 
opportunity to engage in the proclamation of the 
message of truth should seize this opportunity and 


should be vigilant in the performance of whatsoever 
his hands find to do. 

VOLUNTEER SEEVICE 

It is the hope and expectation of the Society to increase
 greatly the volunteer work in the near future, 
in order that the message of comfort might be carried 
to those that mourn, that they might know that the 
kingdom of the Lord is soon to follow and bring the 
desire of their hearts. We therefore suggest that all 
the dear friends who can do so actively engage in this 
volunteer work at the proper and opportune time. 
Each one must determine for himself or herself as to 
whether he desires to have a part in this work. Let 
no one determine it for you. 

COLPORTEUR SERVICE 

One of the most effective if not the most effective 
of manners of doing the harvest work has been the 
colporteur service. Millions of books have been 
placed in the hands of people who have had their eyes 
of understanding opened by reading them. Now 
when the time of trouble is upon the earth they are 
finding greater consolation in reading these books. By 
way of comparison: a public speaker can deliver one 
or two discourses per day. A colporteur who places 
in the hands of a seeker for truth one of the volumes 
is thereby preaching more than fifty discourses. If he 
places in the hands of such truth seeker six volumes 
he has thus preached more than 300 sermons. There 
is no message of comfort to be found outside of the 
Scriptures, Scripture Studies, and kindred publications
. This message has been the divinely provided 
means of bringing comfort to the hearts of those that 
mourn. 

The privilege of participating in this work cannot 
be overstated. When God made announcement to 
Abraham of his intention through the seed of Abraham
 to bless the families of the earth Abraham 
earnestly sought to know when and how the blessing 
would come. The prophets diligently searched and 
inquired concerning the manner and time of God's 
blessing upon mankind, and even the angels of heaven 
desired to know these things; so we are informed by 
St. Peter. We are therefore warranted in the conclusion
 that the angels of heaven would greatly delight
 in having a part in the work the church is now 
commissioned to do; that they would rejoice in being 
privileged to bear the message to the people that would 
comfort their hearts and to announce to them the near 
approach of Messiah's kingdom. One, therefore, who 
now engages in the colporteur work is privileged to do 
greater things than the angels are permitted to do. 
Those who see their privileges and opportunities will 
rejoice to enter quickly and participate in the proclamation
 of the Lord's message by actively engaging 
in the colporteur service. 

When the fiery trouble came upon the Lord's people 
in the spring of 191S many were forced out of the 
colporteur service and for some time there was a 
period of inactivity. Now the opportunities of service
 seem to be opening wider and wider. On the 1st 
of May, 1919, there were only 63 persons engaged in 
the colporteur service. By July of the same year 
more than 200 were actively engaged in the service 
and upwards of 50 more were giving part of their 
time to it. The numerous inquiries coming daily to 
the office of the Society indicates that there are many 


252 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


of the army of colporteurs who are eagerly seeking 
opportunity and inquiring how they may again enter 
the service. Those who are engaged in it report 
splendid success in the placing of the volumes in the 
hands of the people. The people are beginning to 
realize that the leaders of the church systems have 
turned themselves entirely over to the adversary and 
that the Lord is no longer dealing through them. 
They are realizing that they have been fed upon husks 
and are now awakening to the fact that they are in 
need of real food. They cannot find it anywhere except
 through the Studies in the Scriptures, and 
companion publications, because this is the divinely 
provided food. The colporteurs find that it is easier 
to approach the people at this time and easier to place 
in their hands the message of truth contained in these 
volumes. For the encouragement of others, as well 
as those who are already engaged in the service, we 
append hereto some excerpts from letters we have recently
 received from the colporteurs, as follows : 

"I secured 47 orders for Studies in one day and also three 
Tower subscriptions the same day/' 

"Working five hours per day I have taken orders for 118 
volumes in three days. Today I canvassed 29 persons and 
took orders from 25. During the past six months we have 
delivered over 5000 volumes." 

"The past two weeks my wife and I have each worked 
twelve days and have taken orders for 387 Scenarios. Never 
did we hear the Scenarios so highly appreciated. Very often 
the people are anxious to express their appreciation of the 
books when we deliver them, and sometimes chase us down 
the street to buy some more for their friends/' 

"We certainly do enjoy going forth with the message of 
the coming kingdom. We are finding people much different 
now. Some who have been prejudiced against Brother Russell 
now acknowledge that what he taught has come true/' 

"I find many hungry hearts. The work is more precious 
to me than ever before." 

"It looks like a new era is beginning/' 

"I sold 33 fiooks to nine people I saw after the lecture here/' 

"I wonder if there is not a future circulation of the Tower, 
possibly among the Great Company still in Babylon. It seems 
to me a special effort for the colporteurs to push it would be 
in order. It certainly is the message of the hour." 

"The call of the Lord given through Brother Z. in the 
Tower has caused me to decide to go into the colporteur work 
immediately." 

It is our desire to encourage everyone who has heretofore
 been engaged in the colporteur work to enter it 
again, and all who have not heretofore engaged in it 
should now enter the field according as opportunity is 
offered. 

BENEFITS OF ASSEMBLING TOGETHER 

Profiting by the experiences of the past, we have 
deemed it of great importance to have a general convention
 of the Lord's people that all who possibly can 
may assemble together and encourage and strengthen 
each other to go forth in a more concerted manner 
participating in the service. The Society has therefore
 arranged a general convention to be held at Cedar 
Point, Ohio, from September 1st to 8th, a period of 
eight days. It is the purpose of the Society to have 
practically all of the pilgrim brethren attend this convention
, and we hope it may be possible and convenient 
for many of the colporteurs and many who contemplate
 engaging in the colporteur service to attend. 
The convention will not only afford greater opportunities
 for personal fellowship, but will enable the 
colporteurs to encourage each other by comparing their 
experiences and will furnish opportunities for selecting
 partners to engage in the service. The Society 


will have a representative of the colporteur department
 at the convention fully equipped and authorized 
to assign territory and to outline methods of colporteur
 work. 

A dear brother in the truth has offered to assist 
needy colporteurs to attend the general convention at 
Cedar Point, Ohio, by extending through the medium 
of the Colporteur Department financial aid to the extent
 of one-half their necessary expenses incurred in 
connection with such attendance. This offer is available
 for such colporteurs as have been continuously 
engaged in the service for six months last past and 
whose financial condition makes necessary this aid. 
These funds will be disbursed at the convention. 

COST OF PUBLICATIONS 

Because of the great advance in the prices of materials
 and labor the Society is unable to produce the 
books as cheaply as in times past, hence it may become 
necessary to increase the price to both the colporteurs 
and the retail purchaser. For the present, however, 
the books will be billed to colporteurs at regular 
wholesale price. 

BLESSED IS OTTB POBTION 

Truly this is the worst of times and the best of 
times; the worst the world has yet known and the 
best the church has enjoyed this side the vail. All 
peoples, nations, kindreds and tongues are in distress 
and without hope. They are suffering the climax of 
six thousand years of sin, darkness and death. The 
human remedies have failed. They are suffering 
from the effects of war, famines, pestilences, and the 
spirit of discontent is prevalent everywhere. They 
have the desire for peace, plenty, happiness, liberty 
and life. When they look to churchianity and a 
worldly remedy they have nothing on which to base 
a hope to satisfy their desires. Truly this is the time 
of fulfillment of Jesus' propnetic words: "Upon earth 
distress of nations with perplexity, the sea and the 
waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear". 
(Luke 21 125,26) Never before have the people 
suffered so much and never before has the clergy 
been so faithless in helping them to see God's arrangement
. Truly this is the time of fulfillment of St. 
Paul's words : "The whole creation groaneth and 
travaileth in pain together until now". All suffering 
humankind is waiting, they know not for what, but 
we know they are waiting for Messiah's kingdom. 

God has graciously brought us out of darkness into 
his marvelous light, having purchased us with the 
blood of his precious Son and through his merit justified
 us, begotten us of his own will, to be members of 
his royal family, illuminated our minds and permitted 
us while in the flesh to see by faith some of the 
beauties of his coming kingdom and the blessings that 
shall result to all mankind. He has appointed us his 
ambassadors to bear the message of reconciliation to 
the world and to us Jesus has said, "Ye are the light of 
the world". He has commissioned us to go forth with 
his message and comfort those that mourn. He has 
privileged us to live on the earth at its darkest period 
and to hold forth the torch light of true liberty and 
freedom. He has given us a peace of mind that 
passeth all human understanding, assuring us that 
while the present order is being dashed to pieces in 
our midst nothing shall harm us and no evil shall befall
 us. Truly the consecrated child of God is the 
most favored creature that has ever been on the earth 


August 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


253 


since the days of our Master. This great favor to us 
from the Lord has brought added responsibility. 

THE BESPONSIBIUTY IS OTOS 

Seeing the duties devolving upon us by reason of 
our commission to preach the glad tidings to the teachable
, to declare the day of vengeance of our God, to 
announce the incoming of his kingdom, to bind up the 
broken-hearted, and to comfort those that mourn, we 
cannot escape the responsibility by being indifferent or 
indolent ; we cannot prove our faithfulness to the Lord 
unless we are active and vigilant; therefore where he 
shows one of his children the opening door of opportunity
 for service let him grasp the opportunity and 
enter quickly, performing with joy whatsoever he finds 
to do. As ambassadors of Christ we have in our 
hands the very thing that the groaning creation needs 
— the message of divine truth which points them to the 
clear and unmistakable way that leads them to life, 
liberty, and happiness — the desire of all honest hearts. 
It is the privilege of the saints to give wise counsel to 
those about us who are willing to hear, and this wise 
counsel should point them to the message contained in 
the divine plan of the ages. What a wonderful privilege
 the colporteurs have ! The message that they 
bear is in the nature of an ointment, a healing balm to 
the wounded and broken-hearted. There are hundreds
 of thousands of soldiers who have been 
wounded, who have lost a limb or an eye, many of 
whom would rejoice to know that the time of restoring
 them to normal manhood is near at hand. There 
are many in the hospitals lingering with protracted illness
 and it would be a balm of sweetness to them to 
learn of God's arrangement for their complete recovery
 and blessing. Advantage should be taken of 
these circumstances to tell them of his coming kingdom
. Brother Russell had this very time in mind 
years ago when he wrote: 

"An important question arises regarding the attitude of the 
saints during this trouble. That some of the saints will still 


be in the flesh during at least a part of this burning time seems 
certain. They will recognize the trouble as the preparation, 
according to God's plan, for the blessing of the whole world, 
and they will be cheered and comforted through it all. 

"If the example of the saints is thus one of contentment and 
joyful anticipation, and a cheerful submission to present trials 
in sure hope of the good time coming, such living examples 
alone are valuable lessons for the world. And in addition to 
the example, the counsel of the saints to those about them 
should be in harmony with their faith. It should be in the 
nature of ointment and healing balm. Advantage should be 
taken of the circumstances to point the world to the good time 
coming, to preach to them the coming kingdom of God and to 
show the real cause of present troubles and the only remedy" 
— A-339-342. 

OPPORTUNITIES SUCH AS SEUJOM AFFORDED 

Who has such opportunity to do this blessed work 
as those who engage in the colporteur service? "The 
troubles of this day of Jehovah will give opportunity 
for preaching the good tidings of good, such as is seldom
 afforded, and blessed are they who will follow the 
footsteps of the Master and be the good Samaritans 
binding up the wounds and pouring in the oil and wine 
of comfort and cheer/ 1 (A-342) "How beautiful upon 
the mountains [kingdoms] are the feet of him that 
bringeth good tidings; that publisheth peace, that 
bringeth good tidings of good; that publisheth salvation
." (Isaiah 527) The "feet of him" are the last 
members of the body of Christ on earth. How blessed 
is their portion! Through storms and fiery trials, 
through wicked persecutions and experiences hard to 
the flesh they must go. But knowing that they are 
messengers of the Lord, ambassadors of the great 
King, representing him on earth and bearing his 
message of reconciliation to the peoples of the kingdoms
 that are being dashed to pieces, — how beautiful, 
how sweet, how lovely are they in the eyes of their 
royal Head! Let us therefore go forth, beloved in 
the Lord, manifesting the zeal peculiar to our Master's 
house, proving our love and our loyalty to him. Enter 
quickly the colporteur service ! 


IN RE GENERAL CONVENTION 



N VIEW of the fact that the first day of September
 is a general holiday — Labor Day — we could 
not engage accomodations at Cedar Point for 
Sunday, the day previous, but have arranged to 
have full possession of the hotel and other accomodations
 beginning the afternoon of Monday
, September 1. Hence the convention will 
begin Monday, September 1, and not Sunday, 
August 31, and will continue until the 8th of 
September. This will necessitate the friends 
travelling to Cedar Point so as to arrive there 
some time during the day, Monday, September 1. Those coming
 from a distance will be required to start Sunday, or earlier, 
in order to arrive at Sundusky some time Monday. All trains 
for Cedar Point will arrive at Sandusky, Ohio, and the transportation
 to Cedar Point is by boat, about three miles across 
the bay. Particular care should be taken to purchase railway 
tickets to Sandusky, Ohio, and at the time of purchase to 
secure a certificate stating that your ticket is purchased for 
the purpose of attending the I.B.S.A. Convention at Cedar 
Point. We would strongly advise against going by boat from 
Buffalo, Cleveland or Toledo, for the reason that the boats 
will be overcrowded on Labor Day and the reduced rates will 
not be obtainable. 

We are endeavoring to make arrangements, and have every 
reason to believe we will succeed, for special trains to be run 
from certain points to Sandusky, Ohio, arriving at the latter 
station Monday, September r. To accomodate certain districts 
special trains will be started from given points, as follows: 

(1) Pittsburgh, which will include all points in that vicinity; 

(2) Buffalo, including all of western and northern New York, 


and lower Ontario; (3) Philadelphia, including eastern Pennsylvania
, Delaware, New York and New Jersey; (4) Boston, 
including all New England cities; (5) Cincinnati, which will 
include Louisville, Kentucky, and vicinity, Columbus, Ohio, 
and vicinity; (6) Indianapolis, which will include St. Louis, 
southern Illinois and central Indiana points; (7) Chicago, including
 northern Illinois and the Northwest. 

The railroad company requires a guarantee of 125 passengers
, or as many more as they can get, for each special 
train. Any of the friends contemplating travelling by any of 
these special trains will please notify this office as soon as 
possible, addressing Convention Committee, I. B. S. A., 119 
Federal Street, Pittsburgh, Pa., and we will advise you of the 
time of departure of train and the road over which it goes. 
We hope to issue the September 1 Watch Tower in time to 
give the detailed information, schedule, etc. 

We expect this to be the largest general convention held 
for a number of years. All the brethren who spent the winter 
in Atlanta will be present during the entire convention, including
 Brother Rutherford, who will be pleased to arrange 
for private interviews with any of the friends during the 
convention. All the pilgrim staff will be present, both of 
United States and Canada. 

Cedar Point is a delightful place and has probably the safest 
bathing beach that can be found anywhere for children. If 
the friends cannot attend without bringing the children it 
would be an ideal place to care for them, and the hotel has 
granted one-half rates for children under six years of age. 
Special arrangements have been made to accomodate all the 
colored brethren who may attend the convention. It writing 
to this office please specify color. 


THE HOLY SCRIPTURES 

September 21. — Psalm 197-14; 2 Timothy 3:14-17. 

THE BEAUTY OF TRUE HOLINESS— VALUE OF THE ROBE OF CHRIST^ RIGHTEOUSNESS— THE SECRET OF A NOBLE LIFE— IMPORTANCE 
OF HAVING A PERFECT STANDARD BY WHICH TO TEST OURSELVES— PRESUMPTUOUS SINS DEFINED AND ILLUSTRATED— INFLUENCE
 OF A PROPER STUDY OF THE WORD OF GOD — DANGER OF ARRESTED DEVELOPMENT IN SPIRITUAL GROWTH. 
"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and light unto my path" — Psalm 119:105. 



0\V BEAUTIFUL in the sight of right-thinking 
men is a well-balanced, self-possessed and disciplined
 character! And in contrast with such, 
how unlovely are the undisciplined and ungoverned
, the selfish, the unkind and the violent
-tempered! Naturally the one awakens in us 
emotions of pleasure and admiration ; and the 
other those of pain. If such is the appreci-. 
ation of virtue and the abhorrence of the lack 
of it among men who have lost much of the 
, , original image of God, with what keen appreciation
 must they be observed by a pure and holy God ! 

Men of the world who have no personal acquaintance with 
God have no special thought as to how they appear in his 
sight. But with what carefulness should those who love 
him and who value his approval study to conform their conduct
 to his pure and holy mind ! True, all who are "begotten
 again", notwithstanding their imperfections and shortcomings
 through inherited weaknesses, are acceptable to God 
through Christ, whose robe of righteousness amply covers 
them. But the measure of their acceptableness to God, 

even through Christ, is only to the extent that, while availing 
themselves of his imputed righteousness, they are earnestly 
striving to attain actually to the standard of perfection. By 
so doing they manifest their real appreciation of the divine 
favor. 

With what confusion and chagrin would one be covered 
who, while in the midst of a fit of violent temper or of an 
unjust or mean transaction unworthy of his dignity or of his 
profession, should be suddenly surprised by the appearance 
of a beloved friend of high and noble character! And yet, 
the eye of such an One is ever upon us. And only to the 
extent that we dismiss this thought from our minds, or else 
that we undervalue the Lord's opinion and approval, can 
we allow the evil propensities of the fallen human nature to 
run riot Realizing the downward tendency of the old nature
, how constantly should the Psalmist's prayer be in the 
minds of God's consecrated children: "Let the words of my 
mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy 
sight, O Lord, my strength and my redeemer" ! 

HOW TO SUBDUE THE FALLEN PROPENSITIES 

'But how/ someone inquires, 'may the difficult task of subduing
 the inherent depravity be accomplished?' It is hard 
for one, particularly under exasperating circumstances, to 
control a hasty temper or a violent temper, for another to 
bridle a gossiping tongue, especially if the trials of life put, 
to some extent, their colored glasses on the eyes. And then 
what a host of inherent weaknesses there are, against which 
every one of God's true children realizes that he must strive, 
if he would be acceptable with his heavenly Father! The 
thoughts of our hearts are not manifest to fellow men until 
we express them in words or in acts ; but even the very 
thoughts and intent of the heart are all open and manifest 
to God. What a comfort is this fact to the honest-hearted! 

The Psalmist repeats this inquiry, saying, "Wherewithal 
shall a young man cleanse his way?" Then he replies: 

"By taking heed thereto, according to thy word". Then he 
frames this resolution: "I will meditate on thy precepts 
and have respect unto thy ways ; I will delight myself 
in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word". (Psalm 
110:9, 15, 16) Here is the secret of a pure and noble life, 
acceptable to God. It is to be attained, not merely by prayers 
and righteous resolutions, but, in addition to these, by careful
 and painstaking heed, by systematic and diligent effort 
at self-cultivation, by care and perseverance in weeding out 
evil thoughts, by diligent and constant cultivation of pure, 
benevolent and noble thoughts, and by nipping in the bud 
the weeds of perversity before they bring forth their hasty 
harvest of sinful words and deeds. But observe, furthermore
, that this heed or care is to be taken, not according^ to 
the imperfect standard of our own judgment, but according 
to God's Word. The standard by which we test our lives 
makes a vast difference in our conclusions. 

The Psalmist further commends this standard to us in today
's lesson, saying, "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting
 the soul. [That is, if we take heed to our ways 
according to God's law, it will turn us completely from the 
path of sin to that of righteousness] . The testimony [the 


instruction] of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple 
[the meek, teachable ones, clearly pointing out to them the 
ways of righteousness]. The statutes [the decrees, ordinances
 and precepts] of the Lord are right [the infallible 
rules of righteousness], rejoicing the heart [of the obedient
]. The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening 
the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean [not a menial, 
servile fear, but a noble fear, begotten of love, a fear of 
falling short of his righteous approval], enduring forever: 
The judgments of the Lord [corrective in their nature] are 
true and righteous altogether. More to be desired are they 
[his instructive judgments] than gold; yea, than much fine 
gold; sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb. 

THE NATURE OF PRESUMPTUOUS SIXS 

"Moreover, by them is thy servant warned [concerning the 
dangers of the way and the snares of the adversary, concerning
 everything which is calculated to discourage or to 
hinder his growth in grace], and in the keeping observing 
and cherishing of them there is great reward. Who in 
the use merely of his own fallible judgment and without the 
standard of God's law] can understand his errors [can 
rightly judge himself] ?" 

But when, as we measure ourselves by this standard, we 
detect and deplore our shortcomings, let us remember the 
Psalmist's prayer : "Cleanse thou me from secret faults" — 
thus supplementing our efforts by our prayers. There is 
still another part of this prayer, however, which the Lord 
thus puts into our mouths. It reads: "Keep back thy 
servant also from presumptuous sins; let them not have 
dominion over me; then shall I be upright, and I shall be 
innocent from the great transgression". Let us consider 
what kind of sins would be called presumptuous. 

To presume signifies to take for granted without authority 
or proof. A presumptuous sin would therefore be taking 
for granted and asserting as truth something which God 
has not revealed, or the perversion of what he has revealed. 
To claim and hold tenaciously as a part of God's plan any 
doctrine, merely on the ground of fallible human reason and 
without divine authority, would therefore be a presumptuous 
sin. Of this nature is the sin of those who malign the divine 
character by boldly teaching the blasphemous doctrine of 
eternal torment without warrant from the Scriptures and in 
direct contradiction of them. There are many other sins of 
greater and less degree which partake of the same character. 
But the words here seem to refer directly to some particular 
error into which there is danger of drifting: "Then shall I 
be innocent from the great transgression" — evidently the sin 
unto death referred to by the apostles, also, (i John 5:16; 
Hebrews 6:4-6; 10:26-31) Such a sin would be that of presuming
 upon the love of God to bring us salvation, even 
though we should wilfully refuse it through the channel which 
he has appointed, the precious blood of Christ, shed for our 
redemption. 

Well indeed may we pray and strive to be kept back from 
presumptuous sins — sins of pride or of arrogant self-will 
which does not meekly submit to the will of God. Let us, 
beloved, beware of the slightest tendency toward pride and 
self-will or the disposition to be wise above what is written 
or to take for granted what God does not clearly promise. 
Then indeed, if we watch and strive against the very beginning
 of that proud and haughty spirit which surely presages
 a fall, we shall be " innocent from the great transgression
". 

SURE EFFECTS OF TRUE BIBLE STUDY 

"Blessed is the man whose delight is in the law oi the 
Lord, 'and who doth meditate therein day and night. He 
shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of waters, that 
bringeth forth his fruit in his season ; his leaf also shall not 
wither, and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper." (Psalm 
1:1-3) If we make the Word of God the theme of our 
constant meditation, its principles will soon be assimilated 
and become part of our mental makeup, making our character
 more beautiful and commendable both to God and to 
our fellow men; and in harmony with this habit of the mind 
all the acts of life will speak. 

The purified fountain will send forth sweeter waters than 
formerly, bearing refreshment and good cheer to all who 
come into contact therewith. It will make happier homes, 


254 


t'ST I«i, lOIQ 


THE WATCH TOWER 


255 


better husbands, better wives and better children. It will 
sweeten the temper, soften the voice, dignify the language, 
cultivate the manners, ennoble the sentiments and lend its 
charming grace to every simple duty. It will bring in the 
principle of love and cast out the discordant elements of 
selfishness. Thus it will make the home the very garden 
spot of earth, where every virtue and every grace will have 
ample room to expand and grow. Not only will it thus 
favorably affect the individual and the home-life, but it will 
go out into the avenues of trade; and truth and fair-dealing 
will characterize all the business relations. Thus will God 
be honored by those who bear his name and wear the impress
 of his blessed Spirit. 

While the heights of perfection cannot be reached as long 
as we have these imperfect bodies, yet there should be in 
every child of God a very perceptable and continuous growth 
in grace, and each step gained should be considered but the 
steppingstone to higher attainments. If there is no perceptible
 growth into the likeness of God or if there is a backward 
tendency or a listless standstill, there is cause for alarm. 
Let us constantly keep before our eyes the model which our 
Lord Jesus set for our example, that model of the complete
 fulfillment of the will of God, in which the whole law 
was kept blamelessly. Let us follow his steps of righteousness
 and self-sacrifice as nearly as a full measure of loving 
zeal, faithfulness and loyalty to God will enable us to do; 
and we shall have a blessed sense of the divine approval now 
and the glorious reward of divine favor in due time. 

CHAEACTEB LIKENESS TO CHEIST 

In 2 Timothy 3:14-17 the Apostle Paul shows that the 
Scriptures which God inspired are profitable in every direction
, and quite sufficient for the man of God. needing no 
supplements of visions or of dreams, either his own or other 
men's. They are profitable for doctrine, containing the 
full statement of the divine plan; and no human authority 
is competent to add thereto. "Who hath known the mind 
of the Lord? Who hath been his counsellor?" They 
are useful for reproof toward others. No words that we 
can use in correcting the errors of others either in word or 
in doctrine could possibly be as forceful for reproof as are 
the inspired words of Scripture. They are useful also 
for "correction", literally "to bring up and establish one in 
the right*'. No standard of morals or of discipline can 


so thoroughly search out the heart and correct its waywardness
 as does the Lord's Word. 

Not that God's Word is merely a statement of platitudes, 
however, and of moral instruction. It is far more than this. 
It searches the heart, the motives, the intentions, the thoughts, 
the ambitions, the aspirations. It pronounces a blessing 
upon the pure in heart, those whose intentions are upright, 
honest, clean. The Word of the Lord as a corrector in 
righteousness takes hold upon all the affairs of life, and to 
those who arc exercised thereby gives not only the spirit 
of a sound mind so that they are able to weigh and appreciate
 things from the true standpoint, God's standpoint of 
righteousness, but also inculcates a righteousness toward God 
and the propriety of seeking that holiness of which God is 
the perfect example. Moreover, it reaches down to the 

relationships between husbands and wives, parents and children
, friends and neighbors. If permitted, it settles every 
matter for us on lines of justice and love. 

The Apostle assures, accordingly, that God's teachings 
through the Scriptures are given "that the man of God may 
he furnished completely unto every good work". (R.V.) He 
has reference to perfection of character. He makes no 
reference to perfection in the flesh, elsewhere assuring us 
that even in his own case he realized that in his flesh dwelt 
no perfection. The perfection of character here pointed 
out as the proper and desirable aim of all Christians, and 
prepared for by the Lord through the giving of his inspired 
word, should be the mark toward which all the soldiers of 
the cross running in the race for the great prize should bend 
their energies. Perfection of character was exemplified 

to us in the person of our dear Redeemer, whom God has 
exalted to the right hand of majesty and power; and we 
are informed by the Apostle that the Father has predestined 
that all of the "little flock" who will share the kingdom with 
Christ must be conformed to this glorious image of his Son, 
must have perfected characters — hearts, minds, fully submitted
 to the will of the Father and to all righteousness, in 
all things. However imperfect the earthen vessel may be, 
and however incompletely we may be able even at our best 
to carry out in every thought, word and deed all the desires 
of our hearts and the endeavors of our transformed minds, 
these new characters are the earnest, or beginning, of the 
new natures which will be completed in the first resurrection. 


OUR BONDS HIS BLESSING 


My Dear Brethren : 

Greetings of love in the Lord. I cannot refrain from telling
 you all of the great joy our little class in L experienced
 at the good news of your liberation from bonds. 
Great is your reward. Although I never had the pleasure and 
blessing of your fellowship personally I was with you many 
times in my spirit and in my love. I had much to rejoice 
over, for it was through your bonds that my eyes were finally 
opened to the cause of your trouble, and now I rejoice that 
I can say our trouble, for I have tasted of the hatred of the 
world towards the truth, and, sorry to say, in my own household
. 

I was a member of the Presbyterian Church for fifteen 
years and could not get my mind clear on several questions 
"regarding the future life, and in roi6 I purchased a set of 
Brother Russell's six volumes, Studies in the Scriptures, 
but I did not seem to have time to study them as I should, 
with the Scriptures to verify the claims of the Volumes. But 
I was much troubled in my mind over certain light that I had 
received from my study; my friends and my enemies would 
try to dissuade me, claiming Brother Russell to be some 
fanatic. But I could not see it that way, for he seemed to do 
all for his Master and for humanity and not from any false 
or vain-glory idea, as far as I could see. 

So praise the Lord who works in a mysterious way his 
wonders to perform he permitted me to break loose from 
farming on a large scale, as I was doing, answered my prayers 
and covenant (having promised that if I were permitted to 
get free I would devote my time to knowing his plan and 
will for me) and I sold out on March 18, 1918, and soon after 
read the report of your trial and conviction. So I made up 
my mind that I must find out for myself more fully what 
the Bible Students were teaching that was such a bitter pill 


to the clergy. And I went to the I. B. S. A. convention at 
Calgary, Alta., last May (24-26) and praise God I got what 
my soul was hungry for so long. And I symbolized right 
there; thank God I never spent such a year in all my life of 
52 years. 

I have done nothing to speak of in the last twelve months 
but read. Needless to say I have given or tried to give this 
great truth to many others, both through correspondence and 
distribution of literature, which is to me like showers of rain 
are to parched ground. 

But my joy was overflowing when I read the account of 
your return home and reception by so many of the brethren 
in Christ at the Bethel home — as conveyed to us by the Winnipeg
 Branch. Tears of joy blurred my eyes, so I had to wait. 
I wish that some who considered you dear brethren guilty of 
some great violation of the law might see for themselves what 
spirit you were led by. I trust and pray, as do all the brethren 
of this class, that your coming hearing may prove you all 
innocent in the eyes of the world (as you are already in the 
eyes of the saints) if that be our Lord's will and purpose. 

In the service of the Master may God's richest blessing rest 
upon you all and all the saints everywhere is my prayer: and 
may he prepare us for the great work of the kingdom which 
seems to be near at hand, although these days are dark, especially
 in Canada. The great and bright morning is near at 
hand. I do thank our blessed Lord and Head for giving me 
such friends as the saints and children of the Most High. It 
is a great relief to know that they are not fettered by creeds 
and superstitions of men, but they have the pure Gospel of 
Christ. 

May our Father's favor be your portion now and forever. 
Your brother in Christ, N. H. Munay.— Alta. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAKER 


Comanche, Okla. . . Aug. 

Marlow, Okla. *' 

Ohickaaha, Okla. ... " 

Minco, Okla " 

Oklahoma Cy. t Okla. " 


23 
24 
25 
26 

27 


Sapulpa, Okla. , . 
Kansas City, Mo. 
St. Louis. Mo. . . 
Indianapolis, Ind. 
Cedar Point, 0. . . 


.Aug. 


. . Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. H. BARBER 


Bryan, O Aug. 

Alvordton, O " 

Pioneer, O " 

Toledo, " 

Findlay, 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


Fostoria, 0. 

Tiffin, 

Fremont, 0. 
Port Clinton, O. 
Cedar Point, 0, 


.Aug. 


. . Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


St. Johnabury, Vt. Aug. 

Morrisville, Vt " 

Burlington, Vt. " 

Rutland, Vt. ... 

Granville, N. Y. ... " 


22 Ticonderoga, N. Y. Aug. 

24 Albany, N. Y " 

25 Syracuse, N. Y " 

26 Batavia, N. Y " 

27 Cedar Point, O. . .Sept. 


Albany, N. Y. 
Johnstown, N. Y. 
Gloversville, N. Y. 
Oneida, N. Y. .. 
Lockport, N. Y. . 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. 0. BOWTN 
Aug. 


23 
24 
25 
26 
27 


Niagara Falls, N.Y. Aug. 
Westfield, N. Y, . . . " 

Ashtabula, O " 

Elyria, O " 

Cedar Point, O. ...Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. H. BOYD 


Kokomo, Ind. 
Elwood. Ind. . . 
Muncie. Ind. . . 
Anderson, Ind. 
Marion, Ind. . . 


. . .Aug. 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


Wabash. Ind. . . , 

Peru, Ind 

Warsaw, Ind. 
Elkhart, Ind. .. 
Cedar Point, O. 


. . Aug. 


. . Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 

Aug. 


Columbus, Ind. . . .Aug 

Martinsville, Ind. . . * ' 
New Albany, Ind- . . " 
De Pauw, Ind. . ... . " 

Palmyra, Ind. . ^ . . * * 


21 Louisville, Ky. 

22 Magnet, Ind *' 

23 Jeffersontown, Ky. . " 

24 Cincinnati, " 

25 Cedar Point, O. , ..Sept. 


28 
29 
30 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-8 


28 
29 
30 
31 

1-8 


28 
29 
80 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 
29 
31 

1-8 


26 
28 
30 
31 
1-8 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Watertown, N. Y. 

Mannsville, N. Y 
Rochester, N. Y. 
N. Tonawanda, N.Y. 
Salamanca, N. Y. . . 


Aug. 19,20 

21 

22 

23, 24 

25 


Onoville, N. Y. ^ . . 

Olean, N. Y 

Shinglefionse, Pa. 
Jamestown, N. Y. 
Cedar Point, 0. 


.Aug. 26 
, " 27 

. " 28,29 
. " 80,81 
.Sept. 1-8 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. I*. HERB 


Edmore, Mich. ....Aug. 
Grand Rapids, Mich. " 

Reeds, Mich " 

Muskegon. Micb. .. " 
Heart, Mich " 


22 Kalamaioo, Mich. ..Aug. 

24 South Haven, Mich. " 

25 Benton Harbor. Mich. " 

26 South Bend, Ind- .. " 

27 Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER 0. MAGNUS ON 


Hammond, Ind. . . .Aug. 
Michigan City, Ind. •• 

Laporte, Ind " 

Plymouth, Ind. ... M 
Atwood, Ind " 


21 Warsaw, Ind Aug. 

22 Ft. Wayne, Ind. .. '* 

24 Defiance, O " 

25 Toledo, O " 

26 Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 


28 
29 
30 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-8 


Kingston, N. Y. . 
Oneonta, N. Y. 
Binghamton, N. Y. 

Scrahton, Pa 

Peckville. Pa 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. 0. BICE 

Aug. 


17 
18 
19 
20 
21 


Carbondale, Pa. 
Maplewood, Pa. 
Towanda, Pa. . 
Buffalo, N. Y. . 
Cedar Point, 0. 


.Aug. 22-24 
.. •• 26,27 
. . " 28,29 
.. 4 ' 31 

.Sept. 1-8 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER B. L. ROBIE 
Rinard, 111 Aug. 21 Muncie, Ind Aug, 


Flora, HI. 

Iola, 111 

Pana, 111 

Indianapolis, Ind.* 


21 
22 
23 
24, 25 
26 


Muncie, Ind. 
Garrett. Ind. 
Auburn, Ind. . . 

Lima, 

Cedar Point, O. 


. .Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. SEXTQN 


Bellevne, O. 
Attica, O. . 
Tiffin, O. . 
Fostoria, O. 
Marion, O. 


. .Aug. 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


Delaware, O. .. 
Columbus, O. . . 
Chillicothe. O. . 
Lancaster, O. . 
Cedar Point, O. 


.Aug. 


..Sept. 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-8 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. I*. SULLIVAN 


Lonaconing, Md. .Aug. 19,20 

Weaternport, Md. . " 21 

Mt. Lake Park, Md. " 22 

Oakland, Md " 24 

Fairmont, W. Va. . '* 25 


Morgantown.W.Va. Aug. 26 

Brandonvtlle, W.Va. *' 28,29 
Brownsville, Pa. . . " 27 

Pittsburgh, Pa. ... " 31 

Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 1-8 


Jodie, W. Va. 
Sun, W. Va. 
Mt. Lookout. W.Va, 
Wickham, W. Va. . 
Springdale, W. Va, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 

.Aug, 


17 

18, 19 
20,21 
23, 24 
25,26 


Coco, W. Va Aug. 

Parkersburg, W. Va. " 

Clarington, " 

Wheeling, W. Va. . " 
Cedar Point, O. ...Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T, 
. -Aug 


La Fayette, Ga. 
Cloudland, Ga. . 
Knoxville, Tenn. .. 
Morristown, Tenn. . 
Johnston City, Tenn 


19 
21 
23,24 

25 
26 


H. THORNTON 

Aug. 


Bristol, Tenn. 
Radford, Va. . 
Honaker, Va. 
Lynchburg, Va. 
Cedar Point, 


Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER DANIEL TOOLE 


Charlotte, Mich. 
Albion, Mich. .. 
Jackson, Mich. . 
Ypsilanti, Mich. 
Plymouth, Mich. 


• Aug. 


22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


Fenton, Mich. . 
Detroit, Mich. . 
Windsor, Ont. , 
Adrian, Mich. . 
Cedar Point, O 


. .Aug. 


.Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. F. ZINK 


Pt. Washington, 0. Aug. 20,21 

New Phila., O. . . . " 22 

Dover, O " 24 

Cambridge, O " 25 

Bellaire, O " 26 


Toronto, O Aug. 

Wellsville, O " 

Niagara Falls, Ont. * 4 
Niagara Falls, N. Y. " 
Cedar Point, O . . Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAETJERLEIN 
Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 1-3 Butler. Pa Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. T. COHEN 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 4-7 Greenshurg, Pa. ...Aug. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 

Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 1-3 Youngstown, O. ..Sept, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 
Niles, Aug. 24 Toronto, O Sept. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER G. H. FISHER 

Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept, 1-3 Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 1-S Lewiitown, Pa. ...Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F, HTJDGINGS 
Cedar Point. O. . . Sept. 6, 7 Johnstown, Pa. ... Sept. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. L. HUTCHINSON 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 5-7 Canonsburg, Pa. ..Sept. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. H. MACMXLLAN 
Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 1-7 Duquesne, Pa. ...Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 1-7 Morgantown, W.Va. Sept. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 
Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 4-7 Massillon, Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 1-7 Wheeling, W. Va. .Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBTJRGH 
Cedar Point. O. ..Sept. 1-8 Erie, Pa Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER RAY VAN HYNTNG 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 4-7 Sharon, Pa Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 1-7 Pittsburgh, Pa. ..Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. J. WOODWORTH 
Cedar Point, 0. ..Sept. 1-3 Cedar Point. 0. ..Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H. ZOOK 
Cedar Point, O. ..Sept. 4-7 Waynesburg Pa. .Sept. 


28 
29 
30 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-8 


27 
28 


31 
1-S 


27 
28 
29 
31 
1-9 


14 


31 


14 


4-8 


14 


14 


14 


14 


14 


14 


14 


4 8 



u 9 > 

VOL.. XL SEPTEMBER 1 No. 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — AJH. 6047 

CONTENTS 

Glorifying God 259 

Hope of God's Glory 259 

Go<f s Character Glory 260 

God's Image in Man 261 

Character in Drawer and Drawn 262 

Personal Influence 263 

Power in Courage " ' 264 

Some of our Deficiencies 265 

The Rest of God for the People of God., 266 

Ages of Glory to Follow 266 

Weary and Heavy Laden Come 267 

Jesus our Savior and King 268 

The Fulfillment of Prophecy 268 

Special Trains to Convention 269 

John and Peter Become Disciples 270 

Fishers of Men 271 

"/ will stand upon mv waUh, and will set mv foot upon the 
Tower, and will watch to ift - uhai He will sav unto me. and 
tvhat answer- 1 shall make to them that oppose me."— Hub. 2 1. 


Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity: the s^a. and the waves (the restless, discontented) roanns; men'? hearts falling them for fear and for loofcfnfr 
to the things coming upon the earth (socieo ); for the powers of the heavens (ecelesiasticisin) shall be shaken. . . When ye see these things begin to conie to pass. 

Uien know thiit the Kingdom ot God is at hand. Look up, lilt up rour heads, rejoice, tor your redemption draweth nigh. — Matthew 24.33; Mark 13.29, Luke 21. JO 31 


THIS JOURNAL. AND IT© SACRED MISSION 


THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or fnstrumentg In tb> system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,** now belfl£ 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Toweb Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and of 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims,'* and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated 

Bedemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all." {1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which ... has been 
hid in God, ... to the Intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which In other Agee 
was not made known unto the sons of men as It is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while It seeks more and more to bring its every utterance Into fullest 
subjection to the will of God In Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
hath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with Implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear In its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing, 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 

That 


That 

That 

That 
That 
That 



28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :29. 
meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 

last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 

In the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 
the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 

man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," "in due time " 

Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 
the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He ls, M be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hlfl 

glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop In herself every grace; 

to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age.— Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 :6> 
the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 

the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and His glorified 

Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED BY 

WATCH TOWEB BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Tower Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom ha\e read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing m these columns. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Ruthkrpord, W. E. Van Ambukgh, F. H. Robison, Geo. H. 
Fisher, W. E. Pa<,e^ 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $1.00 IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Terms t a the Lord's Poor is follawi— All Bible Students who, by reason of 
old age or other infirmity or adversit\ , are unable to pay for this journal, will 
be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card each May stating their case and 
requesting its continuance. We are not onh willing, but anxious, that all 
such be on our list continually and m touch with the Studies, etc. 

NOTICE TO Aili TOWEB StJBSCEIBEES — PJease remember 
th»t as a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal
 or for a new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are 
indicated within a month by change in date of expiration of the *ub* 
scription on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please grive old address as 
well as new. This is very important, saving as much t me and unnecessary
 correspondence. 

ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA., POSTOFFICE 
UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3RD, 1S79. 

{Continued from second column ) 

It is important that those who want them should order now, 
cash with order, as we know not whether another edition shall 
he printed. Paper consignments have been slow, but it is 
expected that the first three volumes will be delivered early 
in September. 

RETAIL PRICES Carriage charges prepaid by us to any part of 
the world 

Style A: Half leather, i*ilt top, stamped in gold: 

Complete set (7 volumes) $13.50 

Single volumes, each 2.70 

Style B: Green cloth, plain edges, stamped in Oriental gold: 

Complete set (7 volumes) $14.00 

Single volumes, each 2.00 

WHOLESALE PRICES: For the convenience of class secretaries, cr 
others, who can send orders for fifty volumes (or seven complete 
sets), or more, the following prices will apply, carriage collect: 

Style A : Complete set (7 volumes) $18.00 

Single volumes, each - 2.60 

Style B: Complete set (7 volumes) 12.00 

Single volumes, each 1.75 

These prices bring the forty ye^rs of Towers, including 
binding, to about one-third the original subscription price. 



Watch Tower Reprints 

in Seven Volume^ 

In times past readers of The Watch Tower have gone to 
great trouble and considerable expense in trying to secure 
back numbers of our journal. This is no longer necessary. 
Here they are in compact form, with old page numberings 
for looking up references. Six of the volumes pictured above 
are shown in half-leather, and the one in the foreground in 
all-cloth binding. Each book is 8%xiixi^ inches in size 
and the type is the same as that used for the Sunday School 
lessons in this issue. Each volume contains a full-page 
frontis-piece portrait of Brother Russell at ages varying from 
27 to 64, according to the years covered by the volume. Volume
 I contains the reprints of the years 1879-1887; Vol. II, 
1888-1895; Vol. Ill, 1896-1900; Vol. IV, 1901-1905; Vol. V, 
1906-1910; Vol. VI, 1911-1915; Vol. VII, 1916-1919 (June), 
and a Topical and Scripture Index. 



AND HEBAID OF CHRISTS PRESENCE 


Vol. xl 


September 1, 1919 


GLORIFYING GOD 


No. 17 


"Ye are not your own; for ye are bought with a price: [therefore] glorify God in your body". — I Corinthians 6:19, 20, 

Sinaitic Text. 



T HAS been well said that "man's chief 
end is to glorify God and to enjoy him 
forever". The word in our text translated
 glorify conveys the double thought 
of to honor and to beautify; and these 
ideas must be borne along in order to 
catch the significance of the various passages
 in which it is employed. The word 
in its primitive signification meant simply 
to think, to believe, to entertain an opinion concerning 
a matter; but in later times it took on the meaning of 
to magnify, extol, to render glorious, to raise to glory. 
And in the New Testament the meaning is one of the 
last four, though one time the word is translated honor. 
It requires no proof to show that we cannot add to 
God's glory in the sense of contributing to his personal 
beauty or perfection; but we can extol his glory as 
we learn of it and we can exalt that glory of perfection
 in our own minds by setting it up as a proper 
standard for our own conduct and by setting our affections
 so thoroughly on things above, that God occupies 
the highest place in all our thoughts. But before we 
are able to extol God's glory or to exalt it in our own 
minds we must have some fairly clear conception of 
what that glory is. 

"THE GLORY OF THE LOBD" 

In practically all places where "the glory of God", 
"the glory of the Lord," "God's glory," and similar 
expressions are used the evident reference is not to 
some mystic halo or light surrounding the divine person
 — great though such brightness must be— but 
rather to the harmony, the symmetry, the beauty, the 
balance existing between the attributes of God's perfect
 character. For instance there is the statement in 
Isaiah 40 15 : "The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, 
and all flesh shall see it together". This refers to the 
outcome of the work of the Millennial age. That 
whole period will be given over to the revealing of 
God's glory, to instructing mankind regarding the 
principles of Jehovah's character and in surrounding 
man with exemplifications of the harmony of those 
principles. These things, now so obscure in the minds 
of the majority of people, will then be revealed or 
made perfectly plain, so that the humblest wayfarer 
on the highway of holiness will understand them. 

Moreover, the Apostle in his second letter to the 
Corinthians (3:18) shows the relationship of this 
glory to our own character development. He there 
says: "We all [the church], with open face [having 
the eyes of our understanding opened] beholding as 
in a mirror [God's Word] the glory of the Lord, are 
changed into the same image from glory to glory, as by 
the Spirit of the Lord" — i. e. just such transformation 
as one would expect to be accomplished by the personal
 influence of the Lord Jehovah. In other words : 
through the anointing of the Spirit, in response to our 
consecration to the Lord, we have been separated from 
the great majority of mankind, whose minds are 
blinded by the god of this world, and have been 
granted the power of seeing something in God's Word 
which the casual reader does not and can not see. The 
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, has shone unto us, reflected from the mirror 
of his Word. Behind all of the historical facts recorded
, back of all the incidents related, underneath 
all of the prophecies therein contained, we see not 
merely the literary wording of the text but, what is 
vastly more important, we see God's wisdom, God's 
justice, God's love, and God's power working in 
beauty, in harmony, in glory. In this incident his 
wisdom stands out prominently; in that prophecy his 
love or his power or his justice is shown. And what 
effect does this vision have upon our own minds and 
characters? It impresses those principles upon our 
attention ; it centers our minds on things above and, in 
proportion to our responsiveness, changes or transforms
 us into harmony with the image or ideal seen. 
This vivifying or refreshing influence works the 
cnange in us. — Romans 12:2. 

HOPE OF GOD'S GLOET 

Again in the fifth chapter of his letter to the 
Romans Brother Paul makes mention of the "hope of 
the glory of God". The prospect of divine glory can 
well be a cause for rejoicing, whatever the word glory 
may mean. While this glory may very properly include
 the thought of exalted nature, it surely comprehends
 the idea of character, for we are being renewed 
by knowledge into harmony with the image (Christ) 
of him (God) that hath created us, as new creatures. 
(Colossians 3:10) This glory which may be attained 
by the faithful followers of the Lord during the acceptable
 time will be a far more exceeding and eternal 
preponderance of glory (2 Corinthians 4:17) over 
what will be received by the remainder of the children
 of Adam. Their character glory will preponderate
 not in balance, for all of God's creatures will have 
perfect balance or poise of character, but rather in the 
extent of their capacity, which difference will be attributable
 to their more exalted nature. 

It is written: "My glory will I not give to another". 
(Isaiah 42:8; 48:11) How then can we hope to attain 
to divine glory? The answer is: He will not give the 
full extent of his glory to anyone. Although all of his 
intelligent creatures will finally have the glory of his 
character beauty, none will have the illimitable 
measures of his nature, nor the scintillating glory of 
his person, nor yet his authority. But "his glory shall 
be seen upon thee", in that each one shall be a character
 image of the Creator. — Isaiah 60:2. 


259 


260 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Pa. 


GOD'S CHARACTER GLOEY 

Perfect character is perfect balance, or nicety of 
poise between the qualities of a perfect being. Wisdom
, justice, love, and power have long been 
recognized by careful students of the Bible as being the 
cardinal principles or characteristics of God, the 
Father. Some students of God's Word have magnified
 his justice unduly — they have treated of it in such 
a way as to imply a dearth of wisdom and love. 
Others have talked of his love as though justice were 
not coextensive. Still others, by intimating the failure 
of his "efforts", slander his wisdom and power. 

The grand scope of God's plan for human redemption
 gives us a beautiful panoramic view of Jehovah's 
character. His wisdom is most sublimely displayed in 
allowing his creature, man, to enter the school of experience
 with sin. Experience may keep a dear 
school, but divine wisdom foresaw that the great 
lessons thus learned would be most effective, not only 
towards demonstrating the folly of sin, but also 
towards revealing the amazing depths of riches which 
inhere in the Father. Furthermore, when the whole 
race of men is held in mind, the permission of evil is 
an economical course in training, for with one tuition 
price — one man condemned — thousands of millions 
learn the desired lesson. 

His way is wise, too, because of the respect it shows 
to his own image in man — to his freedom of choice. 
Practically all the period from Adam's fall to the giving
 of the Law was used to demonstrate the wisdom 
of non-intervention in man's course, save in his utter 
extremity at the time of the flood. During the first 
age God wisely allowed the angels to try their hand at 
blessing a cursed race. Their failure will be a lesson 
for all eternity of the foolishness of attempting any 
undertaking without Jehovah's direction, or before his 
due time has arrived. 

Then came the Law. Evidently the cardinal 
principle most thoroughly revealed or exemplified in 
God's dealings with the Jews is justice. The very 
multiplicity of ceremonies, of laws and penalties, 
emphasizes the immutability, the unalterableness of 
divine justice. Every transgression, every trespass 
offering, every sin offering, every peace offering, 
every thank offering, every Atonement Day sacrifice 
acknowledged the existence of an unchanging law. 
God purposes to show truth and righteousness as the 
foundation of his throne ; for only when his creatures 
realize that a sentence against sin is unchangeable 
(cannot be eradicated without satisfaction of the judgment
 upon that sin) can they be sure that his oaths 
and promises for good are likewise unchangeable. 
God's justice is the foundation of our faith in him; 
for integrity is the foundation of faith. 

EXCEEDING RICHES OF HIS GRACE 

The Gospel age has been used to reveal to all saints 
something of the breadth, and length, and depth, and 
height of the love of God. Solomon tells us that "love 
is strong as death" (Canticles 8:6); it has reached 
down to us, "dead in trespasses and sins" (Ephesians 
2:1), has laid hold on us by Christ Jesus, and is in 
process of lifting us up to the very pinnacle of glory, 
to the divine nature itself — like him who is "the express
 image of [the Father's] person". — Hebrews 1 13. 

We are assured that the church is to stand as an 
eternal memorial of God's goodness during this love, 


or grace dispensation. The Apostle says: "God being 
rich in mercy, because of the intense love bestowed on 
us, caused us, dead though we were through our offenses
, to live with Christ — it is by grace that you are 
saved — raised us with him from the dead, and enthroned
 us with him in the heavenly realms as being 
in Christ Jesus, in order that, by his goodness to us in 
Christ Jesus, he might display in the ages to come the 
transcendent riches of his grace". — Ephesians 2:4-7. 

But of all God's attributes, power is the least known 
by the world in general. He has chosen to reveal his 
might now only to the eye of faith — and even to faith 
it sometimes seems obscure. One of the Lord's servants
 of old gave voice to the feelings of many people 
since that time, when he cried: "O God, how long 
shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme
 thy name forever? Why withdrawest thou thy 
hand [from activity], even thy right hand? Pluck it 
out of thy bosom." — Psalm 74:10,11. 

God's hand, or power, as exercised through Christ 
Jesus, was withdrawn from general human activity 
and held in his bosom. The Son throughout the 
Gospel age was in intimate retirement and fellowship 
with the Father. The Psalmist prays that God will 
show his power and vindicate his name in the earth. 

This Son of Man will be seen, however, coming at 
the time of the troublous clouds over earth's social 
system. His coming will be in power and great glory. 
(Matthew 24:30) That is, power being the divine 
characteristic least revealed in the history of man, that 
power when it is shown forth will complete the unfinished
 picture, so to speak, and turn on a blaze of 
splendor such as earth has never known. People will 
begin to say: That is the thing that seemed lacking in 
God's character all the time ; now we see his power. 

"TO SEE THY POWER AND THY GLORY" 

Power will be the outstanding attribute of God displayed
 during the Millennial age. On every hand 
mighty forces will be let loose and events too stupendous
 for the worldly mind to think possible, and too 
complex for even the consecrated mind now to know, 
will be quite the order of the day. All the machinery 
of human endeavor will be converted from serving self 
to serving the King of kings for the blessing of mankind
 and the beautifying of the earth. The seemingly 
exhaustless "flood of years", pouring humanity into 
the tomb, will be reversed and the mighty stream of 
the ransomed will flow forth from death. 

Even the most hardened skeptic will then be obliged 
to acknowledge that Jehovah is a mighty God, to bring 
back the dead to life. But while they cannot doubt 
his power, many may doubt his motives or his justice 
or his wisdom in the matter. They may say to themselves
 : Yes, God is powerful, there is no question 
about that : here we are living again when we know 
that we died and have the proof of many witnesses 
that we were buried centuries ago. But maybe God's 
purpose in bringing us back to life is merely to let us 
go through some more suffering just as we did before
. With many people it will probably be some 
time before they realize that the motive was a beneficent
 one ; still more time will be required for the 
average man to see that the whole procedure has been 
one in perfect harmony with justice; and lastly a 
grateful mankind will be wise enough to acknowledge 
the supreme wisdom of Jehovah God in devising a 
plan so wonderful and so kind 


September i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


261 


WISDOM, JTTSTICE, LOVE, POWER 

In the perfect life love prompts, wisdom devises, 
justice directs, and power performs every act. Wisdom
, justice, and love are readily discernible as being 
abstract principles, but power seems just a little different
. It is largely the capacity for performance on the 
part of the other three attributes; it is more like the 
thumb to a three-finger hand: without it none of the 
other character elements can come into action. 

Each of these basic qualities of character has an 
abstract and a concrete, a theoretic and a practical 
phase. The inert or inactive phase of wisdom is 
knowledge ; but when wisdom is called upon to consider
 a problem it cannot do so without the co-operation
 of power. Discretion is applied wisdom and 
every application of it calls for effort, is not possible 
without it. Truth is the precept or theory of justice; 
but its practice become righteousness — and for that 
practice power must lend a helping hand. Benevolence 
is passive love. The very least that one can do 
toward a loved object is to wish it well, and benevolence
 is nothing more nor less than well-wishing; 
but when love becomes active it passes over into the 
stage of beneficence, or of doing good. Even power 
itself may be latent, or inactive, and in such a case we 
call it might; or it may be kinetic, or active, and in 
such case the word force is used. Jehovah is spoken 
of as the "Almighty"; that is, he has all the reserve 
forces of power at his command, and throws them 
into action at his will. 

It is also interesting to bear in mind that not only is 
power necessary for the exercise of each of the character
 elements, but also that no one of these three 
other principles can be brought into action without 
measurable contributions from the remaining two. 
That is to say, wisdom could not be wisdom that were 
deaf to justice and love; love cani;ot exist in all its 
fullness in the presence of injustice and folly; justice 
cannot ignore either wisdom or love, for man is not 
just at all until he loves his neighbor as himself. — 
Luke 10:27. 

GOD'S IMAGE IN MAN 

In Jehovah all the cardinal principles work in perfect
 balance and accord. And we read : "God created 
man in his own image" . (Genesis I \2j) In man's 
noble character God put the same constituent elements
 as compose his own glorious being; and he put 
them there in the same relationship and proportionate 
strength, though of course all of man's powers were 
limited in scope and in the field of their operation. 
Man was made a god, or mighty one, in respect to 
earth's affairs as Jehovah is God in respect to the 
affairs of the universe. 

In the eighth Psalm these same facts are put into 
this language (verses 5-8) : "Thou hast made [man] 
a little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him 
with glory [of character perfection and capacity] and 
honor [of appointed rulership] . Thou madest him to 
have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou bast 
put all things under his feet : all sheep and oxen 
[domestic animals], yea, and the beasts of the field 
[wild animals too] ; the fowl of the air, and the fish 
of the sea, and whatsoever passeth through the paths 
of the sea." In commenting upon this passage the 
Apostle Paul says: "In that he put all in subjection 
under him, he left nothing that was not put under 
him" — his dominion over the earth was absolute and 
complete. — Hebrews 2:8. 


But though man was a glorious being he was at the 
same time a dependent creature. His happiness and 
very life were made dependent upon the maintenance 
of that perfect image with which he was endowed, of 
that glory which God had given him. And we can see 
why this was made so : Our capacity for loving God 
depends largely upon our ability to appreciate him, 
and we can appreciate him best when we have much 
in common with him. That is, the greater our own 
perfection of character, the more shall we be able to 
respond to and adore the wonderful beauties of God, 
our matchless Maker. 

If such things are true with us imperfect creatures 
what must it have been like with Adam, earth's first 
prince ! With him love answered to love divine ; wisdom
 could appreciate wisdom ; justice approved God's 
justice; and power worked in perfect accord. His 
worship of Jehovah engrossed to the fullest capacity 
every power of mind and body. 

"In their looks divine 
The image of their glorious Maker shone; 
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure 
(Severe, but in true filial freedom placed), 
Whence true authority in men". 

THE IMAGE MABEED 

God had set Adam and Eve to take care of the 
Garden of Eden. They were allowed to eat freely of 
all the fruits that were in it excepting that which grew 
on the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. They 
lived in childlike innocence until the serpent tempted 
Eve to take the fruit of the forbidden tree, and Eve 
in turn tempted Adam. They sinned. As they had 
been warned, they now found that they knew both 
good and evil ; good lost and evil got. 

There "all did sin and [consequently] are come 
short of the glory of God". (Romans 3:23, Young) 
Adam came short of the glory which God had given 
him in that he did not live up to his full capacity for 
pleasing his Lord and Maker. He ignored his sense 
of right and duty. Instead of letting justice direct 
his course, he let love not only prompt but determine 
what he should do. It was an unwise decision ; it was 
unjust to God, to himself, and to his erring mate; it 
was really unloving, for that his highest love should 
have been given his Creator ; it was impotent and 
weak, because he had the power to resist and "was not 
deceived". — 1 Timothy 2:14. 

With one unhappy move Adam marred the image 
of his God in him; he disturbed the balance and the 
harmonious relationship which had existed in his perfect
 character. And all the misery, all the trouble, all 
the heartaches and sighs in the earth have come because
 of that broken image. Man sought to retain the 
love and companionship of his wife at the expense of 
his fellowship with God — and he lost even that which 
he thought to retain. Conjugal, as well as all other, 
relations and ties were either sundered or sadly disarranged
. Like the delicate workings of a clock 
whose parts are wrongly assembled : it may run for a 
time, but with labored effort and with inaccuracy, unreliability
 on its dial. 

"Nor only tears 
Rained in their eyes, but high winds worse within 
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate. 
Mistrust, suspicion, discord; and shook sore 
Their inward state of mind, calm region once 
And full of peace, now T tossed and turbulent". 


262 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


CHARACTER IN DRAWER AND DRAWN 

While we are not now perfect, and while none of 
mankind is perfect, there are still enough fragmentary 
traces of original perfection in many men to enable 
them to appreciate these noble qualities of God, and to 
admire their beauty. 

Our Master said: "No man can come unto me, except
 the Father which sent me draw him". (John 
6 144) How is this drawing power exercised? We believe
 all of our readers will agree that it does not mean 
an arbitrary exercise of power over an individual, irrespective
 of his choice or responsiveness in the 
matter. Our Lord precluded any such view as this 
when he said: "The Father seeketh such to worship 

him [as] worship him in spirit and in truth". 

(John 4:23) Manifestly the drawing is effected by 
appealing to that measure of harmony which already 
exists between the character of certain individuals and 
the character of Jehovah. This drawing power would, 
oi course, be strongest in a perfect man; but, on the 
other hand, such responsiveness as we do have is intensified
 by the extreme lack of harmony in the elements
 of the world about us. The dearth of wisdom, 
justice, love, and power in the ideas and ideals of humanity
 whets our appetites for the perfect state. 

We might take an illustration on this point. Suppose
 a man were born and reared in the State of Ohio; 
and the vicissitudes of life found him shipwrecked on 
a Pacific island. Would there be any drawing power 
exercised upon him from his old home in Ohio? Beyond
 doubt there would be a strong drawing, even if 
he had no communication from there. The more distasteful
 the conditions on the island, the more intense 
would be his desire to get back home. Such a drawing
 we would usually call longing, or it might be as 
strong as homesickness; but all his yearnings for the 
former conditions would not serve to transport him 
there. For that purpose some practical means or 
agency is necessary. 

Let a ship heave in sight and the yearning which he 
has felt all along moves him to action. He hails the 
ship; avails himself of the privileges which the ship 
offers, and in due course of events arrives back at the 
desired home-land. 

In like manner some of mankind are either born 
with certain qualities which enable them to appreciate 
their need of Jehovah, or else a long series of experiences
 in life has fitted them for such appreciation. 
They long for greater balance of character and instinctively
 turn their minds and hearts to Jehovah. 
They learn that Christ is the only way whereby they 
can attain to fellowship with God. If their longing 
has been anything more than mere childish fancy they 
put forth every effort to avail themselves of the privileges
 in Christ. They give themselves wholly to him 
and in due course of events, if they do not turn back 
or loiter by the way, they arrive through many experiences
 at that condition of perfect balance and perfect
 poise — "like him," heavenly beings. 

GLOHinriNG GOD NOW 

But the Apostle's admonition in our main text seems 
to imply that we should glorify God now, even though 
our bodies are imperfect. How can this be done? 
We answer that this can be done even as a very 
humble stick, stone, or piece of dirt can reflect the 
glory of the sun. It may, because of its very nature, 
not be able to reflect as much light as a diamond, but 


it can at least acknowledge the existence of the sun 
by reflecting all within its power. 

Wisdom is the luminous, the brilliant feature of 
God's character ; and Christ Jesus is described as "being
 the brightness of [God's] glory" (Hebrews 1 14) — 
the wisest and most effulgent revelation ever made of 
Jehovah's glorious character. 

We can acknowledge the Father's wisdom, then, by 
obeying our Lord's commands. He said: "If ye love 
me, keep my commandments". (John 14:15) 
Furthermore, we can glorify God's wisdom now by 
keeping before our minds as a perfect pattern the 
image of himself which he has given us in his Son, 
and by being conformed to that image, even as he has 
predetermined for the overcoming class. (Romans 
8:29) But perhaps most of all can we glorify God's 
wisdom by our attitude in trial He has told us that 
fiery trials would be necessary for our sanctification 
and purification : why then should we think it strange 
when they come upon us ? Do we murmur and say in 
word or by act: I can't see why the Lord lets me 
suffer like this. But it was all right for our Lord and 
the apostles to suffer; it was all right for that noble 
band of his faithful followers in the first, second, 
third, fourth, fifth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, fifteenth, 
and sixteenth centuries to suffer. Then why not all 
right for us ? 

Complaint calls his wisdom in question, for it implies
 that we could have chosen a better way. There 
was no spirit of this kind in our Lord who said: "The 
cup which my Father hath given me, shall I not drink 
it?" (John 18:11) His three closest friends had 
failed him in his hour of greatest need, but he did not 
complain at the Father's wisdom in permitting it. Had 
we been there would we have bowed before God's 
wisdom, or used worldly wisdom and with superior air 
have said to the Master: It serves yon right; you had 
no business coming out here and getting yourself into 
this trouble, and us into this compromising situation 
with the authorities. 

Much better to say concerning life's trials and disappointments
 : 
"I will not doubt, though all my ships at sea come drifting 

back 
With broken mast and tattered sail, I will believe the hand 
Of him who never fails, through seeming ill, to work some 

good for me. 
And though my ships at sea return with sails all tattered; 
While at my feet my best hopes all lie, shattered; 
My heart will say : I will believe in thee", 

PAYING HOMAGE TO HIS JUSTICE 

We can glorify God by acknowledging the majesty 
of his justice — by acknowledging it not merely in 
word, but also in deed, by being faithful and true to 
the Lord, to the brethren, and to every obligation. If 
we were merely faithful to those things or to those 
persons closest by, or which seem the most convenient 
and reputable, we are not following very closely in the 
footsteps of our Lord and Master, for it would certainly
 have been a much more convenient way for him 
to have stayed in the heavenly glory and never have 
come to earth at all. 

We can acknowledge the desirability of his justice 
and reflect something of its glory by being just and 
faithful in the use of all our talents. The practical 
outworking of justice in the character produces stability
* Stability, reliability, loyalty, faithfulness, 
trustworthiness, constancy, steadiness, fidelity, 
staunchness, devotion, fealty, and other similar qualiSeptember
 i, igig 


THE WATCH TOWER 


263 


ties, are all traceable to justice in the character. And 
where these manifestations are wanting in the life we 
may be sure either that that individual's conception of 
justice is very deficient or that he is not living up to 
all that he knows. 

As children of God and ambassadors for Christ we 
can do honor to our Father and King by faithfulness in 
the use of our time. It is not that the Lord begrudges 
us any good thing, nor that there is a shortage of time 
with the heavenly Father. From everlasting to everlasting
 he is God ; he has all the time there is. But 
our trial time is limited and he purposes to see how 
w r e conduct ourselves in this brief trial period. The 
use of our time, therefore, constitutes one of the important
 means of demonstrating to the Lord what we 
would do with eternity, whether we would be feverishly
 trying to please ourselves or to accomplish something
 to the Lord's glory. It is useless to say that we 
have no time, for we all have exactly the same amount 
— twenty-four hours each day. "But," says one, "my 
time is so taken up with other matters" — but there are 
no other matters ; everything, great or small, stands in 
some relationship to our eternal destinies. 

We require so much sleep (each must determine for 
himself how much he really needs to keep himself in 
a fair state of efficiency) ; we require some time for 
proper eating; still other time is necessary for cleansing
 and caring for the body so that, as ambassadors for 
Christ, we will not misrepresent him. Practically 
every one has certain responsibilities to other members 
of the family, which take up no small amount of time. 
These things all occupy a great deal of the time which 
we have; but what if they do? If they are things 
really necessary to be done and bear some relationship
 to our stewardship as servants of the great King 
of kings, we can be faithful in such use of our time 
and do even those things "as unto the Lord". But 
every one has some time which can be called spare 
time. With some who have a multiplicity of duties it 
may be only a few minutes each day ; with others it 
may be even several hours. No matter what the 
amount ; how is it being spent ? In ways that are 
selfish or in ways that contribute to our uplifting or to 
the upbuilding of others in the most holy faith? 

FAITHFUL IN ENEKGY AND IN MEANS 

We all have some strength, some vitality which will 
be used either in ways pleasing or displeasing to God, 
and hence glorifying or dishonoring to him. At best 
most of us have very little strength, and for that reason
, if no other, it is important that such energy as 
we have be used in unselfish directions. 

Financial means is another talent which practically 
all possess in greater or less degree. Unquestionably, 
all that we have is the Lord's and we have to render 
an account just as certainly as a bank official has to 
submit to an accounting from a government inspector, 
and with far greater issues involved. The Lord's 
great favor bestowed upon his people precludes the 
thought that God is parsimonious ; for he showers his 
blessings abroad so that many of them fall not only 
upon the just, but also upon the unjust. But with all 
his wealth and liberality he is not wasteful. He does 
not invest wealth or means of any kind where there 
is no adequate and reasonable return. The returns 
may not be in the same kind, frequently they are not, 
but they will be something to make the investment 
w r orth while. So with the Lord's people, there should 


be no false investments, no spending of money for 
that which is not bread, and labor for that which satisfied
 not. (Isaiah 55 :z) The dividends from the investment
 may be in the shape of largeness of heart, of 
expanded sympathy, of deepened love,*or of other intangible
 but equally valuable things. 

A story is told of the man who, passing a blind 
beggar on Christmas morning, turned from him in 
disdain, not even giving a compassionate thought. 
Walking on a few paces the man realized his smallness
 in the matter and he determined to return and 
give the unfortunate one something, for his own good 
if not for the beggar's. His first impulse was to give 
him a dime; then the thought: No, you won't feel a 
dime, and in this instance you need some punishment 
for your lack of kindly feeling; you give him a dollar. 
The subject of charity giving is somewhat complex in 
our day, but who can doubt that that man got more 
than a dollar's worth of unselfishness and magnanimity
 out of the experience? Responsibility to others 
might easily make the exact repetition of that particular
 incident unwise for many men, but the principle 
can be applied by all. 

"He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful 
also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust
 also in much. If therefore ye have not been faithful
 in the unrighteous riches, who will commit to your 
trust the true riches? And if ye have not been faithful
 in that which is another man's [Christ's], who 
shall give you that which is your own?"— Lk. 16:10,12. 

PERSONAL INFLUENCE AND OTHER TALENTS 

There is one talent which we all have, and that is 
our personal influence. Sometimes this important 
item is overlooked by the Lord's people. The influence
 of some may be small and that of others very 
large, but each is responsible for his own. "To whomsoever
 much is given, of him shall be much required." 
(Luke 12:48) After we have determined the Tightness
 or wrongness of a given course of conduct, there 
are still other considerations to be kept in mind. 
Many things are "lawful" which are not "expedient". 
(1 Corinthians 6:12; 10:23) And that Christian has 
advanced very poorly indeed who has not learned to 
take into consideration the effect of his conduct, that 
is, in matters where he has the power to choose his 
course. There are certain basic things from which he 
may not depart, no matter what their effect on others. 

We are ambassadors for the heavenly King; and an 
ambassador must give final consideration to the effect
 of his personal conduct on the dignity of the 
realm which he represents. He could waive his own 
dignity and perhaps enjoy doing many undignified 
things in public, but he could not waive the dignity 
and honor of his king. 

We all have some mental capacity, not much in comparison
 with what a perfect being would have, it is 
true, but we do have some. Is that mental capacity 
being employed in such ways as will win for us the 
"Well done, good and faithful servant; enter thou 
into the joys of thy Lord"? There is probably no endowment
 or group of endowments which can not be 
employed directly or indirectly in the Lord's service. 
It may be years before certain powers are so pruned 
or controlled that they can be safely used; but our 
observation is that such time will come. 

All the Lord's people have some education. By 
education we do not mean specified courses in certain 


264 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Pa. 


organized schools, but rather information gathered 
from whatever source, coupled with the thought of 
exercising, practising, or putting into use that infoimation
. A great many of the things whkh we have 
learned either from books (which are merely recorded 
experiences) or from our own experiences will be 
found to be negative in their nature. That is, they 
are good things not to use in the Lord's service; 
excellent things to avoid. But all real information 
bears a certain relationship to the Lord's great purposes
, and it is for us to be faithful in using, or not 
using, what we have. Of course by far the bes*~ 
education any of us has is the acquaintanceship which 
the heavenly Father has been pleased to grant us in 
connection with his Word; no worldly education, however
 extensive, can give one insight into the plans an<3 
purposes of God. The Pharisees and Doctors of the 
Law in Jesus' day did not have it, nor have the wise 
ones of the earth now such insight. "The meek 
[whether otherwise well educated or not] will he 
guide in judgment; the meek will he teach his way." 
—Psalm 25 :o,. 

Additionally, nearly all of us have some power oi 
utterance, some power of speech, which is also a talent 
to be used to the glory of God. Some could well talk 
more, because their speech is with grace, seasoned 
with discretion. (Colossians 4:6) Others could with 
profit talk less, until better control of their speech is 
gained. (Ephesians 4:23) Man's power of speech is 
one of the unique points which differentiate him from 
the irrational creation. It ought to be one of his chief 
glories ; it is one of his chief responsibilities. 

It is to answer as to our faithfulness upon these 
points that we are to appear before the judgment seat 
of Christ. (2 Corinthians 5:10) God is faithful, who 
will not suffer us to be tried above that which we are 
able. (1 Corinthians 10:13) He W M therefore do 
his part and it is required of us, as stewards, to be 
found faithful in our part.— 1 Corinthians 4:2. 

CALLING ATTENTION TO GOD'S BEATJTY 

We can further glorify God by calling attention to 
his beauty. His beauty and warmth are most directly 
connected with his love. "Whoso offereth praise 
glorifieth me." (Psalm 50:23) And what is praise 
but reviewing the Lord's points of grace and goodness
? A hymn is a song of praise addressed to 
Jehovah ; and hence a proper hymn would glorify bim. 
Do we praise God; or do we refrain from praising 
him, or from telling of his beauty, merely because our 
lips are stammering? 

Emulation is the highest praise. Our Master said: 
"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father". 
(John 14:9) Those who saw him, saw the fullest 
manifestation of God which was possible for them to 
see; they saw the same balance of character. Likewise
 when we see Jesus approving childlike innocence, 
^.ve know that God would approve the same thing. 
When we see him angry at hypocrisy, we know that 
*~k>d would be angry at the same thing. Can we say, 
'He that hath seen me hath seen the Father'? It 
ought to be true of us; we ought to show forth his 
praises by emulating his benevolence so thoroughly 
that others could gain some conception of God's goodness
 by beholding our kindness to church and world. 

"Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bear much 
fruit; so shall ye be my disciples/' said the Master. 
(John 15:8) Doubtless some of the most acceptable 


fruit is that of mercy and magnanimity. "If ye forgive
 men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will 
also forgive you. But if ye forgive not men their 
trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses
." (Matthew 6:14, 15) "Anew commandment 
I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have 
loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall 
all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love 
one to another." (John 13:34,35) "Be ye kind one 
to another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another, even 
as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven you." (Ephesians
 4:32) "Forbearing one another, and forgiving 
one another, if any man have a qnatTel [cause of complaint
, Diaglott] against any: even as Christ forgave 
you, so also do ye." (Colossians 3 113) If these 
Scripture passages inculcate anything at all it is certainly
 the spirit of magnanimity, largeness of heart 

Many and subtle are the reasons which the fallen 
flesh presents to the new mind, pleading speciously for 
permission to hold just this one precious grudge; trying
 in fact to induce the new mind to look upon this 
particular grudge as a sort of sacred duty. The nesh 
seeks to contuse in our minds the issues of personal 
dignity and the Lord's work, making the one appear 
to be the other. We are not satisfactory to our own 
selves ; then we need not be surprised if other people 
do not fully measure up to our expectations. But 
though we are not satisfactory to ourselves, we crave 
divine mercy and forgiveness. Why not give as much 
to others? 

P0TO2B NOW LABGELY IN COTJBAGE 

It might be argued that the child of the Lord can 
do nothing now to glorify God in the realm of power. 
And surely we are weakest in this direction, if by 
power is meant capacity for performance. Even the 
honored Apostle said of himself: "To will is present 
with me, but how to perform, I wot not". (Romans 
7:18) Now is not the time for power of that kind; 
though we have a little power in the shape of ^//-control
. Now we are merely practising with "that which 
is least". We cannot be trusted with much outside 
power until we have justice, wisdom, and love in perfection
. The world's long experience in striving for 
and in usurping power is one sad commentary on 
man's inability to exercise that quality without the 
proper balance wheels. 

Bu r there is a kind of strength which all the Lord's 
faithful people have, and a strength that is glorifying 
to the heavenly Father, and that is moral strength, or 
courage. Moral courage is a very rare article indeed; 
and the world with all its boasted fierceness has never 
been able to equal the courage displayed in the footsteps
 of the Lamb of God. And those who walk in 
his footsteps must have and do have much of the same 
courage. If they are standing for the Lord or for his 
Word (which is the same in his eyes) they are bound 
to encounter the inertia represented In the world, it 
not its active persecution. Surely they will encounter
 the world's disesteem and reproach, as also 
suffer from the contumely which the divergent ideals 
of the world will throw upon them. They may not be 
strong in themselves, but, having faith, they are 
"strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might". 

"It takes great strength to live where you belong, 
When other people think that you are wrong; 
People you love, and who love you, and whose 
Approval is a pleasure you would choose, 
To bear this pressure, and succeed at length 


SF.PTKMBKR 1, tt>H> 


THE WATCH TOWER 


265 


In living your belief— well, it takes strength — 

Courage, too. But what does courage mean 

Save strength to help you face a pain foreseen ; 

Courage to undertake this life-long strain 

Of setting yourself against your grandsire's brain: 

Dangerous risk of walking alone and free, 

Out of the easy paths that used to be; 

And the fierce pain of hurting those we love, 

When love meets truth, and truth must ride above!" 

SOME OF OUR DEFICIENCIES 

With our present imperfect powers such glory as we 
may be able to direct towards the Lord will be necessarily
 deficient. We were all born as natural beings 
with certain warps of mind, certain penchants which 
may have seemed very good to us then, but which now 
we recognize to be far from desirable. These 
tendencies we carry with the old body when it is taken 
over by the new will, under the direction of the Lord, 
as a house in which to practise. The Scriptures therefore
 make clear what both reason and experience substantiate
, viz., that "when I would do good, evil [imperfection
] is present with me". — Romans 7:21. 

Here is one group of people, let us say, in whom 
wisdom and justice are predominant, in comparison 
with love and power. That is, they are deficient in all, 
but less deficient in wisdom and justice than in the 
other two cardinal qualities. Such people would have 
some appreciation of Jehovah's character in these two 
directions and would hence be able to praise and 
glorify him somewhat. Wisdom and justice co-operating
 produce a cast of mind in which reason is 
dominant. The only conception many very able minds 
have of our heavenly Father is that of a vast Something
-or-other of Reason. 

They cannot understand or appreciate the fact that 
he has an emotional side as well. According to the 
Scriptures his fatherly love exceeds that of the fondest 
parent: "Like as a father pitieth his children, so the 
Lord pitieth them that fear him" (Psalm 103:13); 
and his motherly care is in no wise equalled by the 
tenderest nurturer of babes : "Can a woman forget her 
sucking child, that she should not have compassion 
on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet 
will / not forget thee". — Isaiah 49:15. 

On the other hand are many people who are deficient
 in both wisdom and justice, but in whom love 
and power predominate. Emotion, and^ very strong 
emotion at that, would be the outstanding quality of 
such characters. Such people would not be able to 
glorify. God as fully as if they had all the four attributes
 well balanced, as was the case with our Lord 
Jesus. People of this type would not be so much interested
 in the Tightness or wrongness of a question; 
they would much prefer to depend upon emotion. 
Exact reasonings would tend to irritate and vex them. 

"THAT WHICH IS IN PART" 

There is another group of people who are able to 
appreciate God along the lines of wisdom and love, 
but who are quite deficient in both justice and power. 
Wisdom 'and love co-operating make a very splendid 
character, but one not well founded, lacking in stability
, ballast. Such people are much more interested 
in who's right than in what's right — more taken with 
personalities than with principles. Of such, apparently
, were the Galatian brethren : "O foolish Galatians
, who [not ivhat] hath bewitched [deluded, Diaglott
] you?" (Galatians 3:1) Of such are the 
brilliant but shallow hearers, who, when tribulation or 


persecution arises because of the Word, are soon offended
. — Matthew 13:20,21. 

There is still another group of characters in which 
justice and power are more active, but in which wisdom
 and love are wanting. Justice and power cooperating
 produce authority. Many people's conception
 of God has been built largely along these lines. 
"They magnify his justice with a zeal he will not 
own." They magnify it out of proportion to other 
qualities, and make a sadly distorted image of God. 

Those people who are sensitive to justice and injustice
 may not be actually more just in their dealings 
with other people ; they may be even much less so, for 
they have more conscience than common sense. In 
proportion to the smallness of their love they are hypersensitive
 to slights and offenses against themselves. 

A very large percentage of those whom we have 
known to turn aside from a closer following of the 
Lord have turned aside on this very point. Some offense
, either real or fancied, has happened to them, 
and instead of being able to occupy their minds with 
other things, that one offense grew larger and larger 
until it finally eclipsed their whole power of vision. 
They lost their balance; hence if they glorify God at 
all, it is not as fully as they might. 

Still another group of people are those in whom wisdom
 and power are both strong, but justice and love 
weak. Sagacity and force are the outstanding features
 of such characters. There would be small inclination
 to wait on the Lord, or to search his counsels. 
Their principal request of Jehovah would be to be let 
alone; they feel quite capable of doing the rest. Action
 ! is their motto. They are apt to be captains of 
industry, or otherwise prominently connected with 
earth's ambitious, and "somebodies". 

Is it any wonder that but few of the true followers 
of Christ have been chosen from the wise and mighty 
ones of earth? (1 Corinthians 1 :26) Even Satan has 
wisdom and power. 

FRAGMENTARY GLORY PERFECTED 

On the other hand are people in whom justice and 
love predominate and in whom natural wisdom and 
power are deficient. The Apostle practically eliminated
 the wise, mighty, and noble, after the flesh, from 
the groups of people likely to be interested in God's 
present callings. But he did not say: 'Not many just, 
not many loving ones' — for from this group probably 
the majority of the Lord's humble followers of the 
Gospel age are drawn. They must have some conception
 of justice as the basis of God's operations and 
plans and also of the loving motive which prompted 
the Father to devise the great plan of redemption for 
a sin-cursed and dying race. 

The world has not known much about these humble 
ones, because it does not care to know about them. In 
times past those of similar stamp have hidden in dens 
and caves of the earth, been stoned, been sawn 
asunder, and slain with the sword. In this age their 
blood has been shed on crosses, it has sotted the sands 
of the Roman Coliseum and Circus; and in similar and 
much less conspicuous ways they have suffered 
martyrdom at the hands of the wise and mighty. 

Now, if we find traces of these various unbalances 
in ourselves (and who will not) we know they are 
traceable to the flesh and not to the new will, or yet 
the new mind. The Lord knew we had these shortcomings
 before he called us and that fact should keep 


266 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


us from getting discouraged, but it should not be used 
as an excuse for carelessness. It is a tragic mistake 
to suppose that character is necessarily a fixed thing. 
It is not so; for we have the Apostle's promise: "My 
God shall supply all you need, according to his riches 
in glory". (Philippians 4:19) No matter what the 
individual character was, or is now, it can be made 
more nearly balanced and hence more glorious in the 
Father's sight, "according to that working whereby he 
is able to subdue all things even unto himself'. — 
Philippians 3:21. 

When that which is sown in dishonor is raised in 
glory, then we shall be able to glorify God perfectly; 
and this should be one of our chief incentives so to 
run as to obtain the far more exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory, even as our Master prayed: "Father, 
the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also 
may glorify thee/' with a vastly more extensive measure
 of character perfection, capable of reflecting more 
wonderfully the beauty of its Giver. — John 17:1. 

Now all of our shortcomings fall under one of these 
four heads: wisdom, justice, love, power; that is, we 


are either unwise, unjust, unloving, or weak, and very 
often all of them together. While we strive to glorify 
God in fact with our imperfect bodies, as the Apostle 
exhorts, this can be done satisfactorily to Jehovah only 
through the assistance given us in Christ in response 
to our faith. Note the word of cheer through the 
Apostle, given long before we were born: 

"But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is 
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness [justice in 
action], and sanctification [the fruitage of love], and 
redemption" — the trophy of power. Thus are we accepted
 in the Beloved/ And why thus? "That no 
flesh should glory in his presence," but "he that 
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord." 

Finally, when God's work through Christ shall be 
complete in the earth the whole planet shall resound 
with paeans of praise, and down through the ages of 
eternity shall reverberate the mighty anthem of the 
redeemed : 

"Holy, holy, holy is the 

Lord God o\ hosts; 

The whole earth is full 

Of thy glory/'— Isaiah 6:1. 


THE REST OF GOD FOR THE PEOPLE OF GOD 

"There remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God, for he that hath entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his 

oum zi'orks, even as God did from his. 1 ' — Hebrews 4:9, to. 



IVING as we do at the close of the Gospel 
age, when the "secret of the Lord" in his 
wonderful plan is reaching its consummation
, our subject has special value to the 
partakers of the heavenly calling. 

God's rest is first called to our attention 
in Genesis 2 :2,3 when it is said that he 
rested from all his work which he had 
created and made and blessed this "day" 
and sanctified it. Unless we discern the kind 01 day 
God blessed and sanctified, and the kind of rest he entered
 into, we will miss the fulness of blessing for us in 
the Apostle's argument on the subject in Hebrews. 

We have learned that in Biblical usage, as is the custom
 in our own time, the word "day" is used to designate
 any set or specified period for the carrying on 
and completion of any purpose. In the picture in 
Ezekiel 4:4-7 the Lord says: "I have appointed thee 
a day for a year", and this usage is the key to the location
 of the time of the Lord's first and second presence
, the period of the Church's desolation in the 
wilderness in the symbolism of Revelation, and other 
items of interest and moment to us. 

Then there was the day of temptation in the wilderness
 to fleshly Israel when God tested and tried them 
forty years long and they tempted him by their unbelief
. Again we learn from Peter (2 Peter 3:8) that a 
day is with the Lord as a thousand years and a thousand
 years as a day ; and the Psalmist also says that a 
thousand years with God is but as yesterday. 

CREATION IN ONE GEEAT DAT 

From previous study we have seen that the successive
 creative days were not the brief periods from 
sun to sun, but a specified time sufficient for a specific 
work, and also that the first six creative days are 
summed up by the Lord as the day in which he made 
the earth and the heavens. (Genesis 2:4) Genesis 
2 \2^ tells us that it is during the seventh of these 
creative days that God rests from all his work and that 
his wonderful plan is brought to completion. This 


rest of God therefore began when God, having created 
the earth and the heavens and the physical things in 
and of them, turned over the outworking of their 
moral features to the Lord Jesus to finish according to 
God's purpose regarding them. 

Six thousand years of this period is in the past, as 
we have learned from Bible chronology ; from 
prophecy we also learn that a thousand years yet remain
 before the moral realm will be cleansed and perfected
, and all God's purposed work completed. Thus 
we judge that each of these creative days were seven 
thousand year periods. We now understand that we 
are entering the last thousand years of the seventh 
great day whose completion will find every tongue in 
heaven and in earth singing a paean of praise and glory 
to him who sits on the throne of the universe because 
of his truth and righteousness and justice. 

God's direct dealing with man ceased with Adam's 
disobedience which brought him under condemnation 
to death, when he and his family were turned over to 
the "Lamb of God slain from the foundation of the 
world" for the perfecting of God's purpose for them. 
This is the one on whom God "has laid the iniquity of 
us all and by whose stripes we are healed"; and of 
whom it is written, "He shall see of the travail of his 
ioul, and shall be satisfied ; by his knowledge shall my 
righteous servant justify [the] many: for he shall 
bear their iniquities." and "the pleasure of the Lord 
shall prosper in his hand." (Isaiah 53:11,10) This 
is the One upon whose shoulder shall rest God's 
government, and who in due time will be recognized as 
the Wonderful One, the Counsellor, the Mighty God, 
the world's Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. 

AGES OF GLORY TO FOLLOW 

The design for the creation and perfecting of free 
moral agents axiomatically carries with it the permission
 of evil, in which the creature can follow his 
own will within his limitations, while the wise, loving, 
just Creator would so exercise his own over-ruling 
power as ultimately to bring all save the reprobate into 


September i, igig 


THE WATCH TOWER 


267 


willing and complete harmony with his own righteous 
will. In his foreknowledge the Creator foresaw all 
the degradation the corrosive forces of sin would develop
, the calumny and blasphemy it would heap on 
his name, the evil effects its reign would bring upon 
sinners and also upon his son and all who would love 
righteousness and hate iniquity. Yet looking beyond 
all this maze and confusion of darkness, he also foresaw
 the ages of glory in which his moral sons having 
been perfected, strengthened, stablished and settled in 
righteousness, would find peace and quietness and assurance
 forever in an eternity of bliss and happiness. 
In the majesty and holiness of his divine nature — 
immortality — he could not directly commune with the 
disobedient, but his love could energize his power, 
which, directed by his wisdom and squared by his justice
, could devise a plan through which he could gather 
together all his creatures in heaven and in earth, in the 
one who, bearing their iniquities, could save them. 
Thus he could remain just, and be the justifier of any 
one who would accept in faith the righteousness he 
provided in his righteous servant, and so for the past 
six thousand years the great Jehovah has rested all his 
plan and purpose in Jesus, and no malignity of man 
or demon has disturbed him, or caused him unrest, for 
he discerns that through his righteous servant all his 
wise and beneficent purposes have thus far been 
carried out, and the residue shall be accomplished. 
He rests all on the Wonderful One, the Counsellor, the 
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of 
Peace. He is not idle, he is not supine. He is working
 out all his will through the King of Righteousness 
on whom he has laid help. 

Are we not taught that the new creation is God's 
workmanship in Christ Jesus, prepared unto good 
works, which God hath before ordained that we 
should walk in them? And is it not also written that 
of his own will begat he us by the word of truth that 
we might be a kind of first fruit of his creatures? We 
were to be sons of God in the midst of a wicked and 
perverse generation, amongst whom we shine as luminaries
. God can and does work in this class because 
whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not; the new 
creature cannot sin, though the old man can rise up 
and kill it. In God's holiness he cannot affiliate with 
sinful man, while he can so do with the new creature 
in Christ Jesus. His mighty power which he "used in 
Christ Jesus when he raised him from the dead and 
seated him at his own right hand far above angels and 
principality and power and might and dominion, and 
every name that is named, not only in this world, but 
also in that which is to come" is now being exercised 
in and for the prospective joint-heirs with the Lord, 
who "are kept by the power of God through faith" to 
an incorruptible inheritance "that fadeth not away". 
Seeing these things, who can doubt his wonderful activities
 among the holy angels and in other pure fields? 

REST NOW ONLY BY FAITH 

And it is written that he blessed this seven thousand 
year day of his rest, and sanctified it, set it aside for 
his especial purpose, in the creation and full development
 of the divine family, through whom, as the seed 
of Abraham, he would bless all nations. 

Groaning under the pain and sorrow, sighing and 
death, of the fallen estate, and blinded by the God of 
this world, man's great and cunning adversary, few of 
Adam's children have been able to see how a blessing 


could come out of the condition dominant in this day, 
or discern the purpose for which it was set aside. 

Only faith can grasp that while weeping would endure
 for this night of sin, joy would come for all in 
the morning of the Millennial day when the Sun of 
Righteousness would arise with healing in its beams, 
chasing away sorrow and sickness, sighing and death, 
when the true God would again be the God of the 
people and the people be his people, he making all 
things new in the restitution of all things lost by Adam 
— life and purity and happiness — wonderful times of 
refreshing from his returned favor. 

All this was pictured to fleshly Israel, the house of 
servants through the types and shadows of their Law 
Covenant but, as a people, because of unbelief, they 
could not enter into God's rest — by leaving the outworking
 of all his plans to the promised Messiah. 
They did not mix their faith with the things heard, 
revealed to them by God through his holy prophets. 

Hence the Apostle says there still remains a rest for 
the people of God, those who belong to the house of 
sons, the new creation. These commit all they have 
and hope to be to Jesus, realizing that in their weakness
 his strength is perfected, and that the pleasure 
of the Lord in restoring all Adam lost will prosper in 
his hands; and thus they enter into the rest of God. 
Mixing their faith with all the glorious promises, these 
accept the righteous provision God has made in Jesus, 
and say, "God being my helper, why should I fear 
what man can do unto me?" in faith realizing that 
nothing can separate them from the love of God which 
is in Christ Jesus. In this rest they do not strive to 
gain righteousness by good works, nor do they fret 
themselves because of evil doers, when the man who 
brings to pass evil devices prospers in his way. But 
resting in quietness and confidence in the Lord they 
find their strength, and the peace of God that passes 
all human understanding rules in heart and mind. 

WEABY AKD HEAVY LADEN COME 

In this righteousness which God gives in his Son, 
how true and complete is the rest! Accepting the 
Master's invitation the weary and heavy laden have 
come to him and found rest for their souls as they 
learn of him who is meek and lowly. How precious 
this peace which the world can not give nor take away f 

But while they do nothing save believe, to lay hold 
of this righteousness and enter in this rest, they must 
needs labor that they fall not through unbelief. As 
God is not idle nor supine, neither can they be. They 
daily prove their faith by their works, in obedience to 
the conditions of the great salvation to which they are 
called, fearing themselves and trembling lest they fall 
away from the faith once delivered to the saints, and 
especially so in these last days, realizing that they are 
in the evil day, when if it were possible even the elect 
would be deceived; ever strengthened, however, with 
the assurance that it is God who is in them both to will 
and to do of his good pleasure, they rest in peace. 

Having rich promises — exceeding great and precious 
promises — and in mixing their faith operatively with 
them, they flee away from the corruption that is in the 
world through natural and even proper desires of the 
flesh, super-adding to faith virtue, to virtue knowledge, 
to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to 
patience godliness, to godliness brotherly kindness, to 
brotherly kindness love, realizing that if they do these 
things, they will never fall, but have an abundant entrance
 into the everlasting kingdom. 


JESUS OUR SAVIOR AND KING 

-September 28. — Matthew 21:1-9,15,16. 

coming in the name of jehovah — israel's long-expected king rejected — two prophecies fulfilled when our lord 

entered jerusalem on this occasion — lessons for spiritual israelite natural israelis history typical of that 

of the gospel church — cleansing of the temple, both in type and antitype. 

"Hosanna to the Son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: Hosanna in the highest: 

"^HILE God foreknew and the prophets foretold 



that the Jewish nation would reject Jesus and 
not receive him as their king, nevertheless 
everything was done as though the results were 
not foreknown and foretold. The prophecies 
were fulfilled. Today's lesson illustrates this 
fact. Jesus offered himself to Israel as their 
Messianic King just five days prior to his crucifixion
, and on the exact day upon which as 
the Lamb of God he should have been received 
by them, in order that they might have been 
"passed over*' and as a nation become the antitypical Levites 
from among whom would have been selected the antitypical 
priests. 

Israel's failure to receive Jesus at the appointed time did 
not at all interfere with the divine arrangement; for all of 
the Jews found worthy to be of the spiritual Levites and 
spiritual priests were selected, although the nation was rejected
. The remainder of those spiritual, antitypical priests 
and Levites God has been gathering from among the Gentiles 
ever since. By and by all these priests, of whom Jesus is 
the chief, will be glorified on the spirit plane. Then will 
begin the great Messianic work for Israel, and through Israel 
for all the nations of the world. Thus, in due time, Israel's 
expectations will be realized on a grander scale than they 
ever dreamed. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and all the prophets 
shall be made princes or rulers in all the earth. Israel 
restored to divine favor shall "obtain mercy" of God through 
the glorified church, and shall become the channel of God's 
favor for pouring out upon all mankind riches of grace 
divine. 

SABBATH AT BETHANY 

The Sabbath day prior to his crucifixion was spent by the 
great Teacher at the home of Lazarus, Martha and Mary. 
His fame had spread by reason of the miracle performed 
upon Lazarus. A feast was given in his honor on Sabbath 
night after sundown. It was then that Mary anointed him 
with the precious perfume which Jesus said was an anointing 
for his burial. The fragrance of this perfume has come 

down to us through the oitire Gospel age. The next morning
, to fulfill the Scriptures, Jesus sent for an ass and its 
little colt to be brought to him. The ass was probably a 
white one; for it is reputed to have been the custom of the 
kings of Israel to ride upon white asses. 

The multitude that had come to see Jesus and Lazarus, 
whom he had brought from the tomb, was filled with admiration
 and hailed Jesus with shouts, as "The Son of 
David!" 'The Great King!* 'The Messiah! 1 Certain Scribes 
and Pharisees called attention to this, and suggested that 
Jesus rebuke them. His answer was that, had the people 
refused to acclaim him, the stones would have cried out ; 
for it had been prophesied centuries before that there would 
be a shout at this time: "Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem! 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee. He is meek, and 
having salvation ; lowly, and sitting upon an ass, with its 
colt, the foal of an ass . " { Zechariah 9 .9) The little 
procession headed for Jerusalem, the multitude shouting and 
strewing their clothing and palm branches for the ass to 
tread upon, as marks of honor to the great King whom they 
imperfectly, indistinctly, recognized, not realizing the still 
greater glory and honor of his later revealing in the end of 
this age, when ''every knee shall bow and every tongue confess
" to him. 

"YOUR HOUSE IS LEFT DESOLATE" 

Just a few days before the events recorded in our lesson 
our Lord had expressly told his disciples that he would be 
set at nought by the rulers of the nation, and would be 
crucified and would rise from the dead on the third day 
They had at least partially understood this matter; for they 
had endeavored to dissuade him from such a view, and he 
had explained to them that his kingdom was to be a heavenly 
one, "in the regeneration'' times, when they should sit upon 
twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. (Matthew
 19:28) Our Lord knew that he would be rejected; 
and before he entered the city, viewing it he wept over it, 
saying, "Your house is left unto you desolate." He evidently
 had not the slightest intention of alluring the people 
to his support for the establishment of an earthly kingdom. 


Verse 9. 
We cannot doubt what a power he would have had if he had 
spoken in defense of his own position. Even when he 
was accused before Pilate, the Roman governor marvelled 
that our Lord offered no defense. All this was in harmony 
with the prophecy which declared : "As a sheep before her 
shearers \*> dumb, so he opened not his mouth." — Isaiah 53:7. 
Jesus sought to influence only those Jews who were "Israelites
 indeed, in whom there was no guile" ; and he understood
 the Father's plan to be that his message, as directed 
under the leadings of providence, would attract this class; 
and he did not wish for others. It was not the Father's will, 
as he declared. According to the divine plan and arrangement
, the remainder of that nation, aside from the "Israelites
 indeed", the holy ones, would reject our Lord, crucify 
him and be blinded for more than eighteen centuries, until 
at the time of his second advent their eyes of understanding 
would be opened, and they would "look upon him whom 
they had pierced and mourn for him as one mourneth for 
his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him as one is 
in bitterness for his firstborn". — Zechariah 12:10. 

THE rUUTLLMENT OF PROPHECY 

In the testimony here recorded two prophecies combine : 
"Tell ye the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy King cometh 
unto thee, meek and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of 
an ass". (Isaiah 62:11; Zechariah 9:9) It was in fulfillment
 of the prediction that Jesus rode upon the ass. The 
Jews were familiar with this prophecy, and for long centuries
 had been waiting for Messiah to fulfill it. Therefore 
according to the divine program it was necessary that our 
Lord should literally, actually, do what the prophets had 
foretold, in order that Israel might be without excuse in 
their rejection of him: so that in the future, when their 
blindness shall be turned away, when the eyes of their understanding
 shall be opened, when they shall look upon him 
whom they pierced and mourn for their rejection of him, 
they will find themselves without excuse. They will realize 
that the Lord had performed unto them as his covenant 
people all his good promises; and that the fault of their 
rejection was entirely of themselves; that they were not in 
the condition of heart to receive their King; that whereas 
he was meek and lowly oi heart, they were proud and 
boastful ; that whereas he was pure and unselfish, they were 
sinful and self-seeking, not fit for the kingdom. In a word 
God did for natural Israel everything that he had purposed 
and promised, and thereby certified that the fault was entirely
 theirs. 

The multitudes accompanying the Lord seemed to catch 
the spirit of the occasion; and while they shouted, "Hosanna 
to the son of David," the Messiah, they made him a royal 
pathway for his beast, some spreading their garments, others 
getting branches of trees. For long centuries it had been 
a custom among various people to treat thus their honored 
rulers. In countries where flowers abounded, these were 
used; in others the branches of trees; and in some instances 
the garments of their admirers and loyal subjects were thus 
used. We cannot suppose that all of this multitude were 
saints, though doubtless many of them outside of the apostles 
were sympathizers with Jesus. That it was not the apostles 
themselves who instigated and carried on this proceeding is 
shown by the fact narrated by another evangelist, that certain
 Scribes and Pharisees in the multitude came to the disciples
 and suggested that they call the attention of our Lord 
to the matter, pointing out to him the impropriety of such 
proceeding. 

Our Lord's modesty in respect to his Messiahship is noteworthy
. Not on even one occasion that we know of did 
he announce himself publicly as Messiah. His highest claim 
at any time was that he was the Son of God, a claim and 
title permissible to any of his true disciples throughout the 
Gospel age since Pentecost. In every instance his honor 
as Messiah was mentioned by others and simply not disputed
 by our Lord . For instance, on the first occasion 
when Jesus inquired of his disciples: "Whom say men that 
I am?" and later, "Whom say ye that I am?" and when Peter, 
speaking for them, replied : "Thou art the Messiah, the Son 
of the living God," Jesus indicated his assent by the words, 
"Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". 


268 


Shptkmber i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


269 


Now it was the multitude that heralded him the son of David, 
the Messiah; and he merely held his peace. Only when 
others objected did he declare that the shouting was necessary 
to the fulfillment of the prophecy which said that there should 
be a shout — "Shout, daughter of Jerusalem; behold, thy 
King cometh unto thee; he is just, and having salvation; 
lowly, and riding upon an ass and upon a colt the foal of 
an ass." The last place where his Messiahship was referred 
to was before Pilate, who asked him : "Art thou a king 
then?" He answered: "To this end was I born and for 
this cause came I into the world, and that I should bear 
witness to the truth". 

"HOSANNA IN THE HIGHEST" 

Had this procession and the shouting of kingly honor to 
our Savior any meaning outside of being a testimony to 
the Jewish nation, a presentation to them of their King, to 
be accepted or rejected? At the time they had no other 
meaning; but indirectly they have a lesson for us spiritual 
Israelites at this end of the age ! for we find that the divine 
arrangement is such that the history of natural Israel, from 
the death of Jacob down to this event, was typical of spiritual 
Israel's experiences from the death of Jesus down to his 
coming in glory, presenting himself to his people. The 
declaration of the prophets is that he must offer himself 
to "both the houses of Israel"— the fleshly house and the 
spiritual house. As in the fleshly house there were true and 
untrue Israelites, so also in the spiritual house of this Gospel 
age, "Christendom," there are both true and untrue Israelites, 
professedly waiting for Messiah and his kingdom. 

A host of Scriptures unite in the testimony that our Redeemer
 presented himself to spiritual Israel at the date 
corresponding to this triumphal entry into Jerusalem and 
presentation to natural Israel; namely, in 1878 A.D. (For 
prophetic testimony on the subject see Studies in the Scriptures
, Vols. 2 and 3) At that date also we believe nominal 
spiritual Israel — churchianity, "Babylon" — was rejected after 
the same manner that the Jewish nation was rejected. True, 
Christendom does not realize this rejection. Neither did 

natural Israel realize their rejection— that their house was 
left desolate, left to go to destruction. 

CLEANSING THE TEJCPLE 

We are still in the time when spiritual Israelites are deciding
 for or against Messiah, accepting him as their present
 Lord and King, or else rejecting him. In their hearts 
they are shouting, "Hosannah to the Son of David, who 


cometh in the name of the Lord"; or, on the other hand, 
they are among those who become embittered as they hear 
the message. Those who receive him will surely have an 
antitype of the blessed experiences which came to the Lord's 
true people at Pentecost. The antitype will be immensely 
greater and grander than the type, nothing short of full 
change from the corruptible to the incorruptible conditions 
of the first resurrection. The others, unready of heart to 
receive the Lord and the blessings, will have their share in 
the great time of trouble with which this age will terminate 
and which will prepare mankind in general for the glorious 
Millennial reign of righteousness promptly to be ushered in. 

As soon as Jesus had sentenced the Jewish nation to destruction
, saying, "Your house is left unto you desolate; ye 
shall see me no more until that day when ye shall say, 
Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord", he 
ceased all efforts in connection with that nation. Their 
trial was ended as a nation; but still he sought the individuals 
who were of the proper condition of heart. He proceeded 
to the Temple and cleansed it of all its merchants and moneychangers
, driving ihcm out with a scourge of cords. 

The shoutings of the multitude on the way had doubtless 
ceased. Yet the children in the Temple had apparently 
taken it up, and probably without any particular meaning 
were singing over and over, "Hosanna, hosanna to the son 
of David." This illustrates how bye and bye the praises of 
the Lord shall fill his temple. But the Pharisees who heard 
the children were annoyed by the singing. We may presume 
that they endeavored to stop it unsuccessfully, and then appealed
 to the Master to rebuke the children, as the one whose 
authority would be recognized. But he answered that this 
was fulfilling prophecy again, as it is written: "Out of the 
mouths of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise". 
What the more highly favored and intelligent of natural 
Israel did not appreciate and failed to proffer, the Lord 
caused to be accomplished even at the mouths of babes. 

Indeed, everywhere we find that earthly wisdom is apt to 
misinterpret divine purposes. Very frequently, therefore, 
the Lord makes use of the weak, the poor, the ignorant, 
instead. Let us, dear brethren, whatever our opportunities 
and talents, seek to be as little children, not guided by worldly 
wisdom merely, but "taught of God," that we may now in 
the proper form herald our Master the Messiah, and in every 
sense of the word co-operate with him in his work and be 
accounted worthy as faithful ones to be associated also in 
the glory of the kingdom. 


SPECIAL TRAINS TO CONVENTION 


Special trains for the International Bible Students Convention
 to be held at Cedar Point, Ohio, September 1 to 8, will 
be run from the following points: 

From Pittsburgh, leaving 8:30 a.m., September 1, via Pennsylvania
 Lines, arriving at Sandusky at 2:45 p.m. same day. 
Friends at Alliance, Canton, and Mansfield, Ohio, are requested 
to notify this office in advance if there will be passengers 
from these points, that arrangements for stopping to take on 
passengers may be made. 

The Chicago special train will leave Chicago at 8 a.m., 
September 1, by way of the New York Central, due to arrive 
at Sandusky, Ohio, 4 p.m. same day. All persons desiring 
to travel by this special train from Chicago will please immediately
 inform the Chicago committee, addressing your 
communications to Transportation Committee, 1305 Masonic 
Temple, Chicago, III. Friends living m the vicinity of Chicago 
can join this special train without difficulty. 

The Cincinnati special, by way of the Big Four Railroad, 
will leave Cincinnati 8 a.m., September 1. Friends in the 
vicinity of Cincinnati and Columbus desiring to join this train 
should" immediately communicate such information to Herman 
F. Franz, 119 Eighth Avenue, Dayton, Kentucky. 

A special train by way of the Big Four Railway will leave 
St. Louis at 10 p.m", Sunday, August 31, arriving Indianapolis 
at 6:45 a.m., Monday, and departing at 7 a.m. for Sandusky. 
All friends along the route desiring to join this train should 
immediatelv notify either J. B. Bernoudy, 7033 Lindell Avenue, 
St. Louis, Missouri, or Edgar M. Ross, 349 Lesley Avenue, 
Indianapolis, Ind., giving the number of persons in party. 
Louisville, Ky., friends can join this train at Indianapolis. 

The Railway Company will require 125 passengers before 
providing a special train. In the event the numbers are insufficient
 at any of these points to make up special train, extra 
coaches will be attached to regular trains running nearest 
the hours mentioned just above. 


As we go to press detailed information concerning special 
trains from, other points is insufficient to make definite announcement
. Passenger agents for roads, however, will be 
glad to make arrangements for special trains provided 125 
tickets are purchased for the trip. 

The matter of arranging for other special trains can be 
easily taken up by other classes with the resident Passenger 
Agent. We therefore request the friends at Buffalo, Boston, 
and Philadelphia to appoint some suitable person to immediately
 interview the General Passenger Agent (or his representative
) of the road over w 7 hich they prefer to travel, and 
make an effort to procure a special train or special cars. We 
give below the addresses of the class secretaries who may be 
addressed, and any friends in the vicinity of the cities named 
can communicate with these class secretaries and ascertain 
what arrangements have been made for special transportation. 

We urgently request that each class appomt some one person 
to notify the proper person or the Passenger Agent at least 
twenty-four hours before time for departure of train as to 
how many passengers have reported and will be expected to 
travel on such train or trains, so that adequate space may be 
provided in ample time. 

The necessary addresses of class secretaries follow: Mrs. 
R. H. Goza, 21 18 Minnie St., Kansas City, Mo.; J. B. Bernoudy
, 7033 Lindell Ave., St. Louis, Mo. ; Edgar M. Ross, 
340 Lesley Ave., Indianapolis, Ind.; Herman F. Franz, 119 
Eighth Ave., Dayton, Ky. (for Cincinnati) ; Convention Committee
, 130s Masonic Temple, Chicago, 111.; E. C. Hegg, 483 
Grieder St., Buffalo, N. Y. ; Alexander Ogston, 48 Wyllis Ave., 
Everett, Mass. (for Boston); Geo. C. Calhoon, 6019 N. 10th 
St, Philadelphia. Pa. 

Ask for tickets to Cedar Point I. B. S. A. Convention on 
certificate plan, on sale Aug. 28 to Sept. 3 only— receipts no 
good. 


JOHN AND PETER BECOME DISCIPLES 

October 5.— John i :2o-4z 

THE KINGDOM, LONG EXPECTED BY THE JEWS, ANNOUNCED AT LAST— "HE MUST INCREASE, BUT I MUST DECREASE"— TWO FOLLOW 
JESUS— "WHAT SEEK YE?"— ANDREW FINDS PETER, AND PHILIP NATHANIEL— "CAN ANY GOOD COME OUT OF NAZARETH?" 

"Jesus said unto him, Follow me"— John 1:43. 



OHN'S mission was to bear witness to Jesus. 
He knew him well from his infancy to manhood
; and, as cousins according to the flesh, 
they had quite possibly discussed various features
 of the divine law, and they were of one 
heart as respects service to the Lord. When 
John said, "I knew him not" (John 1:31), he 
evidently meant that he had never before known 
him as the Lamb of God until the holy Spirit 
pointed him out as such. Neither Jesus nor 

John could begin their kind of public service 

until they were thirty years of age, since this was one feature 
of the law, but John being six months the elder, was thus 
privileged to begin his ministry six months in advance of our 
Lord. During that brief period he had evidently made considerable
 commotion as a reformer, his message being, "Repent
 ye, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand". — Matthew 3 :2. 
The Jews had been waiting for the kingdom for centuries ; 
they realized that the kingdom given to Saul, David, Solomon, 
etc., had not fulfilled the promises, and that a kingdom in a 
larger sense and under a greater than David and a greater 
than Solomon was to be expected. The Apostle assures us 
that this thought was continually before their minds. (Acts 
26:7) John's mission to that nation, therefore, was the announcement
 that the fulfillment of the divine promise was at 
hand, and that in order to be ready to receive the divine favor 
they should repent of sin and turn to the Lord. And as our 
Lord said subsequently, if that nation had believed John and 
acted upon that belief they would have been ready to receive 
the Lord himself, and to have fulfilled to them all the gracious 
promises of the kingdom to which they were heirs, as the 
natural seed of Abraham. 

"HE MUST INCREASE; I MUST DECREASE' ' 

In connection with the repentance which John preached he 
also baptized in water those who repented and desired thus 
to symbolize the washing away of their sins of carelessness 
toward their covenant. As John was baptizing Jesus came 
and requested to be baptized also. John demurred, knowing 
well that Jesus had no sins to wash away; but Jesus insisted, 
for reasons which he did not attempt to explain to John, and 
John acquiesced. 

It was in connection with our Redeemer's symbolic baptism 
in water, which promptly followed his consecration to death 
at thirty years of age, and was a public declaration of that 
devotion unto death, that the heavenly Father bore witness to 
his begetting to the divine nature. We are not informed that 
any but John witnessed the descent of the holy Spirit upon 
him, but John bore witness that he saw the Spirit thus descend
, and that the Lord, in sending him to preach, had previously
 testified that this was to be the sign by which he would 
surely know the Messiah. (John 1:32, 3Z) It was in harmony
 with this that he declared to his disciples subsequently 
as Jesus passed by: "Behold the Lamb of God!" John doubtless
 knew and expected that some of his disciples would cease 
cooperation with him to follow the Messiah. Indeed, he declared
 to them : "He must increase, but I must decrease". 

The two who heard John's testimony promptly followed 
Jesus with a view to getting as close to the fountain-head of 
truth as possible; and all must admit the propriety of their 
course. He thus suggests to us our own proper course, to 
follow the Lord as nearly as possible and to seek as much 
as possible to come into fellowship and communion with him. 
And the noble, self-ignoring course of John appeals to all 
who have the right mind upon the subject. It suggests that 
similarly all of the Lord's servants should call attention to the 
Lord and not to themselves. Each should bend his energy 
to pointing men to the Lamb of God, and not to self-seeking. 
And it is well to remember that 'following Jesus', in the best 
sense of that term, means that we walk in his paths, strive to 
do as nearly as we are able what he would do today if he 
were in our places, taking our lessons from what he did and 
said personally, and from the instructions which he has left 
for us through the apostles, respecting the paths of fellowship 
in his sufferings, the path to glory and joint-heirship in his 
kingdom. The Lord is found of all those who diligently seek 
him from right motives and such are bye and bye to be granted 
full joint-heirship with him. "Ye are my friends, if ye do 
whatsoever I command you". — John 15:14; 2 Corinthians 4:5. 


MODESTY A OEM 

The evangelist furnishes us the name of only one of the 
two who first heard John the Baptist speak of Jesus. It is 
generally thought, and with very strong probability, that the 
Apostle John himself was the other one, and that through 
modesty he refrained from bringing himself into speaaJ 
prominence in his own record, just as in another place he 
speaks of himself as "that disciple whom Jesus loved". 
Modesty is a gem wherever found; it is one of the graces of 
the spirit, which all of the Lord's consecrated followers should 
seek to have largely developed and well polished. 

The narrative of how Andrew found Peter and how Philip 
found Nathaniel (supposed to be the disciple elsewhere called 
Bartholomew) is interesting, and shows that true devotion 
to the Lord is unselfish, and that it desires to confer upon 
others all blessings and truths enjoyed This is still the spirit 
of true discipleship : having found the great light of the world, 
and having seen thereby something of the breadths and lengths, 
depths and heights of the divine character and plan, we are 
and should be anxious to serve the same favor to others. 
And that desire to senne the Lord, the truth, and our fellows 
should be so strong iri us as to make it impossible for us to 
withhold the good tidings from any selfish consideration. Indeed
, if we have the spirit of the Lord, which is tie spirit of 
the truth, the spirit of true discipleship, we will be so anxious 
to make known the good tidings as to be willing to "lay down 
our lives for the brethren"— to help them "out of darkness 
into his marvelous light". 

It will be noticed that those who found the Lord were full 
of faith respecting the Messiah, of whom Moses wrote in the 
first five books of the Old Testament, called The Law, and of 
whom all the prophets also had written — Jesus of Nazareth, 
the reputed son of Joseph. They had not yet learned that 
Joseph was not the father of Jesus. 

GOOD OUT OF NAZARETH? 

Nathaniel's answer: "Can any good come out of Nazareth?" 
reminds us of the prejudice which now exists toward certain 
quarters from which good things may or may not be expected, 
according to one's viewpoint. For instance, some of our 
English friends tell us that when the present truth was first 
brought to their attention they were inclined to disregard it, 
and to consider it unworthy of special investigation, simply 
because it came from America ; for, though they might expect 
many useful things to come through this country, the product 
of "Yankee skill", they had no expectation whatever that any 
new light upon the Scriptures would come from America 
where they seemed to imagine everyone given over to cheating 
and graft for wealth, and that consequently it would be one 
of the last places in Christendom in which the Lord would 
cause the harvest light to shine out for the blessing of his 
people. These facts have doubtless hindered many dwellers 
in other lands from investigating the truths which are now 
and have for sometime been "meat in due season for the 
household of faith". America is Nazareth for them, and 
they expect nothing of the kind from this country. But it 
is not necessary to go to other lands to find instances of this 
same kind of prejudice. 

Others will inquire, What denomination backs up these 
religious teachings? and when told that no sect or party has 
endorsed these things, and that not many great, or rich, or 
wise, have in any sense of the word become interested, they 
say to themselves, if not to others, M-m-m, what could you 
expect? Can any good come out of Nazareth? Nevertheless
, all who are of the Nathaniel type of character, "Israelites 
indeed, in whom is no guile", will overcome their prejudice 
sufficiently to investigate, and on investigation will find sufficient
 proof to satisfy them, "as nothing else could do". Our 
wisest answer to all prejudicial objections to God's message 
should be that of Philip: "Come and see". Test it t examine 
it, prove it for yourselves. — Revelation 14:4. 

"Caesar's friends? or friends of Jesu&3 

Solemn question for today! 
Friends of Caesar 1 friends of Jesus I 

Take your sides without delay. 
If ye pause for man's forbidding, 

Caesar's friendship ye secure; 
If ye do the Father's bidding, 

Scorn, reproach, ye shall endure. 


270 


FISHERS OF MEN 

October 12. — Mark i : 14-20. 

THE HARVEST MESSAGE TO THE JEW FIRST— ISRAEL WAS NOT READY— CALLED TO BE JOINT-HEIRS—HIS OWN RECEIVED HIM NOT— 
THE PRICE OF SONSHIP— "HOW HARDLY SHALL THEY THAT HAVE RICHES ENTER THE KINGDOM OF GOD"— NEVER MAN SPAKE 
LIKE JESUS— DEMONS CAST OUT— DEMON TESTIMONY NOT PERMITTED— THE CONGREGATION AMAZED AT HIS GREAT POWER. 

"Jesus said unto them, Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men"— Mark 1 :ij. 
""I VERYWHERE the New Testament teaches that 



the work done by Jesus and his apostles among 
the Jews eighteen centuries ago was a harvesting
 work. Thus Jesus said: "I send you forth 
to reap that upon which ye have bestowed no 
labor. Other men labored and ye have entered 
into their labors" — ye are reapers of the fruits 
of their labors, gatherers of the "harvest" of 
the fruitage of the Jewish age. 

The ripe characters of that dispensation were 
ready to receive Messiah and his message upon 
terms of full devotion of their time, talents, influence, and 
lives as servants of the New Institution — the New Covenant — 
which God purposes to inaugurate with Israel in due time, 
and under which all the families of the earth will be blessed. 
The labors of Jesus and the apostles found about five 
hundred brethren worthy of the garnering during his ministry. 
Subsequently, at Pentecost and after, several thousand more 
Jews were harvested, brought into the spirit dispensation, 
begotten of the holy Spirit as new creatures, members of the 
body of the Anointed, members of the royal priesthood. But 
of these there was not a sufficient number to complete the 
divine f oreordination ; hence, after all the "Israelites indeed" 
had been harvested the Jewish people were thrust aside from 
divine favor for a time, and God's message of grace was sent 
to the Gentiles, "to take out of them a people for his name'* — 
to be associated as members of the great Mediator of the 
New Covenant, under the headship of the glorified ChristA
 HIGH AND HOLY CALT.TKG 


less ot self-confidence, self-esteem, self-will, whereas the 
Gospel message appeals to those who feel their own weakness 
and imperfection and unworthiness, and who correspondingly 
with great earnestness lay hold upon the divine promise, the 
divine aid, giving God the glory. 

The words of Jesus, "Woe unto you rich" (in wisdom, 
property, fame, in learning, in nobility of character) must not 
be understood to mean that the great, noble, wise, and rich 
are all or nearly all condemned to eternal torment, or to any 
punishment, on account of their riches. 

Rather, we must remember the standpoint of the Great 
Teacher's message— "Woe unto you" as respects the kingdom
; you are Jess likely to gain this wonderful "high calling" 
ot God than if you were in humbler circumstances. You have 
your consolation now, and correspondingly have less interest 
in the glorious things of God's message. You are so well 
satisfied with the things of this present life that it will be the 
more difficult for you to sacrifice all these for the prospect 
-4i a S ^ are m r Messiah ' s kingdom. But, said the Master: 
Blessed are [you who are] poor in spirit", humble-minded, 
and therefore the more teachable, for so much the more will 
you look out for the great Gift of God, the "pearl of great 
price , a share in the kingdom of God's dear Son. 


"THE MEEK WILL HE TEACH HIS WAYS" 

The first five verses of our study tell how the fishermen 
forsook their earthy all for the prospect of sharing with 
Messiah in his kingdom. Verse 21 shows that the Redeemer 
was recognized in Capernaum as a great Teacher and a man 
of learning, to whom others gave place in the synagogue; and 
Today's lesson relates to our Lord's inauguration of the J. he P eo P Ie marveled, saying, "How knoweth this man letters, 
<w^,*» work arn ong the Jews. John the Baptist and his ha ™ g never yarned at school?" 

Moreover, they were astonished at his teaching, "for he 


"harvest 1 

disciples had preached and baptized many under the announce 
ment that the kingdom of God was at hand, and that all 
desirous of participating in its great blessings should come 
into full harmony with the Mosaic Law,, and thus be prepared 
to be transferred from typical Israel to antitypical Israel, 
from membership in Moses, the type, to membership in Christ, 
the Antitype. In due time the preaching of John the Baptist 
was brought to a close, when Herod cast him into prison. 
From that time onward Jesus and his disciples became more 
prominent, but their message was the same as John's; as we 
read : "Jesus came to Galilee preaching the kingdom of God 
and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is 
at hand ; repent ye, and believe the Gospel". Whoever believed
 this message recognized Jesus as the "sent of God", the 
Messiah, who, in God's due time, will be the King of Israel, 
and the monarch of the earth. "The time is fulfilled" meant 
that the foreordained time when the offer of the kingdom 
would be made unto the Jewish nation had arrived. 

But God foreknew that Israel would not be ready, that only 
a few would be prepared to become the bride of the Messiah, 
his associate in the kingdom work, and that it would require 
eighteen centuries to select the remainder from among the 
Gentiles. Hence St. Paul points out in Romans 9, 10, and 11 
that the prophets foretold the stumbling of Israel, their temporary
 rejection as a nation, the fact that a remnant of them 
would be the nucleus of the bride class, and that the remainder 
would be made up of Gentiles. St. Paul declares : "Israel 
hath not obtained that which he seeketh, but the election obtained
 it and the rest were blinded", "until the fulness of the 
Gentiles be come in" and the "elect" class is completed. 

LAYING UP TBEAST7EES IN HEAVEN 

The wisdom of God is foolishness with men, and the wisdom 
of men is foolishness with God, say the Scriptures. This is 
exemplified in our Lord's choice of the twelve apostles, the 
calling of four of whom is noted in this study: Simon, Andrew
, James, and John. However able they were as men, 
they lacked the polish or education which people were accustomed
 to expect in religious teachers. The Bible record of 
them is to the effect that people "perceived that they were 
ignorant and unlearned men". 

This reminds us that the Apostle declared that this "high 
calling" of God to joint-heirship with Jesus reached and influenced
 largely the poor of this world, rich in faith; that 
among the "elect" will be found not many great, not many 
rich, "not many wise", not many learned, "not many noble . 
(1 Corinthians 1:26, 27) Success in life leads to more or 


taught them as one having authority and not as the scribes". 
The Jewish scribes and rabbis then, as today, were evidently 
quite perfunctory and quite unable to give the people any 
understanding of the teachings of the law and the prophecies. 
J esus had a thorough grasp of the sword of the Spirit, the 
Word of God, and his applications and interpretations therefore
 were convincing to his hearers. 

Had the scribes and Pharisees and priests accepted him, the 
whole nation would have done so. But this would not have 
worked out the divine program. Hence the Master's works 
and teachings were largely parabolical and in dark sayings, 
because it was the divine intention that only the saintly Jews 
should fully appreciate the Teacher and become his followers. 
The same principle, under God's providence, has applied to 
the message and the messengers of the kingdom throughout 
the entire Gospel age. Hence at no time has the real message 
been attractive to any except the saintly; others were content 
with forms of godliness devoid of power, and out of accord 
with the Word. 

JESUS' POWEE OVER THE DEMONS 

While Jesus was teaching in the Capernaum synagogue, a 
young man, obsessed by a demon, "an unclean spirit," cried 
out. The demon recognized Jesus and his teaching and used 
the young man as his mouthpiece, his medium, saying, "Art 
thou come to destroy us?" "I know thee who thou art, the 
Holy One of God." 

The demons cast out of human beings by our Lord and the 
apostles, the Bible tells us, were once holy angels. They 
fell from divine favor through their sinful relationship to 
humanity in the days of Noah. (Genesis 6:1-5) These fallen 
spirit beings still desire human relationship, and are styled 
"unclean spirits", because, however they may begin by presenting
 themselves as angels of light, they later reveal their 
true characters by unchaste, impure suggestions. 

St. Paul refused to allow a young woman medium to proclaim
 him and Silas servants of God (Acts 16:16-18) even 
as Jesus refused to allow this demon to give testimony respecting
 himself, even though it was complimentary. He 
commanded the demon to come out of the man. In leaving 
the man the demon caused him great pain so that he cried 
aloud. The effect upon the congregation at the synagogue 
was amazement. Not only the teachings of Jesus captivated 
them, but also his power to deal with the evil spirits, corroborating
 his authority as a Teacher sent from God. His fame 
began to spread throughout all the region of Galilee. 


271 


International Bible Students Association Classes 


Lectures and Studies ty Traveling Brethren 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAKER 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUEBXEIN 


Defiance, 

Sept. 

SES 
Sept. 

SSES 

Sept. 

9 
10 
11 
12 
13 

Milwaukee, Wis. . 
Waukesha, W T is. . . 
Sheboygan Falls. Wi 
<Jreen Bay, Wis. . . 
Bonduel, Wis. , . . . 

Sept. 

Elkhart, Ind 

Michigan City, Ind 

s. " 



ADDRES 

Adrian, Mich 

Mt. Clemens, Mich 
Pt. Huron. Mich. .. 

Atkins, Mich 

Detroit, Mich 

BY BRO' 

9 
10 
11 
12 
14 

rHER T, E. BARKER 

Ypsilanti, Mich. . . 
Plymouth, Mich. . 

Sept. 

Flint, Mich 

Birch Run, Mich. 

; '< 

ADDRE 

Shelly, 

Galion 

BY BROTHER B. H. BOYD 

9 White Cottage, 0. . 

10 Zanesville, 0. 

11 Dresden, 

12 Pt. Washington, 0. . 
14 N. Philadelphia, 0. 

Sept. 

Mansfield, 0. 
Newark, 0. ..,-.. 
Crooksville, 0. 

; •'• 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 

Jeffersontown, Ky..Sept. 11 Shelbyville, Ky . Sept. 

Brandenburg, Ky . . « ' 12 Elizafcethtown, Ky.. 

Louisville, Ky " 13,14 Sonora, Ky 

Lexington, Ky " 15 Nashville, Tenn. . . . 

Frankfort, Ky " 16 Lebanon, Tenn 


14 
16 
17 

19 
19 


15 

16 

17 
18 
19 


15 
16 
17 
18 
19 


17 
18 
19 
21 
22 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Columbus, Sept. 9 

Chillicothe, " 10 

Midland, O ]] 11 

Cincinnati. " 12,13 

Felicity, 


14 


Hamilton, O. . 
Oxford, O. . . . 
Richmond, Ind. 

Piqua, 

Bradford, 0. . 


..Sept. 16 
. .. ' 4 17, 18 
. . " 19 

.. '* 20,21 
.. " 21,22 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERR 

Tr-io p a . Sept. 9 Sharon, Pa Sept. 

nn&TiriW'Pa «' 10 Butler, Pa " 

TUwiSi Pa ."v." " " Pittsburgh, Pa » 

Oil City Pa ..... *' 12 Blairsville, Pa * 

MeadviUe, Pa.' .... " 13,14 Punxsutawney, Pa. . * 


15 
16 
17 
18 
19 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUS ON 


Bellevue, O. . 
Attica, O. . . . 
Marion, O. . . 
Delaware, O. 
Columbus, 0. 


. . . Sept 


9 

10 

11 

12 

13, 14 


Lancaster, O. 
Nelsonville, O. - 
Wellston, 0. .+ - 
Chillicothe, O. .. 
Portsmouth, O. ,. 


..Sept. 14, 15 
. .. " 16 

. .. " 17 

... '• 18 

. .. " 20,21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. C. RICE 


Fremont, O. 
Fostoria, O. 
Findlay, 0. 
Lima, O. 
Dayton, 0. . 


. Sept. 


9 Greensburg, Ind. . . Sept. 

10 Columbus, Ind " 

11 Madison, Ind " 

12 Sparksville, Ind. ..." 
14 Mitchell, Ind " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 


Westfleld, N. Y... 
Jamestown, N. Y. 
Salamanca. N. Y . 
Onoville. N. Y. . . 
Olean, N. Y. 


Sept. 


9 Bolivar, N. Y Sept. 

10 Allentown, N. Y. ... " 

11 Perry, N. Y " 

12 Rochester, N. Y. ... *' 
13, 14 Hammondsport, N. Y. " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER 0. L, SULLIVAN 


South Bend, In<L 

Laporte, Ind 

Hammond, Ind. . . 
Roseland, 111. . . . 
Chicago, 111 


.Sept. 


9 Des Plaines, III. ...Sept. 

10 Elgin, III " 

11 Marengo, 111 " 

12 Belvidere, 111 " 

1-1 Rockford, 111 " 


15 
16 
17 
IS 
19 


15 

16 
17 

18 
19 


15 
16 
17 
18 
19 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 


Erie, Pa Sept. 9 

Qnion City, Pa " 10 

Warren, Pa " 11 

Lockport, N. Y " 12 

No. Tonawanda, N, Y. *' 13, 14 


Niagara Falls, N. Y. Sept. 14, 15 
Rochester, N. Y. . . . '* 16 

Syracuse, N. Y " 17 

Schenectady, N. Y. .. '* 18 

Watervliet, N. Y. . . . " 19 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER DANIEL TOOLE 

Elwood, Ind. ......Sept. 16 

Anderson, Ind '* 18 

Crawfordsville, Ind.. " 19 

Terre Haute, Ind.. . *' 20, 21 
Brazil, Ind " 21,22 


Columbus, 0. 

. . Sept. 9 

Cincinnati, 0. . . 

. . . " 10 

Dayton, - 

. . . " 11 

Richmond, Ind. . 

..." 12 

Muncie, Ind. . . . 

. . . " 13, 14 


Cedar Pt., 0. 
Butler, Pa. . 


. Sept. 


1-3 
14 


Duquesne, Pa. 
Elizabeth, Pa. 


. Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. W. BETLER 


Vandergrift, Pa. . .Sept. 14 


Wellsville, Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. T. COHEN 
Cedar Pt., Sept. 4-7 Niles. Sept. 


Youngstown, 0. 
Lonaconing, Md. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 

Sept. 


14 
21 


Frostburg, Ma. . . . Sept. 
N. Philadelphia, O. , . " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. DONALD 


Cedar Pt., 0. 


. Sept. 


1-7 


Ellwood City, Pa.. .Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 
Toronto, Sept. 14 Akron, Sept. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H. ZOOK 

Waynesburg, Pa. ..Sept. 14 E. Liverpool, 0. ...Sept. 


MORNING HYMNS FOR OCTOBER 

After the close of the hymn the Lord's people may well 
have the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord' ' then join 
in prayer At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered
. Hymns for October follow; (1) 2 77; (.2) 190; 
(3j 2153; (4) 44; (51 325; (6) 259; (7) 173; (8) 150; 
(9) 197; (10) 196; (11) 192; (12) 63; (13) 8; (14) 198; 
(15) 94; (16) 328; (17) 87; (18) 114; (19) 116; (20) 
74; (21) Vow; (22) 189; (23) 70; (24) 60; (25) 25; 
(26) 107; (27) 186; (28) 267; (29) 71; (30) 191; (31) 
182. 


28 

28 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Lewistown, Pa. ...Sept. 14 Scottdale, Pa Sept. 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. L. HUTCHINSON 
Cedar Pt., Sept. 5-7 Cannonsburg, Pa. ..Sept. 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 

Cedar Pt., O Sept. 1-7 Fairmont, W. Va...Sept. 14 

Morgantown, W. Va. " 14 Alliance, " 28 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 
Cedar Pt., Sept. 4-7 Massillon, Sept. 14 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Wheeling, W. Va. .Sept. 14 Oil City, Pa Sept. 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 
Erie, Pa Sept. 14 Washington, Pa. . . Sept. 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 

Sharon, Pa Sept. 14 Brownsville, Pa. ..Sept. 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

Washington, D. C. .Sept. 28 Baltimore, Md. ...Sept. 23 


21 


.-?Bi 




%$m 


wn 




Hzif'm 


ation can 
lay-.-' v 


^ 


*^.,-=*- 


r/*-^ 




^ 


&?*?forniflg €bm«A f ndft7n^d9onM2i:iH« 


VOL. XL, 


SEPTEMBER 15 


No. 18 


SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. f>. 1919— AJH. <K>47 

CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 375 

Triumphantly Distressed 275 

Pulpiteers' Great Responsibility 276 

Wisdom of Their Wise Men 277 

League of all Religions 278 

\nnoiincittK the Kingdom 279 

The Golden Age Nigh 279 

Future Service 280 

How to Proceed 281 

Questions of Interest and Import 282 

Bethel to Be Restored 283 

Jesus in Peter's Home 284 

The Devil a Church-goer 284 

A Lesson in Trust 285 

^ Stormy Night on the Lake 286 

From the Open Field 287 

'■/ will stand upon my watch, and will sfi my foot upon tkr 
Tower, and will watch 'to see what He will say unto me, and 
what answer I shall make to them that oppose me."— Had, s ■/. 

"Ipg^pjS^TB ITS 


Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sea and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring: men's hearts tailing them for fear and for lookln~ 
lo the things coming upon the earth (society); for the powers of the heavens (ecclesiastlclsm) shall be shaken. . When ye see these things begin to come to pa.*- 

thea know that the Kingdom of God la at hand. Look up, lift up your beads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nlgb. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; Luae 21;2/> * 


THIS JOURNAL. AND IT© ©ACRED MISSION 

THIS Journal is one of the primo factors op instruments In tho system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,** now being 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It nut only serves as a class room whore Kible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may bo reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and o: 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "IJerean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbt Dei Minister (V.U.M.), which 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands tirmly fur the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — ■ 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gnve Himself a It un^om [a corresponding- price, a substitute] for 
all." (1 Pet. 1:10: 1 Tim. 2 :<i. i Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has beer 
nid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Aget 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Kph. '3 :w-I>, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance Into fullest 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures, It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lore 
aath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for wc 
enow whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment oi! 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite bat 
urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
■when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :lG t 17; Eph. 2:^0-22; Gen 
28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :20. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses; and when tnc 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting, place between God and men through 
out the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies In the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for evert 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which Hgbteth every man that cometh into the tcorld," *'in due time." — 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :,-,, G. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature/' and share Hifl 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 ret. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace, 
to he God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1:6; 20 :ft 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hand's of their Redeemer and His glorified 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will *>e destroyed. — Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED BY 

VfATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

7%<r Watch Towcj Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three oi whom have read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rctherford, W. E. Van Ambvrgh, F. H. Robison, Geo. H. 
Fisher, W. E. Page. „______ 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRIO fl-OO IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK HRAI-T, PO STAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Term* to the Lord'* Pomr ** follows— All Bible Students who, by reason of 

old age or other mrirmitv or adversitv, are unable to pay tor this journal, will 
be supplied Free n" the\ send a Postal' Card each May stating their case and 
requesting it? continuance. We are not omU willing, but anxious, that all 
such be on our list continuallv and in tuucii w ah the Studie s, etc. 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS — Please remember 
that ae a rule we no longer eend a card of acknowledgment for a renewal
 op for a Dew subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are 
indicated within a month by change in date of expiration of the »ubicripnon
 on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please gire old address as 
well as new. This is very important, saving ua much t me and unnecessary
 correspondence. 

ENTERED AS SKCONO-C L \SS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH. PA , POSTOFFICE 
UNDER 'I HE ACT OF MARCH 3RD. Ib;Q. 


YOUR REMITTANCES FROM ABROAD 

All of our correspondents outside of the United States will 
kindly take notice that exchange on foreign remittances to 
this country has increased to such an extent as to cause 
serious loss, and amounts, in some instances, to twelve percent 
or about one-eighth of the value of the remittance. Do not 
send London exchange, local checks, postal notes, local currency
, or postage stamp-. Foreign po-tage stamps have no 
more value here than would United States stamps have in 
foreign territory— which is none at ail. When at all possible 
remit by government money orders, or Xeze York exchange. 


NAME AND DATE ON CLIPPINGS 

We appreciate very much the clippings and newspapers 
which the friends send us, containing items of special interest 
in view of the general unfolding of the Lord's purposes. 
Some of tho-e who thus favor us supply the name and date 
of the paper from which the clippings are taken; others overlook
 this important feature If you do send us items of interest
 please write on the margin of the clipping the name 
of the paper and the date ot issue. 


/. 




PASTOR RUSSELL SOUVENIRS 

In view of the approaching
 anniversary of 
Brother Russell's death, 
we have prepared a 
souvenir folder which 
contains, besides seven 
portraits showing 
Brother Russell's likeness
, three pages oi informal
 ion dealing with 
(i) his relationship to 
the seven stages of the 
church at large, (2) his 
h "e and works, and (3) 
Ins teachings. The portraits
 picture Brother 
Russell at ages varying 
from 2' I-) 64 and are on 
fine, d..ii finish, tinted 
stock each portrait 6^4 
x ij *>4 inches in size. 
The whole interior matter
 of the souvenir is 
well suited not only for 
a private memento of the 
Seventh Messenger to 
the church, but is also 

appropriate for giving or lending to neighbors and friends 
uhu may have had erroneous conceptions of Brother Russell's 
U"e and work-* impressed upon them from unfriendly quarter?. 

The cover is of stitT greenish brown paper, very fine in 
quality and specially prepared for this edition. It is tastefully 
adorned with a border of conventionalized representations of 
the <cven lampstands, with hand-lettered and embossed title 
("The Messenger oi Laodicea") and a small but strong profile 
drawing of Brother Russell at the time of his physical prime. 
The cover colors are in green and Indian red and the whole, 
besides being securely stapled with wire, is also tied with a 
green gros grain and satin finish silk ribbon. 

The inside pages are SV2 x 12 inches, but the cover has % 
inch overhang all around. It is a very durably constructed 
and attractive souvenir and is procurable for 35c a single copy, 
$4 per dozen, or $16 for fifty. They are now in stock. 



^- 



*~ IP** 


AND HERALD 



Vol. 


September 15, 1919 


Ko. II 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


ONE of the Lord's people can be even in 
distant touch with the situation in the 
world and not be forcibly reminded of the 
words of the Master; "Upon the earth 
distress of nations with perplexity: the 
sea and the waves roaring; men's hearts 
failing them for fear and for looking to 
the things coming upon the earth". It 
would be hard to find a responsible person 
who is not perplexed, as it would be hard to find a 
nation that is not distressed. 

From Paris comes the word that the following 
trades are (or w^ere at the time of the correspondence) 
on strike: Metal Workers, Tailors, Milliners, Bootmakers
, Sugar Refiners, Luxury Trades, Nickel 
Polishers, Painters, Mechanical Modellers, Saw-mill 
Workers, Printers, Plumbers, Butchers, Carpenters, 
Glove Makers, Builders, Newspaper Employees, Subway
 Men, Transport Workers, Bronze Workers, TaxiDrivers
, Electrical Workers at Bourget Company, Employees
 of Maison Brassert, Maison Breguet, Maison 
Dufagel, and Aeroplane Workers at Courtevoie. In 
France outside of Paris Builders are on strike at 
Valenciennes, Timber Workers at Sainte-Tulle, Tramway
 Workers at Caen, Gas Workers at Nevers, Metal 
Workers at Grenoble, Electrical Workers in Lorraine, 
Miners in Pas-de-Calais. 

TRIUMPHANTLY DISTRESSED 

From the London Daily Herald we clip the following
 significant lines touching on the strike of underground
 railway men and allied businesses, in Paris : 

'The reactionary' papers like the Action Francaise and the 

Dcmocrctique Xouvcilc, are, of course, in a condition of 
hysteria, crying that it is all a Bolshevik plot, a German plot, 
a plot to ruin victorious France. Leon Daudet, in the Action 
Francaise, says he cannot express his disgust and horror. In 
point of fact, the mo\ement is not organized at all. But this 
makes it perhaps only the more significant, for it is a spontaneous
 manifestation of the deep discontent among the whole 
ma^s of the workers. 

"The main immediate cause is of course 'la vie chere', the 
high cost of living, which people in England cannot possibly 
appreciate. But apart from that there is a general sense of 
disillusionment and disappointment. Victory has turned into 
dust and ashes, and the workers of France are realizing that 
for them four years struggle have brought nothing." 

To this the Philadelphia Public Ledger, of July 
1 2th, adds some comments on the then conditions in 
Italy, and Europe generally: 

"What have the people of Italy been rioting about? High 
prices. To read the recent cablegrams from that land of long 
history and magic beauty one would have expected the rioting 
to be over Fiume or the Adriatic islands or the exclusion of 
Italy from the French alliance. But the source of the trouble 
was more commonplace and unsentimental. It was simply 
ihat the grocer charged too much for 'cats' and the tailor for 
clothes. 

"Europe is thinking of its stomach and its back, not its 
political rights or its national boundaries. 

"And Europe has no monoply on this line of thought. The 
plain people of America are more interested today in the 

9 


steadily mounting prices of most of the necessities of life and 
the constant warnings that things will be worse before they 
are better than they are in 'Article X* or the true story of 
Shantung or the status of the Monroe Doctrine in relation 
to the league covenant. This is not selfishness or insularity, 
but the same mental process which causes a cinder in a man's 
eye to engross more of his attention than a new moon discovered
 in the neighborhood of Jupiter," 

Up to three or four months ago there were a few 
who still basked in fancied security on the slopes of the 
social Vesuvius; but if there are any such left, they do 
not seem to have much space in the newspapers. A 
few editorial paragraphs from the Portland Oregon 
Journal, of August 6th, sums up the question which ; s 
in the minds of many, many people : 

"When has there been such tumult? 

"A hundred thousand strikers in the building trades in 
Chicago ! 

"A hundred and fifty thousand railroad shopmen on strike 
in America! 

"A Los Angeles lawyer's house dynamited and burned because
 he assisted in prosecuting radicals ! 

"Whites and colored in near civil war in Chicago! 
_ "Strikes in full swing or incubating in many American 
cities ; labor unrest all over the world ! 

A night oi riotin Liverpool described by a newspaper 
( as the most distressing night ever passed in a civilized city-'. 

"Strikes of policemen, street car workers, railway operatives 
and mine workers in various parts of England! 

"Where are we headed for?" 

CAPITALISTS KEADY FOP FIGHT 

The financial column of the Chicago Herald-Examiner
, under date of July 19th, believes itself to be 
correctly informed when it expresses the attitude of 
heads of big business: 

"If, declare corporation heads and their bankers, walkouts 
in the Crane and in the Harvester works are rehearsed for 
more serious and extensive industrial interruptions ; if the 
building workers prove to take their responsibility as lightly 
as their fellows in the Crane and Harvester shops: if street 
railways employes are uncompromisingly insistent upon a 77 
per cent increase in the wage scale — then, say employers and 
their financial backers, let it come to an extreme issue. 

"Financial men do not mince words: they state pointedly 
they will back employers to the limit; will permit every important
 industry in Chicago and in the Middle West territory 
to be strike-stricken rather than submit to an unreasonable 
wage or unjust conditions. If it mu^t come to a drastic issue 
between employer and employe, well and good; they, the 
representatives of capital declare, will not evade the contest ; 
lit the thing be settled now and definitely; they are ready to 
meet and combat it to a final conclusion, is the assertion''. 

There is a familiar ring to these words. Let us see. 
Yes. Back in 1886 an obscure young man named 
Russell, Charles T. we believe, living in the city of 
Allegheny, Pa., wrote a book treating something on 
God's plan of the ages. On page 332 we find these 
words : 

"Capitalists will become convinced that the more they yield 
the more w r ill be demanded, and will soon determine to resist 
all demands. Insurrection will result; and in the general 
alarm and distrust capital will be withdrawn from public and 
private enterprises, and business depression and financial panic 
will follow. Thousands of men thrown out of emplovment 
in this way will finally become desperate." 


<o 


276 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PlTTSBVKGM. Pa. 


Some publicists see farther than others into the 
causes of things. An editorial observer in the Los 
Angeles Times, of August 7th, is one in this group. 
A column of comment is headed: "Is the Human Race 
Going on the Rocks?" We quote a few paragraphs: 

"One half of the world is ablaze, the other half smoldering. 
The half capable of saving the property already on fire is 
just now overoccupied checking the spread of the conflagration 
to its own home buildings. A sauve qui peut spirit is at 
present the dominant incentive to most human action. 

"For humanity is only just emerging, somewhat fearfully, 
somewhat recklessly, from the shadow of a great crime. The 
dawn of peace is obscured in the cloud rack that follows the 
wake of the war tempest. 

"For the time being the tendency of social forces is toward 
discord and disintegration. Almost every newspaper dispatch, 
foreign and domestic, affords evidence of this dangerous trend. 
England, France, Germany Redivivus, the three balance wheels 
of Europe, are running out of true. 

"Our people at home are fretting under new laws and new 
obligations; restless and irritated, they arc turning away from 
the wisdom of the ages. These psychological causes are 
manifested in violent disturbances. The whole world is 
mutinous. 

"In such sporadic outbreaks as the Winnipeg revolt, the 
Chicago riots, the promiscuous bomb-throwing at leading 
citizens in the United States, the Saturnalia of the dregs of 
the human race in unpoliced Liverpool, the general strike 
situation that threatens to paralyze England we see the 
economic peril that springs from this general world spirit 
of unrest, dissatisfaction and dislike for all former restraints. 
As the cost of living goes up the price of human life goes 
down. The same spirit permeates not only popular tastes, 
but even popular decencies and morals. 

"The horrors of the vilest war ever inflicted on suffering 
humanity have tried the world's soul to the limit of endurance. 
The reaction has been violent. Human nature is passing 
through a spasm of protest. Hence riots and extravagance 
and immodesty and jazz music and shimmie dances are a 
seething wash of unrest 

"Is humanity going on the rocks? It seems to be — the 
margin of safety at times appears to be cut down to a recklessly
 fine line. The ship is passing through stormy seas, 
steering closer than caution warrants to the reefs. And 
malcontents in the fo'c'sle are trying to unsteady the hand 
of the pilot" 

SUPERHUMAN QUALIFICATION 3 NEEDED 

There is real comfort in the thought that all the 
trouble will but prepare the world to realize that 
though men may plan and arrange things ever so 
wisely and well, none of their plans can prove successfull
 as long as ignorance and selfishness hold sway in 
the hearts of men. All these experiences are part of 
the divine method of instructing mankind that the only 
feasible way of correcting the difficulty is by the setting
 up of a strong and righteous government, having 
superhuman wisdom and superhuman power, which 
will effect stupendous changes in human society, raising
 the submerged valley classes of earth to a fair and 
reasonable level of happiness and opportunity, subduing
 the disproportionately exalted classes and bringing 
them, not to their injury but to their blessing, down .j 
a reasonable and fair average opportunity for life, 
liberty and happiness. — Isaiah 40:4. 

Here and there the voice of a clergyman is raised in 
warning. The Rev. Dr. W. R. Graham, Army Chaplain
 at Newport News, Virginia, speaking in the Presbyterian
 Erangelistic Conference at Philadelphia, is 
reported in the Evening Bulletin of that city, in its 
issue of July 22nd, as having said: 

"World-rocking social upheavals, threatening to destroy all 
religion, are due to come in the next few years. 

"America, in the meantime, is in peril of becoming drunk 
with a sense of its power and of being destroyed therefore, 
as have other nations in the past." 


A little more explicit are the remarks of the Right 
Rev. F. F. Reese, Bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of 
Georgia. The facts related remind one strongly of 
the words of the Lord's apostle, written nearly 1900 
years ago, telling us that "evil men and seducers shall 
wax worse and worse" in the last days. We will listen 
to the Reverend Doctor as his words are published in 
the Nashville Banner of August 3rd. After having 
spoken of the capacity of human nature for sacrifice 
he says : 

"But it is equally true that human nature is capable of great 
inconsistencies. And even among the soldiers and civilians 
who have manifested such splendid unselfishness there exist 
tragic evidences of moral evil. The prevalence of physical 
deterioration, of illiteracy, of sexual vice, of irreverence and 
profanity is appalling. From what I learn from the comments 
made by business men, there is prevalent, I fear, wide-spread 
lack of moral integrity. And it is lamentably true that shameful
 corruption in politics has not disappeared from our cities 
and other political units." 

The progress that humanity has made has been of 
the merry-go-round variety. It has progressed at a 
dizzy rate for six thousand years only to fetch up at 
the very place from which it started — self-will, discarding
 of restraints, and ingratitude for God's provision
 for man. There is nothing original in these : they 
were all exhibited in Eden. 

Bishop Tihen (Roman Catholic) thinks there are 
wrongs which need righting. The Denver Times, of 
August 4th, reports a part of his Sunday morning 
sermon in this strain : 

"When angry waves begin to appear on the surface of the 
ocean we know that there has been an agitation and that a 
storm is impending. So on the sea of human destiny, when 
waves of Bolshevism and unrest begin to toss and spread, we 
know there is somewhere a great wrong that needs to be 
righted/' 

PtTLFlTEERS' GEE AT EESPONSIBIUTY 

Some writers are blessed with sufficient perspicuity 
to see that part of the wrong which needs righting is 
attributable to none other than the clergy class itself. 
The Detroit Free Press, of August 6th, has some 
pungent remarks by one such personage. He is speaking
 of the responsibility of the clerical gentry, the 
pulpiteers of the country, for getting us into the war: 

"They joined the most rampageous of our jingoist and warat
-any-price patriots in arousing the belligerent passions of 
the people. Almost from the very moment the hellish melee 
broke loose in Europe they seemed to dwell in an atmosphere 
of chronic mental inflammation, and they easily became our 
foremost prophets and trumpeters of a frenzied and unlimited 
militarism. Nearly all of them could be brevetted for distinguished
 service in boosting the human slaughtering game. 

"Over one hundred and seventy years ago Voltaire declared 
that the leading prelates and ministers of his time were as 
much responsible as the autocratic rulers for the elevation of 
war from the lowest to the highest place in men's regard. In 
our own day we have seen the love of God and the love of 
humanity invoked by them in order to make men hate and slay 
their comrades of another nation who also had been taught 
by their own spiritual and militarist guides that it was their 
duty to hate and slay in a similar fashion. 

"Indeed the ministers in all the belligerent countries engendered
 so much passion and violence that it might be called 
their war. It may well be deplored that their conduct did 
not take the fair shape prescribed by the apostle to the servant 
of the Lord, of gentleness, patience, and the instruction of a 
sweet and firm example ; for in that event we might have been 
spared some of the war's most revolting features. It was the 
emotional ferocity that was aroused at home that excused, 
if it did not actually incite, some of the worst practices at the 
front." 

Again we quote from Studies in the Scriptures,. 
Y'olume I, page 333, which words seem to be remarkSbPTRMBBH
 15, iqiq 


THE WATCH TOWER 


277 


ably accurate, especially when it is remembered that 
they were written thirty-three years ago: 

"The Scriptures show us that in this general rupture the 
nominal church (including all denominations) will be gradually
 drawn more and more to the side of the governments 
and the wealthy, and will lose much of its influence over the 
people." 

That the church nominal is leaning more and more 
to bureaucracy seems evident from some of the following
 quotations. Some of her bureaucratic efforts are 
extended in the direction of the humanitarian relief of 
the food and labor situation; some of them in directions
 not so commendable. First there is the declaration
 of the Canadian Methodist Conference, which expresses
 itself through its highest ruling body as being 
"in favor of the nationalization of our natural resources
, such as mines, water-power, fisheries, forests, 
the means of communication and transportation and 
public utilities". Then there are four authorized 
bishops of the Catholic church who have come out 
with smashing pronouncements in favor of co-operative
 production and distribution, state competition with 
private industry, and the proposition that the workers 
must become owners of the machinery of production 
and distribution. 

Then there is a similar pronunciamento by the Board 
of Bishops of the Methodist Episcopal Church of 
America, made public May 22nd. Among other things 
they say; 

"We favor an equitable wage for laborers, which shall have 
the right-of-way over rent, interest and profits. 

"We favor collective bargaining, as an instrument for the 
attainment of industrial justice and for training in democratic 
procedure." 

EPISCOPAL DECLARATION 

Not to be outdone by their more volatile Wesley an 
offspring, the staid, ultrarespectable, and usually reactionary
 Episcopal Church has formed a new league 
(of which there are legion these days) called the 
Church League for Social and Industrial Democracy. 
This league has formulated a very readable statement 
of principles, parts of which follow : 

"We believe that for us as Christians the proper procedure 
is not to formulate a social policy and then seek to justify it 
from our religion, but rather to start with our Lord's revealed 
will and to deduce from it our social programme ; with no 
equivocation or evasion. 

"We recognize that the mere transfer of social control 
from a self-seeking few to a self-seeking many would in itself
 be of no benefit to the world and of no honor to God, 
and we therefore are convinced that in terms of the new day 
of industrial democracy the Gospel of Salvation by sacrifice, 
service, and fraternity must be preached with no uncertain 
voice. 

"We deplore the contemporary suppression of freedom in 
America and shall work for the immediate restoration of those 
bulwarks of democracy, the rights of free assembly, free 
discussion, a free press and a free pulpit. Without these any 
minority seeking to express itself is encouraged to the use of 
force. 

"In making this statement we are convinced that we endorse 
no things irrelevant to the Church's abiding mission, but that 
we reaffirm the convictions of the great company of the 
prophets, saints and martyrs of days past, and of the Lord 
of the Kingdom, Our Savior and Redeemer, Jesus Christ, to 
the fulfillment of whose Holy Will we hereby dedicate ourselves
 anew." 

Our own position is an ungracious one at best, and 
we can never appear to good advantage in the eyes of 
the world, because we seem to them to have the spirit 
of cant and faultfinding. Surely it is much better for 
the Episcopal Church of America to be interested m 
the walfare of the people than it is for them to be indifferent
 ; but they are appearing on the scene with a 
program which is about four centuries too late. Had 
this powerful organization been awake to her privileges 
during the last forty years of espousing the message 
of Christs parousia, of his epiphany, and of his 
apocalypse, it would have been a different world. But 
God's purposes will be fulfilled, only through different 
channels. 

Next comes the Federal Council of the Churches of 
Christ in America with a long list of findings, partly 
political, partly ethical, considerably economic, and 
very slightly religious. An extensive statement on the 
subject in the Erie Daily Times gives a resumS of 
ecclesiastical statistics in the United States which is 
nothing if not s*inguine. It says: 

"There are in the United States 135,000 ministers, priests 
and rabbis in charge of congregations who minister to 
42,000,000 actual communicants. In the Protestant churches 
there are 115,000 ministers in charge of congregations, 
28,000,000 comunicants, an influential religious press, a great 
system of educational institutions, and large numbers of social 
agencies such as hospitals and child-caring foundations." 

Just what they mean by communicants is not made 
plain, and perhaps this is the loophole. The statement 
approaches perilously near to the precipice of inexactitude
, if, indeed, it does not tumble over. Certainly no 
one thinks that there are 42,000,000 regular church 
attendants, or even anywhere near that many names of 
living members on the church books in this country. 
Part of the conclusion of the statement follows: 

"It must not be forgotten that in social reconstruction we 
are dealing with matters that vitally affect the welfare and 
happiness of millions of human beings, and that we have come 
upon times when people are not submissive to injustice or to 
unnecessary privation and suffering. They are deeply and 
justly in earnest. As has been said, we are laying the foundation
 of a new world. If those who are the actual industrial, 
political and social leaders of the nation will not act upon 
the principle that the greatest shall be the servant of all, then 
the people themselves, with indignation and bitterness, are 
sure to take their destiny and that of the world into their own 
hands. The social question cannot be dealt with casually," 

WISDOM OF THEIB WISE MEN 

This whole statement displays considerable astuteness
 in the wisdom of the world, but reveals very little 
understanding of the church's work in the Gospel age. 
So far from pushing himself forward in an effort to 
adjust the delicate political questions between Jerusalem
 and Rome, so far from attempting to right all 
the moral wrongs with which Israel and all the surrounding
 nations were doubtless infested, our Lord 
would not even respond when "they would come and 
take him by force, to make him a king". (John 6:15) 
How disgusting and tame his course must have seemed 
to the "wise" ones of that day when the stage was all 
set for action and he failed to perform. How seemingly
 ungrateful he was for the "honor" which they 
wished to thrust upon him. But he had a mission: 
"My meat is to do the will of him that sent me and to 
finish his work". (John 4:36) Instead of satisfying 
the popular demand, "he departed into a mountain m 
pray". (Mark 6:46) There, sad and alone with the 
Father, beneath the cold and compassionless light of 
the stars, we can imagine him sinking upon the ground 
in the anguish of unutterable sorrow. Such unspeakable
 lack of understanding on the part of the people, 
who, instead of trying to find out Jehovah's purposes 
for them, were feverishly seeking to forward their own 
schemes for national glory. If their course was right, 
our Lord's course was wrong. If our Lord's eourse 


278 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa 


was right, the people were wrong, for the courses are 
certainly not alike. 

But let us vead on. From the New York Tribune, 
of June 14th, we quote the following: 

"Officials of the Church Peace Union gave out yesterday 
the text of a resolution signed by Cardinal Gibbons, former 
President Taft, Dr. John R. Mott, of the Y. M. C. A., Bishop 
Luther B. Wilson and others, urging the United States Senate 
to ratify the league of nations covenant. The resolution, 
which also asks all clergymen and religious bodies in the 
United States to exert influence upon Senators, recites that 
the league covenant embodies the first earnest effort to establish
 the Kingdom of Christ on earth and constitutes the only 
means of conserving the fruits of victory and preventing another
 world war." 

The proposed League of Nations has been called 
"the league with God left out". It is said the name 
of God does not appear in this lengthy, complex, carefully
 thought-out document. Such extracts as have 
appeared in the press give evidence of its being the 
work of the best minds of the world. But there is no 
earnest seeking after God's will ; no devout and reverent
 reliance on God's help; no simple and sincere faith 
in God's blessing on the endeavor. These are conspicuous
 by their absence. 

LEAGUE OF ALL RELIGIONS 

Spurred on by the hoped-for success of the League 
of Nations, it appears that we are now to have a league 
of all religions. The Detroit News, of August 2nd, 
has an article which contains the plan in detail, taken 
largely from the London Chronicle : 

"Dr. John Clifford, of London, Eng., the veteran pioneer 
of many forward religious movements, comes forward with a 
still more ambitious and comprehensive world religious project
, no less than the uniting of the religious sense of the 
world, whether it be Christian, Mohammedan, or Jewish, in 
a World League of Religions which shall be a spiritual 
counterpart of the League of Nations: not to establish uniformity
 of creed or ritual but to encourage unity of spirit and 
brotherliness of action — to be in fact, the soul and conscience 
of the League of Nations. Its definite aim would be the peace 
of the world." 

We append a part of Dr. Clifford's statement of the 
aims of the movement : 

"It is the aim of this new League that through it religion 
shall breathe a soul into the political machine, to give it driving
 power, to ffrant spiritual sanction for executive righteousness
 and peace. As the League of Nations intends to include 
all nations, so the League is designated to embrace all 
religions. A soul is to be breathed into the political machine. 
The League of Religions stands in relation to the League of 
Nations as its conscience; it must keep the compass steadiy 
pointing towards the pole-star of international justice, breathing
 throughout all the peoples a new spirit of international 
good will and creating a new heart of international amity, 
expressing the peace of God in political relationships and 
parliaments and treaties, instead of merely getting it preached 
in ecclesiastical assemblages. 

"Notice, that the first and always the principal object of the 
League would be the keeping of international peace by insistance
 on international brotherhood. No doubt it would 
extend its influence to other matters of prime importance. 
But its first and supreme duty would be to act as peacekeeper 
to the world. 

"To act as peacemaker would be only its second duty, if it 
had failed in the first. It would foster the growing protest 
of the human conscience against war, and concentrate all its 
learning and piety on the exploitation and laudation of the 
peace ideal. 

"As the League of Nations proposed to substitute cooperation
 for competition, so would the League of Religions substitute
 spiritual association for decisive sectarianism. The 
League of Nations proposes cooperation on a vast world-wide 
scale, so the second League hopes to diffuse enlightenment on 
a world-wide scale, and organize the moral sense of man to 
the highest limits of human existence." 


If Dr. Clifford fancies that he has had an original 
idea he is sadly mistaken and several centuries behind 
the times. For about the year 175 A. D. one learned 
gentleman by the name of Ammonius Saccus foisted 
upon mankind the same kind of a scheme. 

Ammonius Saccus, says Madame, was a Christian 
who adopted with such dexterity the doctrines of the 
pagan philosophers as to appear a Christian to the 
Christians and a Pagan to the Pagans, and, says Mosheim
, "as his genius was vast and comprehensive, so 
were his projects bold and singular, for he attempted 
a reconciliation or coalition of sects, whether philosophical
 or religious, and taught a doctrine which he 
looked upon as proper to unite them all, the Christian 
not excepted, in the most perfect harmony. 

"How this project was affected by Ammonius the 
writings of his disciples and followers that yet remain 
abundantly testify. All the Gentile religions, and even 
the Christian, were to be explained by the principles of 
this universal philosophy. But that in order to this 
the fables of the priests were to be removed from 
Paganism and the comments and interpretations of the 
disciples of Jesus from Christianity." — Ec. Hist. I, 
163. 

Evidently that deep laid scheme of Antichrist struck 
at the very foundation of the Gospel in excluding most 
of the New Testament from Christian doctrines. 
There was left only a formalistic, humanitarian, 
sermon-on-the-mount religion of which our modern 
rationalistic clergy are so fond. 

Does not this present-day coalition movement call 
clearly to mind the words of the Lord through the 
Prophet Isaiah? (Ch. 30:1) 

"Woe to the rebellious children, saith the Lord, that take 
counsel, but not of me; and that cover with a covering, but 
not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin: that walk to 
go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth; to 
strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to trust 
in the shadow of Egypt." 

SOME DISSENTING VOICES 

But in fairness it must be said that all individuals 
allied with ecclesiasticism do not look with equal approval
 upon the present day trend in church affairs. 
Dr. J. M. Gray, Dean of the Moody Bible Institute in 
Chicago, thinks that the church is getting out of her 
proper sphere when she gets into politics or even into 
industrial and civic reform. The August number of 
The Evangelical Christian, of Toronto, is responsible 
for the following excerpts of Dr. Gray's address to his 
graduating class : 

"The reported object of the World Church union was to 
give expression on questions of Civic reform, law enforce* 
ment, international morality, and world peace." 

" 'No sane man', he said, 'will question the desirability or 
necessity of these objects, and no well-balanced Christian will 
think it well-pleasing to God to neglect to promote them as 
an individual; but they are not the calling of the church considered
 either as an organization or an organism, and for the 
church throughout the world to become absorbed in them to 
the extent named is for the Bride of Christ to become a harlot. 
These things are by-products of Christianity, and when 
Christianity itself is promoted by the evangelization of the 
masses, these by-products are as certain to follow as the grass 
is certain to spring up after rain.'" 

"'As men and neighbors, as those of one blood and of one 
kin/ said Dr. Gray, 'Let us do all that we can legitimately do 
to reform the city and the state and to promote international 
morality and world peace, but when it comes to the formation 
of a World Church union to promote such things, important 
as they are, let us beware that we are not found righting 
against God, betraying the Lord for thirty pieces of silver and 
selling our birthright for a mess of pottage.' " 


Septhmhkfl 15, 1 9 1 9 


THE WATCH TOWER 


279 


The Detroit Xczcs, of August 2nd, devotes considerable
 space to a sermon delivered in that city by a 
Rev. Hertwig which, commenting upon our Lord's 
separateness from the world, says: 

"He was not an enemy of civil law and order, but its greatest 
friend. He preached obedience to the civil laws, but he did 
not want his church to use force in enforcing its tenets. 
Jesus knew that when the pulpit goes into lawmaking, instead 
of leaving this matter to the citizens of the state, then the 
pulpit can possibly make some very good and possibly very 
bad laws, but it will inevitably make hypocrites out of a great 
number of people who otherwise might have become good 
Christians, heart-Christians. The Pharisees and scribes longed 
for the time when they could be the lawmakers of the country. 

"They were the enemies of Jesus, because he would not 
join them in their propagandas. Jesus was loyal to the Roman 
government. They were disloyal, and accused Jesus of disloyalty
 before Pilate. Hypocrites! 

"We have lately heard exponents of 'righteousness' eulogize 
love of country and in the same breath preach hatred, suspicion
—and curse their enemies into hell. In some instances 
ministers of 'righteousness' have lent their pulpits to inciting 
mob-rule under guise of patriotism. The Pharisees and 
scribes oi old did the same thing and mob-lawed Jesus oi 
Nazareth to death." 

FOB RANSOM AND LORDS RETURN 

The World Conference on Fundamentals, held in 
Philadelphia during the latter part of May and mentioned
 in our issue of July 15th, formulated a doctrinal
 statement of nine articles which, aside from containing
 most of the hoary errors of the dark ages, embraces
 two very interesting items in the fifth and 
seventh articles. The middle article is evidently so 
placed by design. It reads: 

"We believe that the Lord Jesus Christ died for our sins 
according to the Scriptures as a representative and substitutionary
 sacrifice; and that all who believe in him are justified 
on the ground of his shed blood". 

Any adherence to the ransom sacrifice is gratifying 
in the face of such statements as one finds in "A Guide 
to the Study of the Christian Religion", a recent book 
by Professor Gerald Birney Smith, Professor of 
Christian Theology in the University of Chicago. 
Professor Smith comments on the Apostle's argument : 
"The statement in the Scriptures that 'without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins', is both 
foolish and futile". 

The seventh article of the doctrinal statement of 
the World Conference avers: 

"We believe in 'that blessed hope', the personal, premillenial 
and imminent return of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." 

Considering the fact that the distinction between our 
Lord's parousia, his epiphania and his apokalupsis is 
very seldom recognized, that article is particularly encouraging
. 


ANNOUNCING THE KINGDOM 

'And I saw as xt were a sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and his image, 
and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of the Lord God." "How beautiful
 upon the mountains are the feet of him that bringeih good tidings, that publisheth peace; that 
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth!"— Revelation 15:2; Isaiah 52:7. 

Not 



HEN the children of Israel were delivered 
from the Egyptian hordes, Moses, their 
leader, composed a song of praise, and 
standing upon the shores of the Red Sea 
all the people of Israel joined together in 
singing praises to Jehovah, their great Deliverer
. In symbolic phrase the Scriptures
 refer to this song, showing that it 
represented the followers of the Lord 
who, at the end of the Gospel age, would sing the song 
of Moses and the Lamb — the song of deliverance. 

St. John, the faithful servant of the Lord, because 
of his unswerving devotion to his Master was convicted
 for the alleged crime of sedition and was sentenced
 to exile on the Isle of Patmos. He was put to 
work in a rock quarry, and while there the Lord visited 
him and comforted his heart and gave to him a marvelous
 message. Before his mental vision was caused to 
pass a wonderful panorama oi the coming experiences 
of the church, whom he represented. Describing this 
vision he says: "And I saw as it were a sea of glass 
mingled with tire," meaning that the followers of 
Christ Jesus at the end of the Gospel age would have a 
clear vision of the great time of trouble and its right 
meaning, that they could see the distress of nations, 
the sea and the waves roaring, on every side men's 
hearts being troubled ; they would see and understand 
the meaning of wars, strikes, revolutions, and anarchy; 
and have an appreciation of such meaning. 

The sunlight striking the waves of the Red Sea made 
it appear as fire; and so now, when the Sun of Righteousness
 is rising with healing in his beams, the rays 
of light proceeding therefrom, falling upon the restless
 elements of humanity, cause the waves thereof to 


reflect a true interpretation of coming events, 
every one can see and understand these. Only those 
who have been delivered from the bondage of sin and 
death by a full and unreserved consecration to do the 
Father's will; those who have proven their love and 
devotion to the Lord and have fully and completely 
divorced themselves from the beast and his image; — 
only such are permitted to see and understand. These 
faithful followers of the Master are not participating 
in the disturbances of earth ; they are not engaging in 
wars; they are not advocating strikes nor participating 
in them; they are not fomenting revolutions, nor are 
they advising them; they are not taking part in the 
activities of either the radical or the conservative elements
 ; but they stand aloof, stand as it were, on the 
sea of glass. They have but one purpose and take 
but one course. 

The great Master, in this same vision to St. John, 
furthermore said, referring to the elements composing 
the beast : "These shall make war with the Lamb [and 
with the followers of the Lord Jesus on earth], and 
the Lamb shall overcome them : for he is Lord of 
lords, and King of kings: and they that are with him 
[faithfully follow and stand with him to the end] are 
the called, and the chosen, and faithful". — Revelation 
17:14. 

THE GOLDEN AGE NIGH 

These faithful followers of the Master standing on 
the sea of glass mingled with fire and beholding the 
enemy upon every side know that the conflict will soon 
end in what to worldly minds will seem the triumph 
of the evil one; they know that soon they must finish 
their course and pass off the earthly stage of action ; 
and yet they know there is something, by God's grace, 


280 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


PtTTSBl/KOH 


that they will be privileged to do, and, if faithful to 
him, will do, before they pass over. 

Beyond the time of trouble by the eye of faith they 
see the Golden Age of the glorious reign of the 
Messiah, which will bring peace and the blessings of 
life, liberty and happiness to the groaning creation of 
earth. They count it as their chief duty and privilege 
to announce to the world the coming of the Golden 
Age. It is part of their God-given commission. 

From time to time the gre?.t God of the universe 
has brought forth upon the stage of action his representative
 players to play their respective parts. How 
marvelously harmonious are their parts! Long before 
the days of St. John Jehovah gave to his faithful 
Prophet, Isaiah, a mental vision of the same time referred
 to by the Revelator, and this Prophet, beholding 
the faithful followers of the Lamb of God announcing 
the incoming of the Golden Age, with ecstasy and joy 
exclaimed: u How beautiful upon the mountains are 
the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth
 peace ; that bringeth good tidings of good, that 
publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God 
reigneth !" 

Truly the world is in distress and needs a message 
that will still the troubled waters and comfort the sad 
hearts. The whole creation is groaning and travailing 
in pain, waiting for the coming in of the Golden Age. 
Who has the privilege, then, of bearing to them this 
message of glad tidings? The answer is, The class 
whom St. John represented — the feet members of 
Christ — the last saints upon the earth. To the world 
of mankind these loyal followers of the Master look 
like other human beings, and hence their course is 
wholly misunderstood by the world. Truly the world 
of mankind is blind, the god of this world having 
blinded their minds, lest the glorious gospel of Messiah 
should shine into their hearts and they should see and 
be converted. While standing on this sea of glass, let 
us now view ourselves, as well as the vision before us, 
and ascertain from the Lord's Word and his dealings 
with us what is his will concerning us. 

The year 1918 was fraught with many fiery experiences
. A veritable whirlwind of war was raging, and 
the public mind in a high state of excitement, and 
everyone not openly advocating or participating in the 
war was looked upon with suspicion. Such a condition
 is to be expected in time of war. Having consecrated
 our all to the Lord to do his will, we could not 
participate in the human warfare to the extent of taking
 human life; hence we were wholly misunderstood 
and were privileged to suffer persecution as a result 
thereof. 

IN DECISION DAILY 

Obedient to the command of our Master, and 
recognizing our privilege and duty to make war against 
the strongholds of error which have so long held the 
people in bondage, our vocation was and is to announce
 the incoming glorious kingdom of Messiah. 
While striving faithfully to perform our covenant 
thus, there suddenly broke over our heads a terrific 
storm, and like sheep the Lord's people were either 
scattered or driven to cover. So pitiless was the onslaught
 of the enemy that many of the Lord's dear 
nock were stunned and stood still in amazement, praying
 and waiting for the Lord to indicate his will. On 
every hand Bible students, because of their faithfulness
 to their Lord, were reproached, and these reproaches
 became so severe that their heart sentiments 
found expression for a time in the words of the 
Prophet Jeremiah: "I am in derision daily, every one 
mocketh me. * * * For since I spake, I cried out, 1 
cried violence and spoil; because the word of the Lord 
was made a reproach unto me, and a derision daily. 
Then I said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak 
any more in his name." But notwithstanding the 
momentary discouragement, there was a burning desire
 to proclaim the message of the kingdom, and like 
Jeremiah the faithful followers of the Master said: 
"But his word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut 
up in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and 
I could not stay; for I heard the defaming of many, 
fear on every side". 

In sober moments a Christian naturally asks himself
, Why am I on the earth? And the answer of 
necessity must be, The Lord has graciously made me 
his ambassador to bear the divine message of reconciliation
 to the world, and my privilege and duty is to 
announce that message. 

Since the Revelator announces war between the 
beast and the Lamb, we may be sure that the beast will 
put forth every possible effort to hinder and destroy 
the promulgation of the message of truth. Such has 
been the case up till this time. When the storm somewhat
 abated we began to look about to see what could 
be done for further volunteer service, and to our 
amazement we found that all the original plates from 
which had heretofore been printed the Peoples Pulpit
 and Bible Students Monthly, together with the 
official files, had been destroyed. We wondered why 
the Lord permitted this, but concluded that it must 
have been for some good purpose; else he would not 
have permitted it 

FUTURE SEEVICE 

From every part of the field has come the cry from 
those who have the harps of God and who stand upon 
the sea of glass, saying: "What more is there that we 
can do?" We have observed throughout the country 
many towns and cities are passing ordinances which 
forbid the distribution of any papers except to subscribers
 and those who have them sent through the 
mails. Seeking diligently and prayerfully to know the 
Lord's will, the thought came to us that we should arrange
 for some publication to carry the message now 
due, and to put it in such form that it will be sought 
after and read by the people. We were reminded that 
Brother Russell once contemplated a publication of 
this kind, and we reasoned that probably the time wa:> 
due for such a publication. The result is that under 
the Lord's providence we have arranged for the publication
 of a new magazine under the name and title 
The Golden Age. 

Three brethren, strong, young, and vigorous and 
wholly devoted to the Lord and his cause, will have 
the active charge of the publication of this magazine 
and conduct the mechanical part thereof, but it will 
be published by the advice, aid and consent of the Society
 and will especially feature the message of truth 
now due to be announced. 

Many wonderful events are transpiring today, all of 
which have a Scriptural meaning. The magazine will 
carry these current events, together with the Scriptural 
explanation of the same. In addition thereto, there 
will be a regular religious department; also departments
 relating to agriculture, labor, science in the light 


Sbftemiui 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


281 


of the Scriptures, and the relation of these things to 
the Lord's kingdom. The purpose of the magazine is 
to make announcement to the world that the Golden 
Age is at hand and the hope is by this means to 
bind up the broken hearted and to comfort those that 
mourn and turn the minds of the people to the Lord. 
Never before in the world's history has there been 
such a propitious time and opportunity for doing good 
to the people. All mankind is in distress; all are in 
perplexity. The panacea for these human ills can be 
found only in the message of the kingdom, and the 
Lord's ambassadors are granted the privilege and opportunity
 of delivering this message of consolation. 
The Lord's representatives, therefore, will have the 
opportunity of carrying this message of glad tidings 
into the homes of the land, and that in such a form 
that the people will read and appreciate it. 

Looking back again to the picture made by Moses 
leading the children of Israel out from Egypt, we note 
that Israel was commanded to borrow of the Egyptians
: "And they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels 
of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment. And the 
Lord gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians
, so that they lent unto them such things as they 
required." — Exodus 12:35, 36. 

Each part of the work seems to fill a certain requirement
. The Old Theology tracts were used for a 
time and to a good purpose, and then the wise and 
faithful servant of the Lord chose another way; and 
we know that it was his purpose, shortly before his 
death, to inaugurate another method of carrying the 
message to the people. Past experience has demonstrated
 that one who buys a book, paper, or magazine, 
is more likely to read it than if he receives it freely, as 
a gift. It seems worse than useless to distribute something
 unless it be read. The time seems opportune to 
pass on to the people such food as they will consider 
of value, and which is of great value, and which they 
will appreciate. For this opportunity the Lord's consecrated
 saints throughout the land have been waiting
 now for some time. We believe the new magazine
, The Golden Age, is the very thing that the 
people will desire, and let us pray that if it be the 
Lord's will he will favor it with his great blessing. 
Every reader of The Watch Tower has wanted to 
pass on the message of glad tidings. Now will you 
avail yourself of this opportunity? 

HOW TO PROCEED 

The organization that handled the Seventh Volume 
work proved a wonderful success. Seven thousand 
of the friends were engaged in that special work. We 
are asking the classes everywhere to revive that organization
 and put it in proper form. Let us remember
 that in unity, in the spirit of Christ, is there 
strength; that if we have our hearts in a right condition
, closely united together in love, God will manifest
 his strength in our behalf. In the present work 
we desire that every one of the consecrated who has 
a great love and burning zeal for the Lord and his 
cause shall participate. 

The first issue of The Golden Age we hope to have 
in your hands on or before the first of October next. 
We hope that every reader of The Watch Tower 
will subscribe for it, and that you will immediately 
send in your subscription that we may have a proper 
list with which to begin work. The subscription price 


for The Golden Age is $1.50 a year, or 75 cents for 
six months. We then advise that as soon as you receive
 a sample copy, together with subscription blanks, 
you begin canvassing for the magazine. That this 
may be done systematically the class organizers should 
properly district the territory and assign to each one so 
much to do, and each one that is willing should be 
given a part in the work. Ones more particularly 
adapted for certain districts should be selected to work 
those districts. Every home should be canvassed and 
subscriptions solicited for The Golden Age. Detailed
 instructions are sent to the class organizers as 
to the manner of doing this work. 

The possibilities in connection with this branch of 
the work seem more stupendous than any one thing we 
have yet engaged in. With thousands of solicitors in 
the field soliciting the people for a magazine which 
they really want and which will bring to them a great 
comfort, it necessarily will result in a wide spread of 
the message of truth. The magazine will be issued 
twice each month ; possibly, later, once each week. 

PRESENT PRIVILEGES 

St. Paul said; "Woe is me if I preach not the 
Gospel". We are sure that he here expressed the heart 
sentiment of every child of God who has the opportunity
 of proclaiming the message. The door of opportunity
 is opening before you. Enter it quickly. 
Remember as you go forth in this work you are not 
soliciting merely as the agent of a magazine, but you 
are an ambassador of the King of kings and Lord of 
lords, announcing to the people in this dignified manner
 the incoming of the Golden Age, the glorious kingdom
 of our Lord and Master, for which true Christians
 have hoped and prayed for many centuries. You 
are an angel of peace, bearing to a war-torn, sin sick, 
sorrowing and broken-hearted world the glad message 
of salvation. How wonderful is our privilege ! 

To do good unto others is Christlike. To bear them 
a message of peace and comfort is to do them great 
good. The angels of heaven have not enjoyed the 
sweet privilege that is now the portion of the saints 
of the living God this side the vail. As these messengers
 go forth telling of the Golden Age and its 
blessings coming they may be tired and worn and 
weary, and feel their own weaknesses, but to the Lord 
they are beautiful in proportion to their zeal and loving
 devotion to him in making announcement of his 
kingdom. For their encouragement he says to them: 
"How beautiful upon the mountains [the kingdoms] 
are the feet of him [the last members on earth] that 
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that 
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation
". 

Those who are wholly devoted to the Lord; those 
who are fearless, whose hearts are pure, who love God 
and the Lord Jesus with all their mind, strength, soul 
and being, will, as opportunity is afforded, rejoice to 
participate in this work. Ask the Lord for his guidance 
and direction that he may make you a true, faithful, 
and an efficient ambassador. Then, with a song of 
joy in your heart, go forth to serve him. As you sing 
the song of Moses and the Lamb in your heart, may 
the blessing you receive expand and overflow unto 
others, that they too may rejoice that the Golden Age 
is at hand. 


QUESTIONS OF INTEREST AND IMPORT 


IN COERECTION 

Question. — Does not the statement on page 248 of 
the August 15, 1918, Watch Tower in effect deny the 
ransom when it says concerning John 2:19, 21: 'The 
temple which Christ spoke of, 'Destroy this temple 
[the body of Christ] and in three [one thousand year] 
days I will raise it up [resurrect it to the divine 
plane]/ was first his literal, perfect body of flesh and 
also his mystical body, the church"? 

Answer. — The statement is evidently in error. This 
is the first time that it has been called to our attention 
Either it has gone unnoticed by the most of our 
readers, or else our readers have been heeding the 
Apostle's injunction to 'prove all things and to hold 
fast that which is good' — discarding that which is erroneous
. It would, academically speaking, constitute 
a denial of the ransom, in that it implies a taking back 
of the ransom price after three thousand years. But 
it is certain that no such thought was intended by the 
writer. 

HOW READEST THOU? 

Question. — In the July 1 Watch Tower, page 196, 
the assertion is made that consecration must precede 
justification. Is this not contrary to Scripture and to 
what Brother Russell taught? 

Answer. — You have evidently failed to read Brother 
Russell's observations on this point with sufficient care. 
We cite you to Z '14-67, col. 2, par. 1 ; Z '15-292, 293; 
Z '16-281. These are among his latest and clearest expressions
 on the subject, and we believe you will find 
them quite in harmeny with every Scripture. "There 
is, therefore, now no condemnation to them which are 
in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit." — Romans 8:1. 

"MODEL BIBLE STUDIES" 

Question. — A brother writes: Is it proper for an 
elder to conduct what he calls a model Bible study, by 
giving out in advance to the members of the class 
texts of Scripture, and then have the members appear 
at the next meeting and give a sermonette on these 
texts ? 

Answer. — Such a course of study was long ago 
adopted by the nominal systems and has never proven 
profitable. We would strongly advise against such a 
course for that reason, and for the further following 
reasons : The messenger to the Laodicean church, 
evidently directed of the Lord, outlined a proper 
course for Berean Bible study. To this end Question 
Booklets were prepared and printed and furnished the 
classes, and a systematic method of studying the Bible 
in connection with the Studies in the Scriptures 
outlined. The Scriptures speak of "that messenger" 
as the wise and faithful servant of the Lord. We 
would therefore think that he possessed much more 
wisdom for directing class study than any elder of 
any class. Our conclusion, therefore, would be that 
where an elder or leader of the class adopts his own 
methods, ignoring the Studies in the Scriptures, 
sooner or later difficulties will ensue. This has always 
been the history of such attempts to substitute some 
individual's theory for that which has been outlined by 
Brother Russell. In this connection we are reminded 
of the admonition of the Apostle Paul in writing to 
Timothy. — 1 Timothy 6:3-5. 

We realize that we are in perilous times in which the 
adversary takes advantage of every opportunity to 
confuse the Lord's sheep. We know that we have the 


truth in the Studies in the Scriptures, the helps 
divinely provided. Why then deviate from them and 
take any chances by opening the way for the adversary 
to cause trouble and disruption in the classes? Let us 
remember again the words of St. Paul in Acts 20: 
28-30, and particularly the solemn warning and admonition
 written in commenting on this Scripture as 
appears in The Watch Tower, November i, 1916. 

FOE THE CLASS TO SAY 

Question. — A meeting is being held at the home of 
Brother A. Would it be proper for an elder to persuade
 Brother A to discontinue such meeting at his 
home and then to have it announced that such meeting 
is discontinued at his request? 

Answer. — The duty always devolves upon the 
ecclesia to determine when and where meetings shall 
be held. It is often customary for an ecclesia that is 
of some size to delegate this authority to the elders, or 
to an executive committee selected from among the 
elders. Whichever has the authority to fix the time 
and place of meetings would be the only one to determine
 when and for what causes such meetings should 
be suspended. It would therefore be manifestly improper
 for any brother, whether elder or not, to attempt
 to persuade or to persuade the brother at whose 
house the meeting is being held to have it discontinued, 
but the matter should be properly brought up before 
the body having the authority to fix the time and place 
of meetings and let it be determined there. "Let all 
things be done decently and in order." 

GOD'S WORD FOR HIS PEOPLE 

Question. — Apparently you people do not count 
much on special revelations of truth by the holy 
Spirit. Is it not reasonable to expect that God is as 
much interested in his church as he was in his prophets 
of old? 

Answer. — We are told that "holy men of God spake 
as they were moved by the holy Spirit". (2 Peter 1:21) 
Our Lord Jesus and his apostles spoke and wrote in 
similar manner. As a result we have through their 
writings the full measure of the divine revelation. 
The Word of God is sufficient that the man of God 
may be thoroughly furnished. (2 Timothy 3:16,17) 
If the Scriptures are sufficient, then there is no need 
for the holy Spirit to tell us anything further. When 
the holy Spirit came upon the Lord's people at Pentecost
, it enabled them to understand the deep things of 
God. It did not ignore the Word in any way, nor did 
it attempt to teach something inharmonious with it. It 
quickened their understanding so that, as the Scriptures
 became due to be understood, the people of God 
were enabled to understand them. 

Thus we see that God had a great fund of instruction
 laid up long ago, to be used by his people when the 
proper time came ; and as we come into harmony with 
him, he will guide us into the right understanding of 
how to receive the blessings which he designs his 
people to have. This statement does not ignore our 
Lord's declaration that when the holy Spirit would 
come it would guide his church into all truth. (John 
16:13) The Spirit merely enables its possessor to understand
 the things written aforetime for our admonition
 and the things written by the apostles during the 
time of the early church. (Romans 15:4; 1 Corinthians
 10:11) We who are spirit-begotten are therefore
 to expect the clarifying of our understanding that 
we mav be able to see and understand. 


282 



BETHEL TO BE RESTORED 

"Arise, go up to Beth-el, mnd dwell there/'— Genesis 35 :i 
T 15 hardly necessary to remind the read- able lodgings ai reasonable rates. 
ers of The Watch Tower that in midsummer
 of 1918 the officers of the 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
were taken away to prison on the charge 
of sedition. It is rather interesting to 
note that the charge chiefly brought 
against the Master and those who have 
striven to follow in his footsteps has been 
that of sedition, and usually die result of public excitement
 In the summer of 1918 the hosts of Germany 
were pressing hard on the Allies, and the excitement 
of the public mind in America ran high. It was an 
easy matter to charge anyone with sedition, and still 
easier to convict them. W T e are sure that had the 
officials fully understood the purpose of our Society 
they would have seen clearly that there was not the 
slightest bit of disloyalty among the Society's officers, 
but that their whole purpose was to announce the kingdom
 of Messiah, through which blessings will come to 
all the families of the earth. 

Conditions made it necessary to place someone 
quickly in charge of the affairs of the Society. The 
brethren selected were not men of the greatest experience
; and this was not to their discredit. Times were 
threatening, and the brethren left in charge deemed it 
wise to remove the office to Pittsburgh. The Tabernacle
 was sold, and the furnishings and equipment of 
the Bethel Home were sold or otherwise disposed of. 
Later, as is also well known to the readers of The 
Watch Tower, the officers of the Society, together 
with their companions in bonds, were released from 
prison and again took charge of the official affairs of 
the Society. In the course of time the Circuit Court 
of Appeals in the City of New York reversed the judgment
 against these brethren and they were released 
from the sentence and judgment, while the indictment 
still stands as in the beginning. 

MAINTENANCE COST IN BROOKLYN 

When the officers of the Society learned that the 
Bethel Home had been dismantled they were very 
much disappointed, yet reasoned that the Lord had 
permitted it and would overrule the matter to his glory 
1h some way. On account of severe illness the President
 of the Society was absent from the office for 
several months. When he returned the Board of 
Directors took up for consideration the advisability of 
restoring the Bethel Home and establishing the offices 
of the Society there. A committee was appointed to 
canvass the situation carefully and to report. The report
 of the committee disclosed that the cost for maintaining
 the office of the Society at Pittsburgh is fully 
$1,000 per month more than to maintain it in Brooklyn
 at the Bethel. In other words, if the office could 
be established at Bethel Home and maintained there 
a saving of at least $1,000 a month would be had. In 
addition to this, the facilities for printing at New York 
are far superior to those at Pittsburgh. 

It was found to be very inconvenient to make shipments
 from the Pittsburgh office to foreign countries 
and such shipping entailed considerable extra expense. 

Furthermore, the members of the office force ;it 
Pittsburgh have found it very difficult to procure suitThe
 sisters have 
found it very burdensome to work in the office during 
the day and in addition thereto to cook their own meals 
and take care of their rooms. This difficulty is entirely
 overcome at Brooklyn by lodging all the workers 
in the Bethel and all eating in one dining room. 

The morning Bethel service and the discussion of 
Bible questions at meal hours has always been a great 
blessing to the workers, and being deprived of this 
blessing for the past year has been keenly felt by all. 

But above all these things there seems to stand out 
to the fore the fact that Brother Russell was the wise 
and faithful servant of the Lord of the harvest, and 
that the Lord made him ruler over all of his house,, 
and that he, acting under the direction of the Lord, 
had established the Bethel Home. Notwithstanding 
the fact that the Society in 1909 owned its own building 
at Pittsburgh, where the work was done and the family 
was housed, yet Brother Russell vacated it (and left 
it vacant for some time), moved to Brooklyn and 
bought other property, from which the work was continued
, and in that same year he established the Bethel 
Home (meaning the House of God), which, to the 
truth friends, has been the dearest spot on earth from 
then until now. From all over the country have come 
inquiries from many friends: "Will the Bethel Home 
be restored?" 

ROOM FOR OFFICES AND HOME 

Aftering hearing the report of the committee and 
carefully and prayerfully canvassing the situation, the 
Board of Directors arrived at the unanimous decision 
that the main office of the Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society should be removed from Pittsburgh and 
established at Brooklyn in the Bethel Home. There is 
ample space in the latter building to put the offices, and 
also to house comfortably all the necessary workers. 
It is the intention of the management to have at the 
Bethel as permanent residents only such as are necessary
 for the purpose of carrying on the work. Of 
course, there will be a limited amount of space for the 
entertainment of the friends from time to time who 
come to make short visits at the home. Realizing that 
those in charge of the offices and work occupy a position
 of trust toward all the truth friends and toward 
the Lord, it is the purpose and intention to operate the 
offices and home strictly on an efficiency plan and for 
the best interests of the cause. 

Whether a mistake was made or not in removing 
from Brooklyn to Pittsburgh in 1918 need not now be 
seriously considered. If a mistake, it is past, and cannot
 be remedied by giving to it serious consideration. 
We have too much before us to do to waste any time 
in discussing the things that have passed. Let us remember
 the Apostle's admonition: "Forgetting the 
things that are behind and looking to the things that 
are before," etc. Let us give our time, energy and 
strength now to doing with our might what our hands 
find to do to the Lord's glory. 

We believe the friends everywhere will rejoice to 
know that the Bethel Home is to be restored and that 
the remaining work will be directed from that place. 
All mail for the Society from and after October 1, 
1919, should be addressed Watch Tower Bible & Tract 
Society, 124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y. 


Convention at Auburn, Me., Sept. 19-21: For particulars 
address Mrs. J. H. Jodrey, Fairview Ave., Auburn, Me. 


Convention at Indianapolis, Ind., Sept. 26-28: For local 
information address Edgar M. Ross, 349 Lesley Ave. 


2S3 


JESUS IN PETER'S HOME 

October 19, — Mark i .2q~7>9. 

THE GOOD PHYSICIAN—CASTING OUT A DEMON— THE DEMON'S TESTIMONY AS TO JESUS* IDENTITY REJECTED — GOD'S PEOPLE NOT 
IGNORANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES— MANY ISRAELITES HEALED BY OUR LORD — GIFT OF HEALING IN THE EARLY CHURCH— NO 
MIRACULOUS HEALING AT THE PRESENT TIME AUTHORIZED OF GOD— HEALING TO BE PROMINENT FEATURE OF THE KINGDOM. 

"Jesus said unto him, Today is salvation come to this house." — Luke 19:9. 



-I LTHOUGH Simon Peter and Andrew were 
natives of Bethsaida, a few miles north of 
Capernaum (John 1:44), they had evidently 
settled down in the latter city, perhaps because 
larger and more favorable to their business. 
When Peter, Andrew, James, and John accepted 
our Lord's invitation to become fishers of men, 
they did not immediately depart from home. 
Some hours if not some days elapsed between 
the fishing experience and the narrative of this 
lesson. The Sabbath had come; and Jesus with 
the four disciples went into the synagogue, where he was 
recognized and given an opportunity for teaching. In the 
synagogues of olden times there was great liberty to any one 
who had the necessary education and faith in the Holy Scriptures
, to discuss their messages. In some respects that greater 
liberty was more favorable to the truth than are the present 
circumscribed methods of Christendom, in which each party 
or sect holds absolute control and refuses liberty of discussion
 of its own tenets as well as of the Scriptures. The 
Lord's people should jealously guard Lord's day opportunities, 
so that they be not occasions for the overthrow of faith by 
those who reject the Word of God. At the same time the 
blessing of the Lord's day, the purity of truth and the clearness
 of the faith would certainly be greatly stimulated by a 
full liberty of discussion of the meaning of the Scriptures in 
a reverent manner. 

Our Lord's teachings impressed his hearers as being reasonable
 and positive; and this is one of the characteristics of the 
truth today. The divine message is so clear and so forceful 
that it cannot be gainsaid. It appeals to the minds as well 
as to the hearts of reasonable people now as it did then. On 
the contrary, the general mixture of error as then held by 
the Scribes and the Pharisees and Doctors of the Law, and 
as now held by the various denominations of Catholics and 
Protestants and their doctors of divinity, is confusing, indefinite
, self-contradictory and generally unsatisfactory. 

THE DEVIL A CHURCH-GOER 

The devil went to church then, as he not infrequently does 
now; and he was as opposed to having the truth preached 
then as he is now. The attendants of the Capernaum synagogue
, however, were seemingly of a nobler type than of the 
synagogue of Nazareth, who gnashed upon our Lord and 
sought to take his life. In the Capernaum synagogue the 
majority of the people were less under the influence of Satan, 
although one of their number was more particularly possessed 
by a demon, here called "an unclean spirit". We know nothing 
of our Lord's discourse; but from the fact that this demon 
became so excited under the preaching, we may infer that our 
Lord was explaining to the people the origin of sin and the 
power of Satan and of the fallen angels in respect to humanity, 
showing that all these downward tendencies were more and 
more injurious to men and should be resisted, that divine 
fellowship and communion should be sought, and that repentance
 and reformation and resistance of the evil one were 
necessary to physical health as well as to a closer approach 
to our God. 

The demon, one of the fallen angels from the time of the 
Flood (Jude 6, 7; 2 Peter 2:4), believed that our Lord's teachings
 were condemnatory of himself and his associates in evi], 
and cried out, using the mouth of the possessed man. Unquestionably
 the fallen angels, although restrained by chains 
of darkness from manifesting themselves to humanity until 
a certain time, have contact with each "other and are well 
aware of procedures in general. As Satan recognized Jesus 
in the temptation in the wilderness, so all of the fallen angels 
knew that the Holy One of God had become a man for the 
purpose of redeeming, reclaiming and restoring humanity 
from the fallen condition superinduced by Satan's lying ambition
. Apparently, too, these demons had some knowledge of 
the divine times and seasons, though we need not suppose 
that they had a definite or particular knowledge; for our Lord 
declared that at that time neither himself nor the holy angels 
knew of the day and the hour of his coming in glory and of 
the establishment of his kingdom. It is not supposable, therefore
, that the fallen angels knew more on this subject. However
, there is a great difference between not knowing the 


exact day or hour of a matter and not having any idea whatever
 respecting it. Apparently this demon recognized that the 
time was still distant when the power of Satan and all the 
fallen angels is doomed to be overthrown. 

The demon's testimony seemed to be reverential, and by 
some might have been construed to be a testimony in our 
Lord's favor. Jesus, however, was not willing to accept such 
a testimony from such a source, even as the Apostle Paul was 
similarly unwilling to receive testimony of the possessed 
woman who declared of Paul and Silas : "These be the servants
 of the Most High God, which show unto us the way of 
life". (Acts 16:17) The divine method seems to be to make 
a clear separation between the servants of God and the servants
 of evil. The privilege of testifying for God or being 
ambassadors for the truth is a favor reserved for the Lord's 
own people. He seeketh not the evil one nor the fallen 
demons nor evil men or women to be heralds of the glad 
tidings. The Lord's people should note this matter carefully, 
and resent the services of any who do not give evidence of 
being in heart union with the Lord. "Unto the wicked God 
saith, What hast thou to do to take my covenant into thy 
mouth? Seeing thou hatest instruction, and easiest my words 
behind thee". (Psalm 50:16) Spiritualists, Christian Scientists
, trance mediums, hypnotists, etc., would fain associate 
themselves more or less with the name of Jesus and seem to 
be servants of the light. But all children of the light should 
be on guard against these ; for however sincere they may 
sometimes appear, are undoubtedly the tools of the prince of 
darkness, who would array himself as an angel of light in 
order to deceive and mislead the children of the light, the 
children of God. 

NOT IGNORANT OF SATAN'S DEVICES 

At our Lord's command, the demon came out of the man, 
tearing him ; that is to say, causing a convulsion, a fit. Luke, 
describing this event, says that the demon threw the man in 
the midst; that is, the man fell upon the floor of the synagogue 
in a fit, but was otherwise unhurt, the demon not having 
power to do him injury, under our Lord's command. The 
assembled company was astonished, and inquired what new 
teaching was this which had authority to cast out the evil 
demons. Our Lord's enemies, it will be remembered, subsequently
 charged him with casting out demons by Beelzebub, 
the prince of demons, Satan. Hence we see the propriety of 
our Lord's having refused to receive testimony from this 
demon. To have received such testimony would have been 
more or less acknowledging them and giving them credit for 
truthfulness; whereas the Scriptures everywhere represent 
Satan and his fallen spirits as lying spirits, deceiving the 
people. 

Undoubtedly there are cases of demon possession and obsession
 today. The custom of our time removes these to 
asylums, where they are called insane. It is not our thought 
that all the inmates of insane asylums are possessed of demons, 
but that many of them are. As far as we are able to form a 
conclusion on the subject, it would be that probably more 
than one-half are demon-possessed and that less than one-half 
are insane through diseases of the brain. In all parts of the 
world this demon possession seems to prevail, and the tendency
 seems always to be downward. They are unclean 
spirits, delighting not in holy, pure, and good things, but in 
impurity and unhoHness. Their influence is exerted not only 
upon the possessed ones, but upon others, in evil directions. 

Even spirit mediums are well aware of the danger they 
encounter in acting as mediums at all. They caution one another
 not to yield the will too far, but to maintain a self 
control to a certain extent, to yield themselves to the control 
of these spirits only in a definitely limited degree lest they 
become possessed; for if the evil spirit obtains full control, 
the human will is powerless to expel the intruder and the man 
is at the mercy of the demon, and from the human standpoint 
is denominated crazy, more particularly so if several demons 
gain possession of the same person and thus several wills 
seek to control the one organization. In proportion as a 
knowledge of God and of the principles of righteousness advance
 and open the eyes of human understanding, in this same 
proportion the evil spirits find it necessary to be coy in their 
deceptions; and proportionately the Lord's people need the 
protection which God has provided for them; namely, the 


284 


SePTBMBKR »3, 1919 


r n k iv a re n / n w n n 


-jsr> 


holy Spirit, the spirit of a sound mind, the spirit of love, joy, 
peace in the holy Spirit of the Lord. 

Apparently, however, at that time the masses of the people 
were less deceived on this subject than they are today. Acting
 more skilfully today than in the past, Satan is leading on 
as a scientist and is pooh-poohing suggestions that there are 
evil spirits or a Beelzebub or prince of demons. To such an 
extent has he prevailed that many of the leading theologians 
of the world, in all denominations of Christendom, agree that 
there is no devil, that there are no demons, and that our Lord 
performed no such miracles as are here recited. They claim 
that the poor ignorant people of our Lord's day did not understand
 what they were talking about, and said that a man had 
a devil when he merely had a nervous disease, a fit, etc. 
Christian Science is one of Satan's latest fads, which under 
the guise of morality is seeking to destroy both common sense 
and Christianity among the Lord's people. It is one of Satan's 
latest devices, disproving himself and thus turning attention 
away from the powerful influence which he exercises in the 
world. — 2 Corinthians 2:11; Ephesians 6:12; 2 Kings 6:16. 

OTHER NOTABLE MIRACLES 

After the synagogue incident our Lord went to the home 
of Simon Peter and Andrew, James and John accompanying 
him. Peter's mother-in-law lay sick of a fever; and one of 
the evangelists intimates that it was of a violent form. For 
the first time it seems to have occurred to the disciples that 
our Lord's power, which they had seen manifested on various 
occasions, might be exercised on behalf of this sick woman. 
Now, their faith grown stronger, they mentioned her case to 
Jesus; and he took her by the hand and lifted her up. Immediately
 the fever left her. Not only so, but instead of 
being weak and enervated, as is usually the case after a severe 
fever, she was strong and vigorous and able to serve the 
family, probably in the setting forth of refreshments and in 
other household matters. This fact demonstrates that her cure 
could have been nothing shortof miraculous. The operation 
of the mind, even if it could in any measure have destroyed 
the fever condition, could not have made good the waste of 
strength in the system accomplished by the fever. 

Sunset saw the gathering of numbers of the sick and demonpossessed
 ones. This was probably for two reasons: (1) it 
would be during the cooler time of the day that the diseased 
could come in a warm country such as Palestine; (2) it was 
the Sabbath day, and the Jews were all strict Sabbatarians. 
We remember that on another occasion the Pharisees found 
fault with Jesus because he had healed a man on the Sabbath 
day; and that our Lord had exposed their hypocrisy in the 
matter by showing that if it had been an ox or an ass which 
had fallen into a ditch, and where there might be a monetary 
loss if the creature were not assisted, their reasoning would be 
more correct. Our Lord, however, seems to have preferred 
the Sabbath days for his healing work; at all events some of 
his most notable miracles were done on the Sabbath day. His 
reason for so doing was not, we believe, to exasperate the 
Pharisees and Scribes, or merely to show the hyprocrisy of 
their formalism, but because the Sabbath days served a special 
purpose as an illustration of the great Sabbath that was to 
come, the Millennium, in which all the families of the earth 
shall be blessed by this good Physician, who has already given 
his life for the redemption of the life of the world, and who 
during this Millennial age, his bride the church cooperating, 
will bless and heal all the willing and obedient of the human 
family, lifting' them up, up, up out of Adamic sin and death 
conditions to the perfection of life lost in Eden through the 
disobedience of the first Adam. 


MANY CURES PERFORMED BT SATANIC POWER 

Many of the Lord's consecrated people of today, noting the 
cure of diseases by spirit mediums, mind curists, hypnotists, 
Christian Scientists, Mormons, etc., are inclined to think of 
these cures of our day in much the same light as we think 
of our Lord's cures recorded in today's lesson. This is a 
natural tendency. It is natural for us to seek to walk by 
sight and not by faith. Some of these dear friends inquire 
of us : "Is not our Lord Jesus as able to heal the sickness of 
our bodies today as he was able to heal the sickness of the 
Jews at Capernaum?" We answer: Yes, unquestionably; 
more than this, we hold that our Lord has more power today 
than he had then. 

It was after our Lord had finished his sacrifice, after he 
had risen from the dead, a life-giving spirit, that he declared 
to his disciples : "All power is given me in heaven and in 
earth". We have not a question, therefore, respecting our 
Lord's ability to perform today and through his people of 
today any miracles that he performed in person at the first 
advent. We are asked: "If this be so, should we not expect 
healings? Did not our Lord say: 'These signs shall follow 
them that believe : In my name shall they cast out devils and 
heal the sick, and if they drink any deadly thing it shall not 
hurt them,' etc?" (Mark 16:18) We answer that these 
words are spurious, that they are not found in any of the old 
manuscripts, that all scholars admit not only that they are 
forgeries, but that no part of the 16th chapter of Mark, after 
the eighth verse, is genuine. 

Nothing is more attractive to the human mind than the 
miraculous power of healing disease. No one enjoys disease, 
pain and suffering. People would be glad to be healed of 
disease, even if they were assured that the cures were performed
 by the power of Satan himself. It should not surprise 
us today that many false doctrines, wholly out of harmony 
with God's Word, commend themselves to the poor groaning 
creation by promises of relief from physical ailments, without 
medicine, and theoretically by the power and favor of God, 
and supposedly on proof of the doctrines advocated by the 
healers. 

But since these healers hold various and antagonistic doctrines
, it is manifest that not all of them are of God; if any 
of them is. To our understanding, the Bible teaches that at 
the present time no miraculous healing is authorized by God's 
Word. St. Paul declared by inspiration that the gifts granted 
to the early church, and exercised by Jesus and his apostles 
and those to whom the apostles personally communicated 
them, would pass away. We believe that these gifts did pass 
away; that they gave place to the next and higher manifestation
 of divine favor, namely, the fruits of the holy Spiritmeekness
, gentleness, long-suffering and love — as evidences of 
God's favor and of membership in the church of the first-born. 
The miracles which Jesus and the apostles wrought were 
merely with a view to the establishment of the early church 
Nowhere is it intimated that it was the divine will that all 
people should be healed of disease during this age. 

The general healing of disease will doubtless be a prominent 
feature of the work of Messiah's glorious kingdom after its 
establishment. Not only will the ailments of the flesh be 
lifted, but restitution processes will go on, step by step, lifting 
humanity out of sin, disease and imperfection, up to full and 
absolute perfection, except in the case of those who wilfully 
and deliberately oppose the divine arrangement, and who in 
due time will be cut off from life in the second death. All 
the remainder will ultimately reach the glorious condition mentioned
 in Scripture where there will be no more sighing, no 
more crying, no more dying ; for the former things of sin and 
death will have parsed away. — Revelation 21 11-5. 


A LESSON IN TRUST 

October 26. — Matthew 14:22-33. 


JESUS WALKING UN THE SEA — HIS NEED OF SECRET PERSONAL COMMUNION WITH HIS FATHER — THE PROBABLE NATURE OF HtS 
PRAYERS — A SEVERE STORM AT NIGHT — THE APOSTLE PETER'S NEW EXPERIENCE ON A STORMY SEA — A PICTURE OF THF 
CHURCHES EXPERIENCE THROUGHOUT THE GOSPEL AGE — BLESSEDNESS PROPORTIONATE TO FAITH IN THE LORD 

'7 believe; help thou mine unbelief." — Mark 9:24. 

that he was not content with merely the^e opportunities, but 
frequently sought the Father alone, as he has counseled his 
disciples to do. (Matthew 6:6) 

All Christians of experience have realized the value of 
such secret personal communion with the heavenly Father ; 
and we are not surprised that our Lord Jesus felt the need 
of a similar communion. His knowledge of the Father, and 


AFTER having fed a multitude of above five thousand 
persons with five barley loaves and two small. fishes, 
our Lord urged his apostles to start in their boat for 
Capernaum; and after their departure he dispersed the multitude
 and then sought the solitude of the mountain in prayer. 
Although he sometimes prayed with his disciples in their hearing
, so that they recorded the words of his prayer, it is evident 


286 


THE WATCH TOWER 


}'\ n sm'Rf.H. Pa 


his fellowship with Jehovah before the world was made, so 
far from satisfying him and rendering prayer unnecessary, 
rather stimulated his desire for further fellowship and communion
, especially as he was alone in the world. Even his 
beloved disciples, not having yet been begotten of the holy 
Spirit (John 7:30), could not enter into fellowship with our 
Lord in respect to spiritual things, nor appreciate the trials 
which came to him as a perfect man in a way in which they 
do not come to fallen humanity. He needed such fellowship 
with the Father for the refreshment of his own zeal, for the 
keeping warm of his own love and devotion, which was the 
basis of his consecration and his daily sacrificing of himself 
as a man, even unto death. 

There is no intimation given that our Lord spent much 
time at prayer, morning and evening. Yet we may reasonably 
suppose that he never neglected to seek the Father's face. 
But these brief seasons of worship and daily prayer were 
evidently supplemented by occasions like the one mentioned 
in today's lesson, when our Lord apparently spent a large 
part of the night in prayer and communion with the Father. 
There is a lesson in this for the Lord's people. The duties 
of life, pressing upon us daily, are not to be neglected. Each 
is -to feel, as our Lord expressed it, "I must be about my 
Father's business''; and this would ordinarily imply short 
prayers, which our Lord commended, saying, "When ye pray, 
use' not vain repetitions, as the heathen do ; ^ for they think 
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be ye not 
therefore like unto them; for your Father knoweth what 
things ye have need of before ye ask him." (Matthew 6:7,8) 
And the example of a prayer, given his disciples, is brief. 
Nevertheless, m proportion as we feel the importance of the 
great work in which by the Lord's favor we are privileged 
to be co-laborers with him, our hearts should be and will be 
drawn to seasons of spiritual communion. This will not 
necessarily be a prayer in the sense of making requests of the 
Father; for much of such seasons will doubtless be devoted 
to thanksgiving for the mercies and favors already experienced
, and for the gracious promises upon which we base our 
faith for the future, and to communion with him in the sense 
of pondering his will respecting us and how we may most 
acceptably serve and please him. 

A STORMY NIGHT ON THE LAKE 

While our Lord was thus holding communion with the 
Father, the apostles rowing their boat toward Capernaum were 
having' difficulty to make headway, a strong headwind having 
arisen which made the lake very rough, boisterous. John, 
who was one of those in the boat, tells us that they had gotten 
only about twenty-five or thirty furlongs (two and a half to 
three miles) from the shore, in the several hours they had 
been rowing. While thus rowing hard, worn and sleepy, they 
saw the figure of a man near them, walking on the water and 
apparently intending to pass their boat. (Mark 6 :48-5o) 
Some of "them cried out in fear, thinking that they had seen 
a supernatural being, and that it foreboded some calamity. 
But it was Jesus who spoke to them, and set their fears attest. 

The boldness oi Peter's faith was then most strikingly 
illustrated by his request that our Lord should bid him walk 
on the water. After he had received permission his faith was 
so strong that he did walk for a few steps, until seemingly 
appalled by his own temerity and by the boisterousness of the 
water, he began to sink, and cried to our Lord for help. This 
he received through touching our Lord's hand. If the miracle 
of the loaves and the fishes attested the superhuman authority 
of our Lord, so likewise did this manifestation of his power; 
and if the former illustrated his power to protect his people 
from want and to supply all their necessities, this last manifested
 that divine power is unlimited and able to preserve 
God's people in all the storms and difficulties and trials of life. 

This is a good lesson for us to apply individually, realizing, 
as we all must, that our Lord has supcrnaturally ted us with 
spiritual food, and that during the darkness of the night-time 
which precedes the Millennial dawn and sunlight there will be 
Morms and difficulties arising which would overwhelm us without
 our Lord's aid. We are to remember that not only the 
natural winds and waves obey his command, but that all the 
storms and billows of trouble and persecution which may 
impede and weary us are amenable to his control. The more 
we are able to realize this, the more of joy and peace we shall 
experience, because the stronger will be our faith in him who 
is able to succor us and who has promised to do so eventually, 
and who assures us that meantime all things shall be overruled
 for our highest welfare, if we abide in him. 


A PICTTTKE OF THE CHURCH'S EXPERIENCES 

But the boat, the twelve toiling rowers, the storm and the 
darkness of the night picture still more perfectly the experiences
 of the Lord's people as a whole— not the experiences of 
a sectarian church, but those of the one true church of which 
our Lord is the Head, the church of the first-born, whose 
names are written in heaven. ( Hebrews 12:23) Tnis true 
church has indeed had a stormy time since parting with her 
Lord, who ascended to the Father. The darkness came down 
upon them, darkness of error and superstition; and the great 
adversary of God. through the antichrist and many lesser 
antichrists, has aroused all through this Gospel age a severe 
storm against the Lord's faithful few. The difficulties of their 
position have caused them to bend every effort to make progress
 against such fearful opposition, of which one of the 
apostles declares : "We wrestle not against flesh and blood 
[merely], but against principalities, and against powers, 
against the rulers of the darkness of this world, and against 
wicked spirits in high positions". (Ephesians 6:12) This 
battle against adverse Influences has continued throughout the 
night-time of this Gospel age; and yet the church has not 
reached the harbor nor has the storm abated. 

As our Lord came to the disciples in the midst of the storm, 
in the fourth watch of the night (that is, in the early morning
), so his second coming in the Millennial dawn is to the 
church and for the purpose of helping her, rescuing her from 
her toil, weariness and peril. As the Prophet says: "God 
shall help her early in the morning". (Psalm 46:5) And as 
the manner of our Lord's coming to his disciples was different
 from what they had expected, so the manner of his second 
advent differs from what has been expected. Peter would 
seem to represent a class living now, in the end of the age, 
who are fully convinced of our Lord's presence and are 
privileged to walk with him by faith. But as Peter's faith 
w r as unequal to the occasion, except as our Lord came to his 
rescue, so all ol the faithful now will need the Master's hand 
stretched to their relief. Otherwise they would sink in discouragement
, because of lack of faith. 

Is there not a good lesson here for all who have been faithfully
 laboring in self-control, and in the Lord's service, to 
bring all their thoughts and words and doings into full accord 
with the will of God in Christ, and who as the Lord's people 
experience from the world, the flesh and the devil serious 
opposition? The lesson here, in harmony with its presentation 
elsewhere in the Scriptures, is that little progress can be made 
by the people of God until the Master himself shall join 
them; and that then their blessedness and privileges will be 
proportioned to the measure of their faith. How strongly 
this speaks to us, then, of continued faithfulness and of 
growth in faith, not in ourselves but in the Lord, and of his 
ultimate deliverance of rill who put their trust in him! 

In John's account we learn that as soon as our Lord and 
Peter got into the boat, immediately the wind and the storm 
ceased, and the ship was at the harbor. So will it be with 
the Lord's people, the "little flock''. As soon as their faith 
has been fully tested at our Lord's second presence, he will 
join their number; and immediately the trials, storms, difficulties
 and oppositions will he at an end, and the desired haven 
of heavenly condition will have been reached. The kingdom 
will have come. Courage, then, dear brother-mariners on the 
sea of experience, seeking to make your calling and election 
-ure ! Let us note carefully the Master's w f ords to the Apostle 
Peter as especially applicable to ourselves; name!}', that all 
which will hinder us from walking out to meet our Lord is 
lack of faith. "O thou of little faith, wherefore didst thou 
doubt?" 

Let us learn to trust the Lord, not only in matters which 
pertain to his church and all of its interests and affairs, but 
also in all of the matters and interests of ourselves and our 
families. The lessons will be proritable to us, and will prepare
 us for larger measures oi divine favor and for the joys 
of the kingdom. And all of this faith is built upon a clear 
realization of the fact that our Lord Jesus is truly the Son of 
God. If he is the Son of God, he is true; and if he is true, 
then all the exceeding great and precious promises which he 
left for us may be relied upon, built upon, anchored into. 
And s'uch reliance on them will give us the faith requisite for 
the overcoming of all the difficulties and obstacles of life. 
that we ::vjy come off more than conquerors through him who 
loved us and bought us with his cvn precious blood. 


FROM THE OPEN FIELD 


VINE OF THE EARTH KTPE 

Dkak Brothkr Rutherford: 

Praise the Lord who has brought you and the other brethren 
hack to your duties again! I have been to three conventions 
here thi> \xar and the ke\note has been: The vine of the 
•.-arth i> ript- and ready for the winepress, let us be up and 
< xptdite ht-r final exit. And jour release just at this time 
synchronizes well with this spirit. 

I have had the privilege of lecturing at Durban and 
Johannesburg on "The Finished Mystery" and have had the 
satisfaction of hearing several brethren testify to a better 
feeling toward the book. It is evident that the opposition 
literature has prejudiced some and, without going into the 
book itself properly, they condemn same. But I've not met 
with one solid objection here in South Africa. Thank God 
several have decided to consign the literature of the American 
opposition to the waste-paper basket in future. 

Those who accept the book are tilled with zeal as never 
before; those who reject it grow slacker and slacker and 
gradually get "at sea", even on the most fundamental questions. 
I know of one such brother here who has today less light than 
he had four years ago. Poor soul ! May the Lord be merciful
 to him. 

I would love to see you all in the flesh, but have little hope. 
But I do hope and trust to meet you beyond the vail. More 
and more I begin to emulate Brother Paul, to do "one thing" 
and to hearken to the injunction, "do your own business", 
which means our Father's business. 

The truth is indeed a great sanctifier and it not only makes 
one free from weaknesses, but also transforms one slowly, 
but surely, so that one finds that, comparatively speaking, he 
is indeed a new creature in a very literal sense. 

Praying God's richest blessing on all your endeavors, I am, 
Your loving brother in Christ, J. J. Theron. — Transvaal 


"ENCOURAGING AND STIMULATING" 

Dear Brethren: 

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you through God our 
Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ. 

I have just finished reading the Tower of the 15th of August 
and I want to express my appreciation for the rich feast, so 
encouraging and stimulating to faith. Surely such food as 
that can come from no place than from the Lord's storehouse. 
I am truly grateful to the giver of every good and perfect 
gift. 

May the dear Lord continue to bless you, and may you continue
 to receive wages and to gather fruit. 

Yours in the blessed hope, \V. T. Baker. — Ohio. 


determined to ghasp opportunities 

Dear Brethren : 

Never have I written you before of my appreciation of your 
loving efforts to bring forth the food for the Lord's dear 
children, as he makes it known. But I have^ just finished 
reading the article, "Blessed are the Fearless", in the August 
1 and 15 Towers. I have been encouraged almost beyond 
measure. 

I am one of those who, while trusting and confident that 
God was working all things to the good of his people and his 
glory, was yet possessed of such fear as this article explains. 

My heartfelt prayer is that we may all come forth with the 
fearlessness of Elisha, as the Lord' directs the way. I am 
determined to grasp each opportunity for whatever sendee 
our Captain sends forth, knowing^ his grace_ is sufficient. 

May the Lord's continued blessings be with you. 

Your sister by his grace, Lilly Lang. — Wash. 


"ENCOURAGEMENT AND COMPORT" 

Hear Brethren in ol'r Lord: 

I wi-h vou to know the helpfulness of August 1 and 15 
Watch Towers, "Blessed are the Fearless". I have carefully 
read both articles twice and will read them a great many 
times more. I have never found any difficulty in being bold 
when there was no danger; but to face real danger and realize 
the power and presence of the Lord requires a genuine closeness
 to him. 

It is a source of encouragement and comfort to know how 
earnestly mv heart responds to the Lord's voice as he speaks 
through" The Watch Tower. Whatever elements of weakness
 I may have seem to disappear as I feel myself stirred 
by the impulses which these wholesome words awaken, I 


desire, above all else, to live near to the Lord. It seems to 
me that I find myself nearer to him since I heard our dear 
Brother Rutherford and read August 1 and 15 Towers. 

This spirit of encouragement seems equally stirred in the 
friends everywhere. It is the first thing the friends talk about 
when we meet them and is in their letters which they write 
when they welcome us before we visit them. 

I thought it might encourage to write telling you of the 
Lord's blessing at your hands. 

Ever grateful for the Lord's many favors, 

Yours joyfully in his service, M. L. Herr. — Pilg 


"HAS NOT CHANGED A BIT" 
My Dear Brethren : 

I am herewith renewing my subscription to The Watch 
Tower for another year. Please continue to send them to me 
They are welcome guests whose bi-monthly visits I can not 
afford to miss. I have been carefully noting the tone of the 
Tower since Brother Russell's death and realize that it ha< 
not changed a bit. This is further assurance that the same 
unerring Lord is still guiding in the affairs of the Society 
which has been organized to publish the glorious harvest 
truths. Being confident of the Lord's faithfulness we realize 
that even if half of the members of the Society should become 
unfaithful, he would supply the vacancies and still use it as 
his channel of truth. May the wisdom from above continue 
to guide all your efforts in the King's business until your 
activities on this side shall cease. 

Your feeble brother by his grace, G. W. Thomas.— C. Z 


THE LORD'S METHODS ORDERLY 

Dear Brethren: 

Just after posting to you the few thoughts on Hebrews, 
the June 15 Tower came to hand in which you mention the 
Minor Prophet booklets. I must thank you for the kindly 
way you have put the notice, but am sorry such a thing has 
been necessary. I doubt not, however, that it was necessary. 
A few words dropped here and there are liable to be quickly 
transformed out of the original, as they pass from one to 
another. I have received letters addressed Tract Society, 
an ingenious guess at the meaning of the initials T. S. 

I would like to say, dear brethren, as I said in writing to 
Brother Hemery a few weeks ago, I now feel it would have 
been better had I not taken it upon myself to print these 
comments. I feel I have recently had more light upon the 
subject of the orderly way the Lord is arranging and managing
 every feature of his work through the Watch Tower 
Bible and Tract Society. I wish I could have seen back 
last year, as I feel I now see. However, even a mistake upon 
my part may have been overruled for the blessing of some 
of his dear people, 

A month or two ago I had to decide about a reprint of two 
or three of the booklets that had run out of stock. I am glad 
to say I could clearly see it to be the Lord's will to go no 
further in this matter. 

I am one of those who, since. coming into the truth, have 
been led to expect an early glorification of the little flock 
— ioio, 191 1, 1912. AH my temporal affairs were arranged 
with a view 7 to October 1914. Each time the Lord ha* seemed 
to be saying: "Thou must prophesy again", etc. (Revelation 
10:11) The same message seems to have come to us last 
summer; and still we are permitted to serve in sacrifice our 
dear Master who has done so much for us. 

I desire to express my deep appreciation oi your faithful 
service for the truth and for the Lord's dear family. May 
you be kept humble and faithful to the end. With love, 
Your brother by grace, T. Stracy — Eng 


I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 


QUESTIONS FROM 

MANUAL ON SERIES SIXTH 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY XI-"PASSOVER OF THE NEW CREATION' 


Meek *f Oct. 5 
Week of Oct. 12 


Q. 2X-29 
Q. 30-36 


Week of Oct. 19 
Week of Oct. 26 


CM- 7 

Q. 8-11 


Question Manuals on Vol. VL Studies in the Scriptures, 10c each, postpaid. 


287 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies by Traveling Brethren 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHEB W. A. BAKER 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 

Duluth, Minn 

Superior, Wis. . , . 
Two Harbors, Wis. 
Wrenshall, Minn. 
\itkin, Minn 

.Sept. 28 
. . " 28, 29 
. . " 30 
..Oct. 1 
11 o 

26, 27 

Northome, Minn. 

. . " 3 


liarinette. "Wis. . . .Sept. 
Slack Creek, Wis. .. " 

Shiocton, Wis " 

Clinton ville, Wis. ... " 
Ifanistique, Mich. .. " 
3ault Ste Marie, Mich. " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H, BARBER 

)ayton, Ohio Sept. 21 Knoxville, Tenn. ..Sept. 

famestown, Ohio ..." 22 Bristol, Tenn " 

Hamilton, Ohio . ... " 23 Johnson City, Tenn.. " 

Louisville, Ky " 24 Morristown, Tenn. .Oct. 

Shelby ville, Ky " 25 Dunlap, Tenn " 

Lexington, Ky " 26 Chattanooga, Tenn... '* 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 


28 

29 

30 

1 

3 

5 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


iaginaw. Mich. . . . Sept. 20, 21 Muskegon, Mich. ..Sept. 28 

Bay City, Mich " 21,22 Empire, Mich " 29,30 

Midland, Mich " 23 Manistee, Mich. ...Oct. 1,2 

Wheeler, Mich " 24 Mears, Mich " 3 

Alma, Mich " 25 Grand Rapids, Mich. . " 5,6 

Kdmore, Mich " 26 Reeds, Mich " 7 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 


Moline, 111 Sept. 

Muscatine, la " 

Bmrlington, la " 

Keosauqua, la " 

Monlton, la " 

Cfaaritan, la " 


21 
oo 

23 
24 
35 
26 


Des Moines, la. 
Indianola, la. 
Coburg, la 
Glenwood, la. . 
Kirkman, la. . . 
Omaha, Neb. . , 


. Sept. 


.Oct. 


28 

29 

30 

1 

3 

5 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 


Nashville, Tenn. ..Sept. 

Lebanon, Tenn " 

Murfreesboro, Tenn. ' ' 

Milton, Tenn " 

McMinn ville, Tenn. . " 
Albany, Ala " 


21 
22 
23 

24 
26 
28 


Tuscumbia, Ala. . 

Oilman, Ala 

Birmingham, Ala. 
Walnut Grove, Ala. 
Gadsden, Ala. . . . 
Boaz, Ala 


.Sept. 29, 30 
. .Oct. 2, 3 
. . ** 4, 5 

6, 7 
. . . '* 8 
. . " 9, 10 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Tippecanoe, Ohio ..Sept. 
Dayton, Ohio " 

Indianapolis, Ind. .. " 
Martinsville, Ind. . . " 

Cooper, Ind Oct. 

OrawfordsriHe, Ind.. " 


23 Kokomo, Ind Oct. 

24 Elwood, Ind " 

25-28 Anderson, Ind. ... 

29 Losantsville, Ind. 

1 Richmond, Ind. . . " 

3 Portland, Ind. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERB 


Mahaffey, Pa Sept. 20, 21 

Curry Run, Pa ' ' 22 

Altoona, Pa " 23 

Aleia»dria, Pa '* 24 

Coles Summit, Pa... " 25,26 
LewtsUn, Pa " 28 


McClure, Pa SepU 

Northumberland, Pa. " 
Harrisburg, Pa. . . . Oct 

Plainaeld, Pa " 

Elizabethtowa, Pa. 
Manheim, Pa " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUS ON 


IreaUn, Ohio Sept. 21, 22 

Ashland, Ky " 23 

Hu»tiMgton. W. Ya.. " 24 

Patrick, Ky " 25 

Paintsville, Ky *' 27,28 

Elmgreve, Ky " 29, 30 


Cincinnati, Ohi* . 
New Albany, Ind. . 
Jeff ersonrille, Ind . 
Louisville, Ky. . . 
Elizabethtown, Ky. 
St. Charles, Ky. . . 


Oct 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER S. MORTON 


Charleston, W. Va..Sept. 

Sun, W. Va " 

MacDonald, W. Va. . " 

Rock, W. Va " 

Priacetom, W. Va., etc. " 
Heaaker, Va " 


21 Coburn, Va Sept. 

22 Radford, Va Oct. 

24 Roanoke, Va " 

25 Lynchburg, Va " 

26-28 Hurt. Va " 

29 Chatham, Va " 


4, 5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 


30 
1 

2 
3 

4 


30 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. C. RICE 


Salem, Ind Sept 

New Albany, lad. , . " 

Palmyra, Ind " 

De Pauw, Ind " 

Indianapolis, Ind 
Vinrennes. Ind " 


20 
21 

22 

23 

25-28 

29 


Belmont, III. . . 
Centralia, 111. . 
Belleville, 111. . 
3. St. Louis, Til. 
Farmington, Mo 
Avert, Mo 


.Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 


Elmira. N. Y. . . 
Ithaca. N. Y.. . . 
Cortland, N. T, 
Auburn, N. Y 
Syracuse. N. Y. 
Oneida, N. Y. . . 


. .Sept. 


21 Rome. N. v Sept. 

23 Mansv.Ue, N. Y. . . .Oct. 

24 Spragueville, N. Y. . . " 
25,26 Watertown. N. Y. . " 
27, 28 Boon ville, N. Y. . . " 

29 Johnstown, N. Y. . . " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. L, SULLIVAN 


Preeport, 111. . 
Clinton, la. . . 
Dubuque, la 
Waterloo. la. 
Shellsburg, la. 
Iowa City, la. 


.Sept. 


21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 


Cedar Rapids, la. 

Tiecorah. la 

Mason City, la. . 

Elma, la 

Austin, Minn. . . . 
Whalen, Minn. . 


.Sept. 


.Oct. 


2. 3 
4 

5 
7 

8 


30 

1 
3 


28 
29 
30 

1 


Marion, Ohio Sept. 21 

Van Wert, Ohio ....*' 22 

Ft. Wayne. Ind. ..." 23 

Muncie, Ind " 24 

Indianapolis, Ind. .. " 25-28 

Pugger, Ind " 29 


Linton, Ind Sept. 

Wadesville, Ind. ...Oct. 

Boonville, Ind " 

Hawesville, Ky " 

Owensboro, Ky " 

Evansville, Ind '* 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 


Albany, N. Y 

Troy, N. Y 

Hoosick Falls, N. Y. 

Pownall, Vt 

North Adams, Mass. 
Orange, Mass 


Sept. 20, 21 Greenfield, Mass. ..Sept. 

. " 21,22 East Hampton, Mass. ** 

23 Springfield, Mass. .. " 

- " 24 Pittsfield, Mass. . . .Oct. 

. " 25 Worcester, Mass. .. " 

. " 26 Milford. Mass " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER D. TOOLE 


Indianapolis. Ind. 
St. Louis, Mo. . . 

Rolla, Mo 

Lebanon, Mo. . , . 
Springfield. Mo. . 
Ash Grove. Mo. 


.Sept. 25-27 
. . " 28,29 
.. " 30 

.Oct. 1 

. . " 2. 3 

. " 4, 5 


Golden City, Mo. 

Jasper, Mo 

Carthage, Mo. . . 

Aurora, Mo 

Monett, Mo 

Webb City, Mo. . 


.Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L, F. ZINK 


Racine, Wis Sept. 

Stevens Point, Wis. " 

Plover, Wis " 

Withee, Wis " 

Atwood, Wis " 

Marshfield. Wis. . . " 


14 Osseo, Wis Sept. 

15 Black River, Wis. . . " 

16 Chili, Wis '* 

17 Wausau, Wis " 

18 Vulcan, Mich " 

19 Sault Ste. Marie, Mich " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 

New Haven, Conn., .Oct. 5 Passaic, N. J Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. W. BETLER 

Waterbury, Conn. ..Oct. 5 Bethlehem. Pa Oct. 


Vineland, N. J. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. DONALD 

Jersey City. N. J. ..Oct. 5 So. Norwalk, Conn. Oct. 

Bayonne, N. J " 5 Stamford. Conn ... " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 
Reading. Pa Oct. 12 Newark, N. J Oct, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Holyoke, Mass Oct. 5 Pen Argyl, Pa Oct. 

Springfield, Mass. . . " 5 Bangor, Pa " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. H. FISHER 

Allentown. Pa Oet. 5 York, Pa Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUDGINGS 

Paterson, N. J. .. Oct. 12 Kunkletown, Pa. ...Oet 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. H. MACMTLLAN 

Auburn, Me Sept. 21 Cumberland. Md. ..Sept. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 

Sew Brunswick, N.J. Oct. 12 Lancaster, Pa Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 

Tamaqua, Pa Oct. 5 Pottsville, Pa Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Providence, R. I. ..Oct. 5 Fall River, Mass. ..Oet. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 

Bridgeport, Conn. ..Oct. 5 Boston, Mass Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 

Cromwell. Conn. . . .Oct. 12 Worcester. Mass. . .Oet. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

Wilmington, Del. ...Oct. 5 rlartford. Conn. . Oct 


30 

1 
2 

3 

4 
S 


28 

29 

30 

1 

2 

3 


6 

T 

8 

9 

10 

11 


21 
22 
23 
24 

25 

I6-2& 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L, T. COHEN 
New Britain, Conn.. Oct. 5 Easton. Pa Oet. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 

Bridgetoa. N. J. ...Oct. 12 Hazelton, Pa Oct. 

12 Wilkes Barre. Pa. . " 


12 


19 
19 


12 
12 


19 
19 


19- 


19' 


19- 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H. ZOoK 
New London, Conn. .Oct. 12 Elizabeth, N. J Oct. 19 

Conventions to be Addressed by Brother J. F. Rutherford 

Auburn, Me Sept. 21 Philadelphia, Pa ...Oct. 5 

Indianapolis. Ind. . . " 28 Baltimore. Md. ..." 12 


^ ^/^ 1 1 il 


#■ 


-^^4 
*-&& 


^ ROCK^OF ACES^y 

Other foundation c'arrl 
•'■-■: no man lay-.<v£ 
A.RANSOM FOR ALL^* 7 




v*^ - 


^..-.v; 


r/*^ 5 


^*r< 


isenefc 




#■" 


"v* V* iV'"'> *•'.*'» 


ftps /v\, 


VOL. XL OCTOBER 1 No. 1» 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — A.M. 6048 

CONTEXT* 

Report of General Convention 291 

Convention Program 292 

Wednesday's Discourses ' 293 

Faith : Morale of the Christian 294 

Wonders of Creation 295 

The World Not Converted [ 296 

Many Baptized 207 

Co-laborers' Day * 298 

The Golden Age * 299 

Jeremiah Commends the Reehabhes 300 

Priests Resentful at God's Word '. 300 

Jeremiah Still Unloved '. 301 

What Power At Bottom Of It? 301 

Peter's Great Confession 302 

Peter A Useful Stone 302 

The Doors of the Kingdom 303 

" '/ will stand upon my watch, and will set my foot upon the 
Tower, and will watih to see what He writ say unto me, and 
what answer I shall make to them that oppose me"—Hab. •?./. 





Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sea and the waves (the restless, discontented) roannsi; men's hearts failing them tor fear and for looking 
to tne things coming upon the earth (.society i ■. for the powers ot the heavens (ecclesvasUctsm) shall be shaken. . When ye ace these things begin to come to pa<*K, 

Wen know that the Kingdom of Clod is at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nlKh. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; Luke 21:25 I 


THIS JOURNAL, AND IT© 6AGRCD MISSION 

THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments In the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension," now betot 
presented in ail parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towbb Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Convention* and o' 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims/* and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
very helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International 8. S. Lessons Is specially for the oldei 
Bible Students ant Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Rannom {a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all." (1 Tet. 1:10; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building ud on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has beec 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Age* 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fulleat 
subjection to the will of God in Christ as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
oath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
snow whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
arge our readers to prove all its utterances by the Infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing, 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

Chat the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been In progress throughout
 the Gospel Age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :16, 17 ; Eph. 2 :20-22 ; Gea 
28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :29. 

That meantime the. chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master "Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throufbout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 ;5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the icortd," "in doe time." — 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

Chat the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be **partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hit 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3 ;2 ; John 17:24; Rom, 8:17; 2 Pet 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of Berrice ; to develop In herself every grace J 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 :& 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and HU glorified 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3 :l9-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED B^ 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

Utt FEDERAL ST., PITTSBURGH, PA., U, S. A. 

The Walck Towet Editorial Committee; 
This Journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom have read and approval as truth each and every 
article appearing in these columns. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F\ Rutherford, W. E. Van Amburgh, F. H. Robison, Gko. H. 
Fishhr, W. E. Page. _____ 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE |l.00 IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BA NK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Tarms U tb« Ur<T» Poor u (oU«»— All Bible Students who, by reason of 
old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unabie to pay for this journal, will 
be supplied Fw if they send a Postal Card each May stating their case and 
requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all 
such be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 

NOTICE TO AIL TOWXB SUBSCRIBERS — Pieaee remember 
that M • rule we no longer send ft c*rd of acknowledgment for » reaewa
] or for ft new subscription. Receipt »nd entry of renewal are 
ndiemted within a month by change in date oi expiration of the *nbu
-nptioB on the TOWER wrapper. 

When requeuing change of addreaa, please gWe old addrea* aa 
»«11 »■ new. This is very important, saving aa much t me ftnd on- 
■ •ceasary correspondence. 


KNTKRBD AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA., POSTOFFICK 
UNDER THE ACT OP MARCH 3RD, l8?9- 


SOCIETY'S REMOVAL — CHANGE OF ADDRESS 

As per more extended notice in our September 15th issue, 
the headquarters of the Society will be entirely removed to 
Brooklyn, N. Y., by or before October I, the date of this 
issue. All correspondents addressing us will therefore please 
remember to send all communications, remittances, etc., to 
Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 124 Columbia Heights, 
Brooklyn, N. Y., from the time this issue is received- This 
request applies to all of the Society's activities. 

CONVENTION AT BALTIMORE 

A two-day convention will be held in Baltimore, Md., on 
October 11 and 12. The sessions on the nth will be held in 
the Florists' Exchange Hall, corner Franklin and St. Paul 
Streets. The Sunday meetings are to be held in the Academy 
of Music, Howard Street, near Franklin. It is expected that 
Brother Rutherford will serve on October 12. For local information
 write Louis F. Hildebrandt, 806 North Carey Street, 
B.ibimore, Md. 

YOUR OWN OBITUARY 

In most of the funeral services which the Society's travelling
 representatives have been called upon to conduct there 
seems to have been a dearth of direct relationship between the 
words spoken and the life of the deceased. This has not been 
the fault of the brother officiating, because in the majority of 
cases the dead was unknown to him. His remarks must, 
therefore, be somewhat impersonal in their nature. This is 
often disappointing to the bereaved relatives and friends, for 
they have assembled to pay respect to the life and character 
of the one whose association they have lost. 

On such occasions those most capable of giving vital statistics
 and personal information regarding the deceased are 
usually too preoccupied with their grief and with extraordinary 
obligations to be able to give even that information which is 
familiar to them. Once in a while if the speaker arrives in 
time he can find a more distant relative or capable neighbor 
who can tell something about the dead ; but this does not 
happen very often. 

Our suggestion therefore is, that each of the Lord's people 
gradually, and as opportunity offers, write down such items 
in connection with his life as would be interesting from the 
standpoint of the Lord's Word — something of how and when 
he or she was led to the Lord, some words of appreciation of 
the Lord's goodness and providences, in short, whatever the 
Lord has meant to the testifier individually. Such remarks 
need not exceed a thousand words (shorter would do just as 
well) and they could be kept in an envelope marked "Personal: 
To be Used at My Funeral', or some such wording, and 
kept with one's personal effects, so that it could be easily 
found. At the time of one's demise and funeral such a testimony
 cou!d be handed to the officiating brother and he would 
thus be able to make the service a fitting climax to a course 
of faithfulness, a sort of period to the living testimony just 
ended. Friends would listen who would not have listened 
before, while the speaker elaborated on this point of the statement
, or gave Scripture substantiation for that. 

It is not expected that the Lord's people should become 
literary artists — nothing could be further from our thought. 
A few simple, plain statements of the facts would serve the 
purpose better than any attempt at sermonizing, or dissertation 
on different Scripture passages, except as some particular 
Scripture, perhaps, had been of special help and comfort to 
the writer. We believe that if these suggestions are followed 
the funeral services of friends in the truth will become less 
like a public lecture and more like a personal testimony to the 
bereaved family and friends. Do not, of course, send such 
items to us, but keep them against the day of possible use 


CH TOWEH 

AND HERALD OF CHRIST^ PRESENCE 



VoL. XL 


October I, 1919 

REPORT OF GENERAL CONVENTION 


N*». IP 



ATCHING and waiting, in an attitude of 
prayer, this has been the condition of the 
International Bible Students for the year 
or more last, past; — watching the Lord's 
leading, and waiting for a wider publication
 of the message of the kingdom; praying
 at all times for the Father's guidance 
and blessing. Nothing in this world 
brings such happiness to the heart of the 
Christian as the privilege of glorifying the heavenly 
Father's name by telling others of the blessedness that 
shall come to mankind when Messiah's kingdom is in 
full operation. 

Since Brother Russell passed into glory there have 
been no general conventions until this year. But in 
July of this year the thought was conceived that we 
should have a general convention of our brethren 
where, for a season, we could come aside from the 
world and devote a number of days to sweet fellowship
 and study of the Word of God. It was believed 
that this would stimulate the brethren to greater zeal 
and confidence in all the Lord's arrangements. 

Cedar Point, Ohio, was selected as the place, and it 
indeed proved to be an ideal spot. Situated as it is 
upon a narrow peninsula jutting out into Lake Erie, 
and being less than half a mile wide, the waves of the 
beautiful lake can be seen on either side while one 
walks amid the trees that cover the ground. Sometimes
 the waters are storm driven and the waves run 
high, dashing with fury the slender strip of land, even 
as turbulent conditions surround God's people everywhere
 ; and then again the lake is placid and calm, suggesting
 the calmness that will invade the hearts of men 
when the Savior of man stands up and says to the 
troubled, restless sea of humanity: "Peace, be still!" 
Through the middle of the outer Point lies a quiet 
lagoon, on whose tranquil surface are mirrored the 
giant cottonwoods, the stately elms, the slender ash 
which grow long the grassy banks. Even so the 
Lord's children, in the midst of earthly society, mirror 
the beauties of his handiwork in proportion as the 
peace of God, which passes human knowledge, keeps 
guard in their hearts and minds. 

The public season at Cedar Point closed this year on 
September i. And arrangements were made for our 
Society to have full possession of the hotels and auditoriums
, beginning in the afternoon of that day. The 
week previous to our visit there was a stormy one; the 
lake was turbulent ; there was much rainfall : the week 
our convention was there the weather was well-nigh 
perfect, there being but one rain, which came at night 
and did not at all disturb or interfere with those attending
 the convention or the meetings. Monday 
forenoon the hotel was being vacated, according to the 
previous arrangement of the management, and many 
who had been there for a time reluctantly withdrew, 
because of the pleasant conditions surrounding. 


The hotels at Cedar Point accomodate approximately
 3,000 people, and we had not anticipated more 
than that number. Just across the bay is the beautiful 
little city of Sandusky, with a number of hotels and 
private rooming houses, and in addition to these a 
large number of private homes willing to entertain the 
Bible Students. 

THE FBIENDS ARBTVE 

On Monday morning, September 1, the friends began
 to arrive, smiling and happy, as are always those 
who walk in the footsteps of the Master. At first 
they came slowly, and when the convention opened at 
three o'clock in the afternoon less than 1,000 persons 
were in attendance. Later in the day, however, came 
special trains from Pittsburgh, New York, Boston, 
Chicago, Columbus, and many other places, and special
 cars from numerous points ; also steamboats and 
automobiles of every description laden with the 
brethren. By midnight 3,000 persons or more were 
on the ground. The assignment of the friends at the 
hotel was no small task, and the local hotel authorities
 were overwhelmed with the work. They expected
, of course, that our brethren would be fretful 
and complaining because they had to stand in line and 
wait long for assignments; but on the contrary the 
brethren manifested a degree of cheerful endurance 
beyond the understanding of the ordinary man. 
Brother Macmillan's previous experience as a hotel 
clerk, and Brother Martin's wide experience, were 
used to good purpose. They volunteered their services
 to the hotel management, which gladly accepted 
them. These two brethren stood behind the counter 
till after midnight, assigning the friends to rooms, 
while Brother Rutherford and many of the others 
acted as bell boys to carry the baggage and help the 
friends get to their rooms. It was a happy throng, 
rejoicing that they could come together again. 

Tuesday morning the convention was in full swing, 
and it was soon discovered that the auditorium, seating
 2,500, was far too small to accomodate those in 
attendance. Another hall was requisitioned, and still 
another, and the large foyer of the hotel, until four 
meetings were running at the same time ; and still 
these four halls were inadequate to accomodate the 
people. The weather being so fair, a spot was found 
amid the trees in the open where thousands of people 
could be seated and hear the speaker without difficulty. 
There, beneath that leafy dome, where the glory of 
heaven shone through and cast a lacy fretwork of 
sunshine and shadow on the ground, were held the 
remaining forenoon and afternoon sessions of the 
Convention. 

Still the brethren continued to arrive. The hotels 
at Cedar Point were filled, the hotels at Sandusky, and 
hundreds of private homes were well filled; and by 
Friday fully 6,000 of the Bible Students were in attendance
 or had been in attendance on the grounds. 


201 


292 


THE WATCH TOWER 


The attendance on Sunday was augmented still more, 
and it is estimated that fully 7,000 people attended the 
public lecture delivered by Brother Rutherford in the 
grove Sunday afternoon. The local ticket agents informed
 one of our office force that during the convention
 they sold 7,500 extra tickets returning from Sandusky
, thus giving a good indication of the number 
that attended. 

OPENING THE CONVENTION 

The convention opened promptly at three o'clock 
Monday afternoon by an address of welcome delivered 
by Dr. McCosh of Detroit, which was responded to by 
the President of our Society, who then, in turn, introduced
 Brother Van Amburgh as the permanent chairman
 of the convention. After a few timely remarks 
Brother Van Amburgh conducted a praise and testimony
 meeting for the rest of the afternoon. Brother 
C. J. Wood worth was assistant chairman of the convention
, and for the purpose of conducting other meetings
 it was necessary to have Brother Martin chairman
 of an additional meeting, and Brother Fisher of 
still another. It was remarkable to watch the interest 
manifested by the friends. Cedar Point claims to 
have one of the finest bathing beaches in the world. 
It has long been a great resort for bathers. But with 
several thousand people at Cedai Point every day, seldom
 any of the truth friends were seen bathing in the 
lake. 

It had been arranged to have the Bethel service in 
the dining room at the breakfast hour, but since the 
dining hall had places for only about 1,100 at one sitting
, it was soon discovered that such an arrangement 
was not practicable. Consequently the friends assembled
 on the beach each morning at seven o'clock, 
and as the sun's rays fell gently upon the waters of 
Lake Erie, there morning Bethel service was conducted
, and the day was begun with joy of heart and 
thankfulness for each progressive step of the convention
. At nine o'clock the regular meetings opened, 
strictly in accordance with the program previously 
published. That we may preserve a record of the 
program of this convention we here insert it as published
 : 

Ol0ntrptttton Jtrojgram 


3:00 p. m. 


7:30 p. 
-(.00 p. 


Grand opening rally 
Address of Welcome 
Salutation 


Brother McCosh 
President of Watch Ttiwi 
Bible & Tract Society 

Praise, Prayer and Testimony Service 

Praise Service 

Discourse Brother Van Am burgh 


gtorabay, &?jrtrmh*r 2nb 


J -00 a. m. Praise and Prayer Meeting 

i):30 a. m. Discourse Brother Barker 

10:30 a. m. Praise and Testimony Service 

11 00 a. m. Discourse Brother Barber 

2:00 p. m. Praise and Prayer Service 

2,30 p. m. Discourse Brother Sexton 

3:30 p. m. Praise Service 

3:45 p. m. Discourse Brother Rutherford 

7:30 p. m. Praise and Prayer Meeting 

6 .00 p. m. Discourse Brother Sullivan 


HirbnrfliiaB, &rptrmb*r 3rb 

9:00 a. m. Praise and Prater Service 
y 30 a. lq. Discourse 


10:30 
11:00 
2:00 
2:30 
3:30 
3:45 
7:00 
8:00 


p. m. 

p. m, 

p. m. 

P 

p. m. 

p. m 


m. 


Praise and Testimony Service Brother Hazlett 

Discourse Brother FiBher 

Praise and Testimony Brother Dock»y 

Discourse Brother Thorn 

Praise Service Brother Roberts 

Discourse Brother Rutherford 

Discourse Brother Perrin 

Discourse Brother Toole 


Styurfibatj. &rjrt*mbrr 4tlf 

0:00 a. m. Praise and PTayer Service 

9:30 a. m. Discourse Brother Williams 

10:30 a. m. Praise and Testimony 

11:00 a, m. Discourse Brother Robiaoa 

2:00 p. m. Praise and Testimony Service 

2:30 p. m. Discourse Brother Pickering 

3:30 p. m. Praise Service 

3:45 p. m. Discourse Brother Macmillan 

7:30 p. m. Praise Service 

H:00 p. m. Discourse Brother Graham 

Jirtbay, ^rptrmbrr 5ti? - (Uo-iEabomB* Say 


9:00 a. 

9:30 a. 
10:30 a. 
11:00 a. 

2:00 

3:00 

4:00 

7:30 

8:00 


PraiBe and Prayer Service Brother Zook 

Discourse Brother Magnuaon 

Praise and Testimony Service Brother Ric» 

Discourse Brother Salter 

Colporteur Testimony Meeting Brother Van Hyning 

Address to Co-laborer? Brother Rutherford 

Discourse Brother Martia 
Praise Service 

Discourse Brother Thornton 


fcahtrtteuj. 0*ptrmb*r fitly 


m. 


9:00 a. 

9:30 a. 
10:30 a. 
11:00 a. m. 

2:00 p. m 

2:15 p. m. 

3:15 p. m. 


7:30 p. 
8:00 p. 


Praise and Prayer Meeting 

Discourse 

PraiBe and Testimony 
Discourse 
Praise Service 
Discourse 

Discourse : "Baptism and 
Its Import"; followed by 
water immersion. 
Praise Service 
Discourse 


Brother Baker 


Brother Woodwortb 


Brother Bohnst 


Brother Wise 
Brother Cohe» 
Brother Hexr 


Brother Morton 
Brother Whelp ton 

Bruiher Rutherford 


Brother Rice 
Brother Robie 
Brother Baeuerleiii 
Brother Riemer 
Brother Hudgings 
Brother Zink 


Brother Bowm 
Brother Howlett 


&ttttbay, 9*pt*mbtr 7tlj 

9:00 a. m. Praise and Prayer Service 
9:30 a. m. Discourse 

10:30 a. m. Praise and Testimonv 

11:00 a. m. Discourse 
2:00 p. m. ^Praise and Testimony 
3:00 p. m. Discourse: "The Hope f« 

Distressed Humanity* * 
7:00 p. m. Praise and Testimony 
7:30 p. m. Symposium: "Fruits an*i 
Graces of the Spirit" 


y:00 p. m. Love Feast 

ii0nbag, &tpt*mbtr BUr 

9:00 a. m. Discourse Brother Thmtchley 

10:00 a. m. Discourse Brother Boyd 

10 '45 a. m. Farewell Praise and Testimony Meeting 

The Sandusky Register each day carried a lengthy 
report of the proceedings of the convention, and quoting
 from it we append hereto a brief outline of the 
speakers and what was said. Their Tuesday issue 
announced : 

CONSECEATION THE KEYNOTE 

''The Bible Students' convention at Cedar Point is now in 
full swing. One and all seem to be very devout, and yet extremely
 cheerful and jovial people. Meetings and more meetings
 seem to be the order of the day — and of the evening also. 
These people apparently never tire of meetings, sing lustily 
their anthems, which are of the old-time devotional character, 
and carry with them even into the large dining rooms and 
eating places the spirit of worship. Nevertheless, peculiar as 


October i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


293 


it may seem, they do not appear to be of the over-sanctimonious
 kind of persons, and do not carry with them the 

'better-than-thou' attitude. 

"Nothing seems stranger than to observe the general mutual 
acquaintanceship of almost all of the 4000 and more delegates 
now convened. Thev address each other bv name, and the 
air is full of 'Brother So-and-So' and 'Sister So-and-So', 
as though each and every^ one was a life-long friend of the 
other, although, upon inquiry, it is learned that they are from 
most distant parts of the country. 

"Although it was close onto midnight Monday before all 
the room assignments had been made and the arriving conventioners
 were all finally allocated, the announced earlymorning
 praise service at 7 o'clock was overflowingly attended 
in the large breakfast room. At The Breakers it takes three 
complete relays to accomodate the over 2,200 delegates 
assigned to that hotel alone. 

"Beginning Wednesday morning, the propitious weather 
continuing ^ and permitting, a sunrise, open-air prayer and 
praise service will be conducted on the beach in the front of 
The Breakers hotel. 

"The main auditorium was filled to capacity, and many 
standing, for the Monday evening meeting. 

"Consecration seemed to be the keynote of the Bible Students
' convention on Tuesday. The speakers, without premeditated
 intent or knowledge of each other's talks, made 
stirring appeals to the large audiences, which gave rapt attention
, for a continuation of their complete consecration to 
do 'the Lord's will', as they expressed it. 

"Although the main auditorium's capacity was increased 
by additional chairs to 2,200 and it was originally contemplated 
to have at least five different one to two-hour Bible lectures 
during the day, at the very first session it was demonstrated 
that this would be entirely inadequate. Accordingly, the 
Agricultural Hall, seating 600, was arranged for an overflow 
meeting, as well as the capacious Breakers hotel lobby, and 
larger parlors were similarly converted into halls for overflow 
meetings." 

THE CHURCH AN UNKNOWN QUANTITY 

The Sandusky Register of Wednesday says: 

"The gist of President Rutherford's speech was the encouragement
 to Christians that we are living in a time of 
great stress, when all the world is disturbed, when men's 
hearts are failing them for fear of what they see coming upon 
the earth; that the Christian, instead of fearing as the 
world fears, should have an abiding confidence in the Lord 
and therefore be of a sober mind, and watchful unto prayer. 
He said: 

" 'The world does not and cannot understand the position 
of a truly consecrated child of God. The Apostle Paul gives 
us the correct key note when he addresses his words to the 
Christian, saying: 'For though we walk in the flesh, we do 
not war after the flesh!' The new creature in Christ Jesus 
consists of a new will that is wholly surrendered to do 
Jehovah's will; a new mind that is in course of development 
from the time of consecration unto death; the new heart, 
which means the seat of affections— affections being set on 
heavenly things. 

"'And having this newness of life begun, it must have an 
organism, and therefore the Apostle says : 'We have this 
treasure in earthen vessels/ To the world in general a Christian
 looks like any other man, but from God's standpoint he 
is a new creature, and in order to win the prize that is set 
before him he must deport himself in accordance with the 
divine rules, 

" 'The divine rule prohibits, then, the followers of the Lord 
Jesus from taking human life, because he has not power to 
restore it, and the right to take it belongs only to Jehovah. 
He is commanded to do good unto all as he has opportunity, 
and wrong unto none. This rule applies to a Christian only, 
and has no application to the man of the world who has not 
fully consecrated himself to do God's will. 

" 'It takes a great deal of courage to be a soldier upon the 
battlefield, and men who go over the top manifest this courage 
as the world knows courage and bravery; but it takes a vast 
deal more courage to be a faithful soldier of the cross, who 
is without fear of man ; who fears not anything that man 
might do to him; who fears not death; who fears nothing 
except Jehovah; who desires to do the will of the Lord and 
receive his approval above all things else, because the approval 
of Jehovah means to such life everlasting on a higher plane. 
A repudiation of his covenant with Jehovah would mean his 


loss of everything — his eternal existence, every future hope 
of happiness, peace, or joy, and even life itself. So when a 
Christian truly recognizes his position before Jehovah he 
realizes that he must be obedient to the Lord's arrangement, 
and cannot be moved by fear of anything else. 

THE CHBISTIAN'S MISSION 

" 'Every Christian recognizes his obligation to the gorernment
 wherein he lives, and cannot willfully be a law-breaker. 
No true Christian, therefore, could be willfully a seditionist 
We are taught to pray for the governments and kings of this 
world, and thus we do. 

" 'A Christian's mission on earth, however, is to proclaim 
the message of the Lord's kingdom of righteousness, which 
will bring blessings to the whole groaning creation. 

"'And just as a man who is being trained for a physician 
could not devote his time to the trade of a blacksmith, just 
so one who is being trained under the great Teacher to be an 
assistant physician for the Word's blessing could not devote 
himself to something in this world that would be inimical to 
his interests and the interests of the Lord's Kingdom. For 
this reason Christians have never been understood by the 
world. Jesus was misunderstood and was persecuted; St 
Stephen, the first Christian martyr, was persecuted to death 
for the same reason; the Apostle Paul was imprisoned four 
years because he was misunderstood; Martin Luther suffered 
great persecution at the hands of the people for his conscientious
 adherence to the principles of Christianity; and the 
Lord Jesus said to his followers: 'If the world hate you, be 
not surprised, because it hated me before it hated you. If 
ye were of the world the world would love its own, but because
 I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world 
hateth you/ (John 15:18, 19) A part of the Christian's 
sacrifice is to be misunderstood, but the happy part of it is 
when the mists clear away and he is understood, having proven 
his loyalty and faithfulness even unto death; — then he has the 
promise of life on the highest plane. Jesus said to such: 'Be 
thou faithful unto death, and I will give you the crown of 
life'; 'Fear not, little flock; it is your Father's good pleasure 
to give you the kingdom.' — Luke 12:32; Revelation 2:10.'" 

WEDNESDAY'S DISCOURSES 

We quote from Thursday's issue of the Register as 
follows : 

"Pastor M. A. Howlett, in speaking took as his text Matthew 
22:35-40, particularly the 37th and 39th verses: Thou shalt 
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy 
soul, and with all thy mind, and thou shalt lore thy neighbor 
as thyself.* 

"He stated that this was the epitome, as the Master stated, 
of all the law and the prophets, and therefore represented the 
love of justice, or the love that would lead its possessor to 
render justice to all. 

"He referred to Jesus* statement in John 13:34, 35* 'A new 
commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I 
have loved you.' This represents, he averred, the love that 
leads to self-sacrifice, that really goes beyond the line of 
justice. 

"The speaker then went on to describe the scope of the love 
of simple justice, showing that this quality of character is the 
first thing that one who becomes a Christian must attain and 
develop; "that this would lead the follower of the Lord to be 
'just before he is generous'. 

"Then, taking up the various parts of this quality, he showed 
that to love the Lord God 'with all one's soul' means that one's 
whole being must be consecrated to serve the Lord and no 
matter what the work in hand may be, the true Christian must 
'do all to the glory of God' (1 Corinthians 10:21), whether 
this be housework, business, or preaching the gospel. To love 
God 'with all one's mind' means to see that the mind is kept 
full of pure, loving, wholesome thoughts, that so the words 
and actions may be acceptable to God. 

"Then, to 'love one's neighbor as one's self* implies that a 
true Christian should have a heart-development of 25,000 
miles; in other words, should have a heart big enough to lore 
the whole world, even his enemies. 

"Finally the speaker enumerated three rights, or prerogatives
, that belong to the heavenly Father: (1) the right of 
headship; (2) the right to reward; and (3) the right to 
punish. 

"He said that anyone who is a Christian and causes false 
reports to be circulated about another person, is violating these 
prerogatives in that he is causing that person to be judged 


294 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Prrr*muiLGH. Faand
 to suffer. Many, he went on to explain, try to be information
 bureaus, and are really 'inflammation bureaus/ in 
that they give forth tales that cause friction and inflammation. 

IS IT TRUE, KIND, NECESSARY? 

"The speaker closed with the explanation of a simple rule 
which will, if put into practise, prevent the Christian from 
violating the law of justice and brotherly love in his words. 
This rule is that every statement be made to pass through 
three requirements before it is allowed to have utterance, 
namely, 'Is it true? Is it kind? Is it necessary?' He said 
that with this rule there would be far less talking done in the 
world and far less trouble would prevail. 

"Pastor O. L. Sullivan spoke on 'Pulling Down Strongholds 
of Error/ choosing as his text 2 Corinthians 10:3, 4- He 
declared that the proclamation of the truth would result in 
the overthrow of everything founded upon selfishness, injustice
, or graft of any kind, stating that it was manifest that 
this overthrow of all unrighteousness began in 1014 and was 
increasing in momentum. He added that it was a remarkable 
fact that Christians who know and believe that the present 
world-contusion means the dawning of a better day are confident
 and undisturbed amid the turmoil, being confident that 
God is at the helm. > m 

"The great need of cooperation among true Christians in 
forwarding the message of truth was emphasized by the 
speaker, contentment amidst reconstruction difficulties was 
strongly recommended. He stated that a great responsibility 
rested upon each one entrusted with the knowledge of God's 
plan of the ages to proclaim Messiah's Kingdom come! The 
speaker then took up the prophecy of Jeremiah 50:41-46, and 
interpreted the phrase 'people from the north' to mean 
bolshevism, which he characterized as Wntal influenza' and 
the greatest menace that has ever threatened organized 
government. 

"Taking up 1 Kings the 19th chapter, the speaker applied 
the experiences of Elijah and Elisha to the present time. He 
showed that these were typical of the experiences of true 
Christians, and commented upon the fearlessness of Elisha. 
He stated that Elisha carried on the work of Elijah and both 
represented one class — the true, fearless followers of Christ 

"Pastor Sullivan then explained the meaning of the word 
Elisha to be 'Great Deliverer'. He applied this to Christians, 
and said that their mission is to preach deliverance to mankind
 — to tell mankind that Christ's Kingdom of peace and 
justice is now at hand, when all shall be delivered from 
oppression, persecution, disease, pain, and death. 

FAITH:. MORALE OF THE CHRISTIAN 

"J. F. Rutherford, president of the Watch Tower Bible A 
Tract Society, Wednesday afternoon before a great crowd of 
5,000 students attending the convention at Cedar Point, said 
that Bible prophecy is fulfilled and the reconstruction period 
for blessing humankind is at hand. He said : 

" 'We are living today in a most important period of the 
world's history. The consecrated Christian whose mind is 
illuminated by the holy Spirit can understand prophecy when 
it is fulfilled or in course of fulfillment The non-Christian 
does not understand prophecy. It indeed appears as foolishness
 to him. He witnesses the events that are transpiring and 
takes it for granted that these merely happen by chance. 

" 'The reason for this is because the non-Christian has no 
faith. Faith means an intellectual understanding and appreciation
 of the Word of God, and a confident reliance upon 
that word. The Scriptures declare, 'The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the spirit of God; for they are foolishness 
unto him; neither can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned*. (1 Corinthians 2:14) It is not astonishing
, then, that the unbeliever scoffs at the interpretation of 
prophecy. 

" 'God's dealing with the Jewish people was not only for 
their benefit, but for the special purpose of making types and 
shadows of greater events to transpire. Hence prophecy is 
properly defined as history written in advance. That which 
pertains to the world is a record of the world's history in advance
, foreknown and foretold by Jehovah through holy men 
of old who wrote under inspiration. That which pertains to 
the church is a history of the church In advance, written under 
the direction of Jehovah and intended to be understood only 
by the spiritually minded. 

" 'The experiences of Elijah, as clearly set forth in the 
Scriptures, represented in type the experiences of the followers
 of Jesus and the work they should do on the earth. 


The experiences of the Prophet Elisha, who was anointed In 
the stead of Elijah, picture another part of the work of the 
same class of Christian people. Ahab, the king of Israel, was 
a type of the civil powers, while Jezebel, his unrighteous queen, 
typified the unholy systems that operate under the name of 
Christ. Both Elijah and Elisha were very unpopular with 
Ahab and Jezebel and persecuted by them. The church has 
found its experiences to correspond with this. Hence, when 
the Christian has such experiences, instead of being astonished 
he regards it as an evidence that the Lord is dealing with him 
as one of the class whom he is selecting for a special purpose. 
The lesson the Lord intends to teach his people, then, is this: 
that they should have full faith and confidence in God and 
in the Lord Jesus Christ; that they should serve the truth in 
righteousness, without fear of man or man-made institutions; 
and this was particularly pictured in the experiences of Elijah 
and Elisha. 

"AFORETIME FOR OTO LEARNING" 

" 'It may be asked, How do we know that the Lord caused 
these things in olden times to be recorded for the benefit of 
the church ? The Scriptures answer : 'Whatsoever things 
were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we 
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have 
hope'. (Romans 15:4) And again, 'All these things happened 
unto them for ensampies [types], and they are written for 
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world [ages] are 
come'. (1 Corinthians 10:11) We have reached the end of 
the world, as clearly shown by Biblical testimony. Even wise 
men of the world recognize this fact The term world means 
order of things. We are witnessing the passing away of the 
old order and the coming in of the new. Therefore, we have 
the additional proof that the unfolding of the prophecies 
would be at this time for the benefit of that class of Christian 
people whose hearts are wholly devoted to the Lord's cause. 

" 'In the light of these prophecies, Bible students can plainly 
understand why so much persecution came upon them during 
the recent war. It was not limited to one country, but took 
place in many countries. Instead, therefore, of being discouraged
 or downcast by these experiences, they rejoice to 
know that they are counted worthy to be partakers of the 
sufferings of Christ. The five thousand people that have 
come to this convention from every part of the United States 
and Canada witness by their presence, by their beaming 
countenances, that they are rejoicing in all the experiences 
through which they have been privileged to pass up to this 
time. St. Paul says, 'For unto you it is given in the behalf 
of Christ, not only to believe on him, but as a privilege also 
to suffer for his sake'. (Philippians 1 :2g) 'If we suffer with 
him we shall also reign with him.' (2 Timothy 2:12) We 
may be assured, then, that unless we have some experiences 
like unto the Lord and the Apostles we could not have the 
witness that we are his. The Lord caused St. Peter to say: 
'Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fire that is to 
try you, as though some strange thing had happened unto 
you, but rejoice inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's 
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of God that 
leadeth to glory rests upon you: on their part [the nonChristians
] he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified
. If any man suffer as a Christian. \et him not be ashamed, 
but let him glorify God in this behalf/ (1 Peter 4:12-16) 
The world cannot understand why the Christian is happy 
amidst trials and tribulations, The men of the world reason 
that when one becomes a Christian he ought to expect to have 
more natural blessings than before, but the consecrated Christian
 sees that it is his privilege to walk in the footsteps of 
Jesus and suffer in the same character of suffering that Jesus 
and the Apostles experienced, in order that he might be qualified
 to associate with Jesus in the great work that is to follow 
in uplifting and blessing mankind. St Peter makes this clear, 
saying, 'For hereunto were ye called, because Christ also 
suffered for us, leaving us an example that we should follow 
in his steps'. — 1 Peter 2:29. 

OFFENCES MUST COKE 

"The history of the footstep followers of Jesus from the 
days of the Apostles until now shows that all who are willing 
to live a sacrificial life and be true* faithful and loyal to the 
Lord and his cause have suffered persecution at the hands 
of those who have misunderstood them. As an example, John 
Bunyan spent twelve years in prison because of his faithful 
adherence to the principles of Christ It will ever be so until 


OCTOBBH 1,1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


295 


the church is finished. Then those who have engaged in the 
persecution will be sorry. The Scriptures indicate that they 
will weep tears of bitterness. Many of such have thought 
that they would be the chief ones in heaven, not understanding
 what heaven is. Yet, after all their tears are wiped away 
and they see that God has a gracious provision for all mankind
 and that through Christ, head and body, he will offer 
restitution blessings to all the world, then they will be glad. 
During this period of reconstruction under the Christ, all 
those of the world, learning obedience and humbly walking 
before the Lord, shall be lifted up and blessed with life, 
liberty and happiness. We confidently believe that the end 
of the journey of the church is at hand and that within a short 
time all its members will be removed from the earth; that 
the time of trouble now on the world will then cease and the 
Sun of Righteousness, rising with healing in its beams, will 
bring comfort and peace and blessings to the people. The 
faithful, however, the ones who cheerfully endure trials and 
tribulations for the truth's sake, for righteousness* sake, even 
unto the end — these shall be privileged to be associated with 
Christ in extending the blessings to the groaning creation. 
Seeing this coming to pass, the Christian has every reason to 
rejoice and he can appreciate the Apostle's words, when he 
said: 'Rejoice in the Lord; and again I say, Rejoice!'" 

We quote from Friday's issue of the Register: 
"Describing creation from the beginning until the present 
day, Pastor J. B. Alford, Texas, told the 5.000 Bible students 
assembled at Cedar Point yesterday, that God was bringing 
about his wonderful creation of a perfect earth in a perfectly 
natural way, in harmony with hi^ own natural laws. 

"The address created a profound impression, as did one by 
Prof. F. H. Robison, Pittsburgh, formerly of Cleveland, serving
 as foreign secretary of the International Bible Students 
Association. He spoke of the episode of the Lord with His 
disciples after the woman of Samaria had been greeted by 
him at the well A. H. Macmillan, Xova Scotia, also talked. 

THE WONDEES OF CREATION 

"Pastor Alford spoke on the topic: The Wonders of Creation
'. He stated that Bible students had often heard and 
studied of the times of restitution of all things in respect to 
mankind, but that he intended to bring before their minds the 
material side of this restitution, as it will relate to the atmosphere
, plant and animal life, and cosmogony in general. 

"He said in part : 'Man was created perfect in mind, body, 
and morals, an earthly image of his Creator, and to him was 
given the blessing of Jehovah and the commission: 'Be fruitful
, and multiply, and fill the earth, and subdue it, and have 
dominion'. (Genesis I :2&) Evidently the purpose of the 
Lord was that if man remained in his pristine purity and perfection
, that he would not only take care of the especially 
prepared Garden of Eden, where everything was perfect, but 
would extend that Garden until it took in the whole remainder 
of the earth, which was not brought up to the same standard 
of perfection as Eden. 

" 'However, we must not think that the remainder of the 
earth was in the condition in which it is now. In spite of all 
the progress during the last century along agricultural lines, 
the earth outside the Garden of Eden was far in advance of 
the best cultivated parts of the earth today. This is proven 
by the discovery of buried fossil remains of many varieties of 
luscious fruits now extinct; such a discovery was reported as 
having taken place in the state of Pennsylvania on July 3d of 
this year, the report being in the 'Saturday Blade' published 
in Chicago, July 5th, iqiq. 

" 'This condition of luxuriance was sustained as long as the 
earth was surrounded by the canopy of vapor, called by scientists
 'the last ring , which caused the whole earth to be one 
vast greenhouse, because the sun's rays could not strike the 
earth directly, but gave a diffused, equable light and temperature
. 

" 'A tremendous change took place when the ring broke and 
precipitated itself upon the earth, causing the Biblical flood, 
the 'Ice Age 1 of the scientists. Our seasons began at that 
time, with the extreme heat and extreme cold; and from that 
time began the present condition of the earth, when the curse 
began to operate fully: 'Thorns and thistles shall the ground 
bring forth'. (Genesis 3:18) A whole earthfull of exuberant 
life was destroyed, both animal and vegetable. 

ECONOMY 07 GOD'S ARRANGEMENTS 

41 'This is evidenced by the present atmosphere surrounding 
the earth. Scientists tell us that 77 percent of the atmosphere 


is nitrogen, an inert gas which undergoes no change when it 
is breathed by animal and plant life. This, we are informed 
by those who have made it a study, is a gas composed of 
organic substances decomposed and changed to gaseous form; 
in other words, the element called nitrogen is the direct result 
of decomposition of organic matter, at the time of the flood. 

" 'The Lord promised that in the time of the end of the 
present evil order of things, when the time has come, not to 
destroy the earth, which 'abideth forever', (Ecclesiastes 1:4) 
but to usher in a new order of things, that then 'knowledge 
*ha11 be increased, and the wise shall understand'. (Daniel 
124, 10) Hence, even the scientists and evolutionist* are 
learning more and more about the earth. In fact, everybody 
is learning something except the modern theologian. 

" 'Now that the time is near when man will regain his lost 
dominion he is learning how to 'subdue the earth', to harness 
the elements to do his bidding. For instance, by growing certain
 leguminous plants, which have the power to extract the 
nitrogen from the air by a process of osmosis, through nodules 
on their roots caused by certain microbes, the nitrogen is returned
 to the soil, oftentimes increasing the value of the land 
$25.00 per acre. Also, in the culture of pecans in Texas, where 
previously in the wild state it took forty years for a pecan 
tree to come to full bearing, now it begins to bear fruit eight 
times the size of the wild pecan on the third year after planting
, and is in full bearing in eight years, producing $350.00 
worth of fruit per acre. 

" 'The wonderful economy of God is evidenced by the fact 
that when the resurrection takes place, and 'all that are in 
their graves shall come forth', by the end of the thousand 
years of the Millennium, all the nitrogen will have been used 
from the air for the creation of the twenty billions of human 
bodies, and for the enriching of the soil of the earth, so that 
the restored human race will find the atmosphere composed 
of oxygen and carbon-dioxide, the oxygen for the human race 
and the animals, and the carbon-dioxide for the plant life, 
and as in the process of respiration animal life gives out 
carbon-dioxide and takes in oxygen, and plant life the opposite, 
each would harmonize and cooperate with the other. 

"This gives a faint idea of how the Lord God Almighty 
will bring about his wonderful creation of a perfect earth, in 
a perfectly natural way, in harmony with his own laws of 
nature. If the world of mankind could only catch a glimpse 
of God's wonderful plans, it would bring them on their knees 
before him in heartfelt praise and adoration for such a 
wonderful plan and such a wonderful God.' 

THE NEW CKEATUEE'S FOOD 

H Professor Robison selected as his topic John 4:32-36, describing
 the episode of the Lord and his disciples after he had 
spoken with the woman of Samaria at the well. His disciples 
urged the Lord to eat, as it was time, and he replied: 'I have 
meat to eat that ye know not of. The speaker explained that 
at this time the Lord had been anointed with the holy Spirit, 
and thus had been begotten as a new creature, but he was 
speaking to those who had not yet been thus begotten ; hence 
his words, 'meat to eat that ye know not of. And what this 
meat or food was, the Master explained, saying: 'My meat is 
to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his worV. 

" 'What was the comparison the Lord used here? The Lord 
was here telling them that his food (the word translated 
'meat' meaning 'food* in a general sense) was to do what 
God wished him to do. Food is what we take into the system, 
to nourish it, keep it active, and to sustain it. So the Master, 
as a spirit-begotten new creature, was simply stating that to 
do the will of God was what was nourishing this new creature, 
keeping it active, and sustaining it Of course, the disciples 
could not understand him, even as no one not begotten of tkt 
Spirit can understand this at the present 

" 'At Pentecost, however, the followers of the Lord were 
also anointed with the holy Spirit, thus also begotten as new 
creatures, and from thenceforth the church, composed of the 
true followers of the Lamb, wherever they might be, can and 
do appreciate the Lord's words. Also, they themselves are of 
the same mind, and their food as new creatures is to do the 
will of the Father in heaven. 

" 'But was not our Lord always doing the Father's will, 
even before he came to earth? He tells us he came to do 
God's will. (Hebrews 10:7) The distinction is that now for 
the first time he was doing God's will when it meant the 
suffering of persecution, ignominy and shame. Yet, even in 
the Garden of Gethsemane, he was able to say : 'Not my will, 
but thine be done,' that is, 'Although I would that this cup 


296 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa 


pass from me! that if it be possible, I be not crucified as a 
blasphemer against God, nevertheless, notwithstanding, irrespective
 of my own will, choice, or preference, not my will, 
but thine be done'. 

" 'Think what this meant! The one in all the universe 
most faithful to the Father would have to die an ignominious 
death, as a malefactor and a blasphemer. Not only at the end 
of his ministry, but from beginning to end of his three and 
one-half years of trial time, the Lord Jesus showed the same 
spirit, manifested that his meat was indeed to do the will of 
him that had sent him. 

" 'He had left the courts of heavenly glory, had come into 
a rebellious and sinful world to die as the ransom price for 
mankind, a willing sacrifice. After two years of the proclamation
 of his coming kingdom, and the performing of 
many miracles, we read in the sixth chapter of John how he 
fed rive thousand in the wilderness, and how the multitude 
would have taken him by force and made him king, (John 
6:15) We can see why they did this. The Jews had a scheme 
of their own for the carrying out of God's plans, They 
wished to rebel against Rome, set up their own kingdom, and 
thus bring about the blessing of all the peoples of the earth. 
Doubtless they chose Jesus as being the most popular leader, 
who would be able to lead them against Rome, and although 
they thought him a little too modest, they hoped that if they 
used force, he might capitulate to their wishes. 

'TO FINISH HIS WOBK" 

" The psychological moment was at hand, if he wished to 
take another course than that of self-sacrifice. But he 
wavered not at all, for in the same verse we read: 'He departed
 again into a mountain himself alone'. 

" 'From that time on, it seems that his popularity with the 
people was more or less on the wane. When, at the Feast of 
Tabernacles, which was one of the two great feasts of the 
Jews, he stood in the temple and cried: 'If any man thirst, 
let him come unto me and drink' (John 7-37)- He was offering
 them the very thing they needed, yet none came to mm to 
ask him how he proposed to give them the living water of life, 
although fully 30,000 people must have been within the range 
of his voice, for this feast was attended by Jews from all 
parts of the earth. 

" 'At the close of his ministry, even Peter, the oldest of the 
disciples, older than our Lord in the flesh, gave way under 
the pressure of the time, and turned against the Master. The 
Lord might have said : 'Here he has been with me for three 
and a half years, and should certainly have imbibed something 
of the truth; yet he, the oldest of my disciples, has had the 
most advantages among the twelve apostles, who have had the 
most advantages among the nation of Israel, which has had 
the most advantage of all the races of earth— if Peter would 
turn against me and deny me thus, what would not the rest of 
them do?' But no, the Lord knew the will of God was for 
him to die as a sacrifice, and he remained faithful to the very 
end. 

"A, H. Macmillan, of Nova Scotia, said : 

" 'To this end was I born, and for this purpose came I into 
the world, to bear witness to the truth.' These words of our 
Lord Jesus to Pilate at the time of his trial set forth one of 
the main objects of Christ's life. The Master here showed 
with clearness that one of the main objects of his advent into 
the world was not to delve into Jewish politics, not to spend 
his time in various moralistic and humanitarian works, great 
and admirable though such works would be, but to bear testimony
 to the truth concerning God's plans and purposes^ for 
the blessing of mankind. It is true there were other objects 
in his leaving the heavenly glory which he had with the Father 
before the world was : he came to 'seek and to save that which 
was lost'; he came to 'give himself a ransom for many'; but 
his bearing witness to the truth was almost inseparably bound 
up with those exahed missions. 

"THE DESIRE OF AJLL NATIONS" 

" That kingdom, the true testimony of which the Lord bore 
and which true testimony he passed on to the Apostles and 
through them to his faithful followers of this Gospel age, 
will prove to be the very thing which man has wanted and 
needed all along. It will be the 'desire of all nations'. For 
the privilege of testifying to that message our Lord and all 
his faithful followers have counted shame, ignominy, imprisonment
, persecution and death as nothing. If they called 
the Master of the honse Beelzebub for his faithfulness in declaring
 the Messianic kingdom and for the things necessarily 


associated with that declaration, it need not be surprising if 
they apply similar epithets to his followers who are, of course, 
imperfect and much more likely to call forth the criticism of 
the enemies of truth.' " 

The Sandusky Register of Saturday, the 6th, gives 
a lengthy report of Brother Rutherford's discourse to 
the colaborers. We do not quote it here, however, 
for the reason that it appears in substance in the 
former issue of The Watch Tower under the subject
 "Announcing the Kingdom/' Brother A. M. 
Graham's discourse we quote from the Register as 
follows : 

"Evangelist A. M. Graham, of Boston, Mass., selected as 
his text, Isaiah 60:1-3, reading as follows: 'Arise, shine; for 
thy light is come, and the glory oi the Lord is risen upon thee. 
For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross 
darkness the people; but the Lord shall arise upon thee, and 
his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall 
come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.' 

"He said" in part : 'The Bible pictures this in a remarkable 
way in the experiences of Elijah the prophet of God, and the 
priests of Baal, which was an idol worshiped by the apostate 
children of Israel during the reign of the wicked King Ahab. 

"'1 Kings 18: Elijah and the prophets or priests of Baal 
went up on Mt. Carmel to see by a test as to whether Jehovah 
or Baal was the true God. The test was one of fire: both 
Elijah and the Baal prophets were to offer a sacrifice to their 
respective gods, and the god that would answer by fixe which 
would consume the sacrifice would be proved to be the true 
god. 

"FERADVENTUBE HE SLEEPETH** 

" 'All day, from morning to night, the priests of Baal 
shouted and yelled to their god, Baal; they cried aloud and 
cut themselves with knives and lancets and leaped up and 
down upon the altar, but no fire came down upon their sacrifice
. Elijah mocked them, saying: 'Cry aloud! either Baal is 
having a conversation, or is on a hunting trip, or has gone on 
a journey, or perhaps is taking a nap and must be awakened'. 

'"But beyond these remarks, Elijah had nothing to say 
during the whole of that day; the priests of Baal had the 
floor, so to speak. It was only when evening came that Elijah 
got busy and prepared his altar and his sacrifice, and then 
Jehovah answered by fire, as we know from the Scriptures. 

"T believe this illustrates in type, pictures very well the 
conditions during the Gospel age. From the death of the 
Apostles until 1874 the false religious systems have had full 
control, and have done the yelling, howling and shouting, and 
have failed to accomplish that which they have been howling 
for— the conversion of the world. They are well represented 
by the 450 priests of Baal there on Mt. Carmel. Elijah, on 
the other hand, represents the true Christians during the 
Gospel age, in this picture, who, though very small in number 
when compared to the false systems, have been fearlessly declaring
 and showing up the false claims of the false church 
organizations. This has been one of the principal themes^ of 
all the great reformers from the Apostles' time to this— Arius, 
Waldo, Wycliffe, Martin Luther, and Pastor Russell, with all 
their co-workers. 

"'Elijah had his chance at the close of the day, picturing 
well the fact that at the close of the 'day of salvation' of the 
Gospel age the Elijah class, or true saints, are having their 
chance ; the evening of this age being the harvest period, beginning
 in 1874. Since 1874 Christians have been permitted 
to preach the Gospel that Jesus proclaimed, and to place it 
before tlu people, ric ured by Elijah building up again the 
altar of the Lord, which had fallen down. 

THE WORLD NOT CONVERTED 

" 'Keeping in mind that the 450 priests of Baal represented 
the preachers of our day, we can see how appropriate the application
 is. Anyone who has attended an old-fashioned 
Methodist camp meeting will have no doubt that the picture 
of the yelling and shouting of the priests well applies. Some 
thirty years ago Methodists said: Tf we only had a man big 
enough to do the job!' So the Lord gave them— Billy Sunday! 
He certainly qualifies as a fulfillment of the priests-of-Baal 
illustration. He jumps up and down, yells, shouts, cries 
aloud, and does various gymnastic stunts on the platform. 

" 'Also he is a big man, because he always manages to get 
the biggest salary, and this is the standard of bigness in vogue 
in the world today. But still the world remains unconverted — 
their god seems to refuse to answer. 


October i f 19:9 


THE WATCH TOWER 


297 


" But now the time has come for the Elijah class to demonstrate
. It has been reported that in 1914 the Baptist people 
in their annual gathering discussed the question of how they 
could 'get that man Russell*. Finally they said: 'He has been 
preaching that the world will end in October, 1914. When 
that time comes and the world does not end, we will brand 
him as a false prophet and an imposter.' They overlooked 
the fact that our teaching was and is that it is not the physical 
earth that will end, but the governmental, social, religious, 
political world — in ether words, the entire present order of 
things must give way to a new order of things. However, 
when in July 1914 the world war began, and by October, 1914, 
all newspaper correspondents and great statesmen of the world 
were freely predicting that unless something happened to stop 
the war, civilization and Christianity would go down into 
revolution and anarchy, this shut up the mouths of these 
Baptist preachers so completely and so thoroughly that they 
have never dared to open their yoppers since ! What had 
happened? The tire had come down! And just as the fire 
in the type of Elijah burned up not only the sacrifice, but the 
stones of the altar as well, so this fire will not stop until the 
whole of every unjust and autocratic institution is burned up 
and destroyed 

" 'This was the test — the coming down of fire ; and the fulfillment
 exactly on time has proved that Pastor Russell was 
one of God's great reformers and prophets. Do you believe 
that? Well, let me tell you that the preachers believe it too, 
but are afraid to say so ! They say : 'That man Russell is an 
awful man; — he never takes up a collection, and gives everything
 away free!' So far as I can learn, that is the worst 
charge they have against us ! When I was a boy, we used to 
say that there are two kinds of Christians, — Papists and 
Protestants. Now we will have to say there are two kinds 
of Christians — Papists and Apists ; because the only thing left 
of Protestantism is the 'ism', — the protest is all gone, and they 
are trying to ape that which they once repudiated. Our text 
says : 'Arise, shine !' Dear friends, it is for us to let our lights 
shine, that men may realize that false religious systems are 
the worst foes of the liberties of mankind. 1 

GIDEON CHOSEN 

"Pastor Oscar Magnuson, of New York, chose as the topic 
of his discourse the 6th, 7th and 8th chapters of the Book of 
Judges, describing the feat of Gideon and his band of 300 men 
in putting to utter rout an army of 135,000 Midianites, 
Amelekites, and children of the East, who had come against 
Israel at the close of the harvest season. This episode, the 
speaker said, well pictured the final experiences of the church 
of Christ, the true Christians, after the harvest period of the 
Gospel age had drawn to a close. Pastor Magnuson then 
went on to explain the symbolisms as follows : 

" The angel of the Lord found Gideon threshing wheat— 
the antitypical Gideons, the true saints, are found occupied in 
the same way — seeking for the wheat among the chaff and 
tares ; seeking for true Christians among the great mass of 
hypocrites and lukewarm ones. This also proves that the entire
 incident which followed the coming of the angel belongs 
after the harvest period of this Gospel age has closed, in antitype
. The angel appeared to Gideon as a man and commissioned
 him to go and destroy the Midianites. Gideon objected 
that he was too weak, and the Israelites too few. To this the 
angel replied, speaking as a representative of Jehovah: 
'Surely I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites 
as one man'. (Judges 6: 16) What a comfort we find in this, 
that the Lord has promised to be with us in our fight against 
great odds, against error and false doctrines firmly entrenched 
among mankind ; and the Lord has promised beforehand that 
we shall succeed in smiting the enemy and scattering them. 
As a sign of confirmation, the angel accepted the sacrifice that 
Gideon immediatly offered, and disappeared from his sight. 

" 'The next command from the Lord was for Gideon to 
break down the altar of Baal ; which he did that night with 
ten trusted servants. This pictures the effect of the dissemination
 of the truths— the breaking down of all idols, 
whether of material things or of false doctrines of hell fire, 
eternal torture, etc. Then we find Gideon filled with the 
spirit of the Lord and preparing to go against the Midianites 
by sounding the call to arms. In the same way, each time the 
Christian goes out with the truth, whether by printed page, 
word of mouth, etc., it strengthens him for the next combat. 

THE FEABFUL AND AFBAXD 

" 'We find that 32,000 gathered themselves to Gideon. But 
when they viewed the hosts of their enemies 'like grasshoppers 


for multitude* home never looked so good to them as just 
then, and they wished they had an opportunity not to be in 
this fight. Knowing this, the Lord said : 'Whosoever is fearful 
and afraid, let him return and depart from Mt. Gilead'. He 
did not need to repeat it. 22,000 availed themselves of the 
opportunity. So in the Christian fight. The Lord never 
drafts anyone into his army. He wants only volunteers; and 
these volunteers must be fearless : God does not want cowards. 
He invites all who are afraid to get away as quickly as they 
can run, to 'depart early'. 

" 'But still there were too many, even though only 12,000 
were left, said the Lord. So he applied another test, saying: 
'Bring them down to the water, and I will try them for thee 
there*. (Judges 7:4) How glad we are that it is the Lord 
that will try and test his people ; he has not commissioned that 
task to you or to me. He can read the heart; we can not 
When the 12,000 got to the water, some acted as though they 
had not had a drink for a long time; they lay down and drank 
and drank and drank. These represent a class of truth people 
who are always drinking in the truth, but never watching for 
and seeking opportunities to serve the Lord and to proclaim 
the truth. Of all the 12,000, only 300 men took the water up 
in their palms and lapped it, meanwhile keeping their eyes on 
the enemy and upon the leader for his commands. These 
picture the very few really wide awake and active followers 
oi the Lord, who partake of the truth for the purpose of being 
refreshed and enabled to fight the battle of the Lord. They 
say : 'We did not come to the waters merely to drink : we 
came here to fight'. 

" The Lord said that these 300 men would capture the 
Midianites. Gideon divided these into three companies, 
equipped them with trumpets, and torches hid in pitchers. 
They surrounded the mighty host of the enemy, and at 
Gideon's signal sounded their trumpets, broke the pitchers and 
let the light shine, and shouted: 'The sword of the Lord and 
of Gideon'. And the Midianites fled in confusion, slaying one 
another in their fright. So will the fearless sounding forth 
of truth cause all errors to take flight.* " 

MANY BAPTIZED 

The Sunday issue of The Register contained, besides
 a fuller report of Brother Wise's talk, these 
items of interest : 

"Following an eloquent discourse on Baptism by Pastor C 
A. Wise, Indianapolis, vice president of the International 
Bible Students Association, over 200 members of the society 
were baptized Saturday afternoon at the Cedar Point bathing 
beach. 

"A throng of more than 6,000 persons lined the beach in 
the vicinity of the sea swing to witness the unusual spectacle. 
More than 100 bathers halted their sports and collected near 
the scene to observe the ceremony. 

"After the talk of Pastor Wise, applicants for baptism 
formed in line and marched to the bath houses, where the 
women donned loose, black apparel for the occasion, while 
the men were in black bathing suits. 

"Volunteers from the delegates conducted the ceremony of 
immersion, forming in a semi-circle about 100 feet from 
shore. Those seeking baptism waded out to the volunteers 
who conducted the rite of immersion and the line of men and 
women continued back to shore with scarcely any interruption. 

"In this manner the numerous applicants were baptized in 
less than an hour and a half. It was explained to them that 
the act of baptism was a symbol representing their willingness 
to^ enter the service of Christ unto death. Pastor J. A. Bohnet 
Pittsburgh, had charge of the immersion. 

LAB0B PLENTIFUL NOW 

" 'Labor' was the subject upon which Pastor W. F. Salter, 
manager _ of Canadian work, of Winnipeg, Canada, spoke, 
basing his remarks upon the text: 'For we are co-laborers 
together with God'. He said: 

"'Our subject implies that there is labor to do; it also implies
 that there is more than one laborer to carry on that labor. 
Not only are we said to be co-laborers with the heavenly 
Father, but our commission is also to be co-laborers one with 
another to carry on the work of our God on this side the vail. 
We also recognize that if we are going to participate in that 
great work with God, the work which he has for us at this 
time, we must walk in the light, even as God himself is in 
the light. We recognize that in the past 40 years the light 
has come through the agency of God's wise and faithful 
servant, Pastor Russell, bringing to you and to me the har- 


298 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


monious plan of our heavenly Father, long hidden by the 
false and erroneous teachings of the Dark Ages, 

" This then is the message which we have heard of him, 
and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness
 at all. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk 
in darkness, we lie, and do not tell the truth; but |if we walk 
in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with 
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us 
from sin.'— I John I :57. 

" 'We recognize that the time has come when the increasing 
light indicates that there is a great work ahead for us to perform
. We recognize that; we are not talking about a literal 
light but the great symbolical light of the Bible, that illuminates
 our hearts and minds as to the Plan of God and the 
character of God. As the great Jehovah God is without beginning
 or ending, of necessity his plans and purposes must 
be without end. And therefore, throughout the ages of eternity
, God will be revealing himself more and more to his intelligent
 creations on various planes of being— human and 
spiritual. Therefore it has been well said that it will require 
eternity to know God.' 

"Lecturer W. A. Baker, of Portland, Ore., addressed the 
big open-air gathering of the Bible Students upon the grandest 
quality of the Christian's character: the quality of love; taking
 as his text: I John 2:5, 'Whoso keepeth his word, in him 
verily is the love of God perfected.' 

BOTH NEWSPAPERS GENEEOUS 

The Sandusky Register in its Tuesday (September 
9) issue gives a full-page report of the public discourse
 delivered by the President of the Society, and 
another full-page giving a brief resume of the work 
of Pastor Russell and his associates, and of the trial 
and conviction of several Bible Students for the publication
 of The Finished Mystery, and their subsequent
 release. We are advised that a copy of this 
issue went to every newspaper in the United States 
and Canada. 

One of its leading headings reads : 

"The annual convention of the International Bible Students 
Association, by far the biggest thing of its kind ever held in 
this part of the Great Lakes section, was concluded with a 
rousing open-air mass meeting at Cedar Point Sunday afternoon
." 

The Sandusky Star-Journal also carried lengthy reports
 of the convention. We quote from the StarJournal
 of September 8: 

"Hundreds of Sanduskyans and residents from nearby 
places who visited Cedar Point Sunday, the last day of the 
resort's season, were vividly reminded of the contrast with 
the last days of former years at the Point, particularly before 
the State became arid. Crowds on the steamer 'Boeckling* in 
the evening sang, 'God Be With You Till We Meet Again', 
instead of 'Hail, Hail, the Gang's All Here', as was frequent 
in other years. 

"Nearly 300 were baptized in Lake Erie before a large 
crowd late Saturday afternoon. Volunteers formed in a semicircle
 in the Lake near the sea swing and performed the 
baptismal rites as the candidates waded out to them. 

"President Rutherford spoke to nearly 7,000 persons under 
the trees Sunday afternoon. He declared a League of Nations 
formed by the political and economic forces, moved by a desire
 to better mankind by establishment of peace and plenty 
would accomplish great good, and then asserted that the 
Lord's displeasure is certain to be visited upon the League, 
however, because the clergy — Catholic and Protestant — claiming
 to be God's representatives, have abandoned his plan and 
endorsed the League of Nations, hailing it as a political expression
 of Christ's kingdom on earth." 

SLEEP, KEPOSE, AND— GA 

In each room at the hotel the friends found a little 
card of greetings from the President of the Society, 
and this card suggested regular hours of retiring, that 
all might be refreshed for the next day; and it was 
noted that this suggestion was very closely observed. 
So by eleven o'clock each night Cedar Point was quiet 
and peaceful. Nothing could be heard save the gentle 
swashing of the waves against the shore. 


After the evening services those friends who lodged 
in Sandusky had a pleasant ride across the bay, the 
while they watched the iridescent shimmer of the 
moonbeams on the water, or sang together the songs 
of Zion. Those who stayed on the Point strolled 
along the silver strand, or watched as 

"Silently, one by one, in the infinite meadows of heaven. 

Blossomed the stars — the forget-me-nots of the angels." 
The fresh breezes and the pacific setting of the scene 
prepared the friends for repose. 

Many were reminded of how Jesus and his disciples 
must have walked the sands of Galilee's shore and 
given praise to Jehovah as they gazed upon the 
wonders of his creation and looked forward to the 
time when his glory shall fill the whole earth as the 
waters rill the deep. 

On the card above mentioned, and on the back of 
the program, was a sign in gold — the cryptic characters
 GA. Larger signs of the same thing had been 
painted and hung about the book store and hotel lobby 
and other places. No explanation was given at the 
time of the meaning of these letters, and many of the 
friends were guessing. Sometimes one would come 
and say: 'T have solved it: GA means Gideon's 
Army". Another would say: "I have it: It means 
Guess Again"; and thus they guessed, and looked forward
 with expectancy until the explanation was given, 
which accordingly was done Friday afternoon, as previously
 promised. 

CO-UUBOBEBS* DAT 

The real climax of the convention was reached on 
Friday — Colaborer's Day. The addresses and testimony
 meetings were chiefly for the benefit of colporteurs
 and other workers. At three o'clock in the 
afternoon, according to the program, Brother Rutherford
 addressed the colaborers, and in the midst of his 
address announced the purpose of the Society to publish
 The Golden Age — the new magazine mentioned 
in the previous issue of The Watch Tower. After 
making announcement he called upon those present to 
know how many desired to enter into this work and 
who would enter into it. The response was an inspiring
 scene. Six thousand people, as one person, arose, 
and standing they sang with a zest and zeal known 
only by those who follow in the footsteps of Jesus the 
beautiful words: 

"Send out thy light and truth, Lord; 

Let them our leaders be 
To guide us to thy holy hill 

Where we shall worship thee." 

Many remarked that never before had such an inspiring
 scene been witnessed; never before had any who 
attended that convention seen anything to compare 
with the loving zeal and enthusiasm and devotion 
manifested by the people of God. 

Then followed the address of Brother R. J. Martin, 
office manager of the Society, in which he outlined the 
detailed methods for the new work of obtaining subscriptions
 for The Golden Age. Brother Martin 
pointed out how by systematic efforts it would be an 
easy matter to procure 4,000,000 subscriptions in less 
than a year. Since The Golden Age will carry a 
large amount of religious matter and explain presentday
 events in the light of divine prophecy, and since 
it is a thirty-two-page magazine, published twice each 
month, a subscription list such as above stated would 
be the most extensive volunteer matter we have ever 
had, and in such form as we believe the people would 


OCTOBKJt 1, 191 9 


THE WATCH TOWER 


299 


readily take it. Coming to them at this time of distress
 in the world, it will be readily taken, because it 
will comfort those that mourn and bind up the broken 
hearted. These details for The Golden Age work 
have been mailed to the various class secretaries, and 
already the subscriptions are coming in. 

ADVANCE SUBSCRIPTIONS 

As an incident showing how readily the people 
desire something of this kind, one of the sisters made 
a short journey during the convention and, talking to 
strangers on the boat about The Golden Age, she 
procured rive subscriptions. One business man who 
employs a large number of people remarked : "As 
soon as this magazine is out, send it to me, and I am 
sure all my employees will want to subscribe". 

Long had the dear friend? waited, prayed and hoped 
that the Lord would open some new method of spreading
 the truth, announcing the kingdom of Messiah. 
And when the announcement was made, detailing how 
the Lord had led up to this method of spreading the 
truth, the dear friends responded with gladness of 
heart. There seemed to be no dissenting voice in that 
great throng of people. Evidently Satan was there, 
because he always maintains an office at such times 
and places. But manifestly he was there as an onlooker
, and truly we may say: "Thou preparest a table 
before me in the presence of mine enemies". — Psalm 

23:5- 

It was a wonderful convention ! it was marvelous 

for eyes to behold ; and in the language of one dear, 
zealous brother: "The meeting was a miracle — the 
most wonderful meeting ever held on this earth!" It 
has long been customary to say of each convention: 
"This is the best yet," and therefore the phrase sounds 
somewhat trite. However, we believe it will be the 
unanimous opinion of every one who attended the 
Cedar Point Convention that there never has yet been 
held a convention of the Lord's, people wherein such a 
wonderful spirit of unity, of devotion to the Lord, of 
willingness to do his will was manifested, as at this 
convention. And why should it not be thus, realizing 
that the church is but small in numbers, and that the 
war is on between it and the beast, the members of 
the church should stand as one, united, harmonious 
body, battling together to the pulling down of the 
strongholds of error. Had there been any differences 
between any of those who assembled at the convention 


prior to coming there, seemingly all were wiped away, 
and the heart sentiment of each found expression in 
the words of St. Paul: "Forgetting the things that are 
behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are 
before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus". (Philippians 
3:13) It w r as good to be there! The Lord was there, 
and he showered upon every one blessings of loving 
kindness. 

MESSAGES OF GREETING 

But the dear friends who could not be there must 
not be overlooked. Some exercised self-sacrifice in 
staying at home, that others might attend. Many of 
those whose attendance was hindered by one cause and 
another sent telegrams and letters of greetings and 
good wishes. The Lord reward them according to 
their hearts' desires. 

Officers of the Boeckling Company, owners of the 
Cedar Point summer resort, were deeply impressed 
with the Bible Students. They had never seen anything
 like them. The second day we were there, forty 
of the kitchen and dining room employees called a 
strike and refused to work. Immediately a sufficient 
number of our young brothers and sisters volunteered 
and did the work in the kitchen and dining room, 
greatly to the pleasure of the management, who gladly 
paid them the regular wages. Soon the hotel clerks 
and officers caught the habit of calling everyone 
Brother and Sister, and seemed to appreciate them 
very much. The President of the Boeckling Company
 said to Brother Macmillan: "I never saw such 
people as these. If you can make my help do their 
work as readily as these people do theirs, it will be 
worth $10,000 to me 1 '. Nearly ail the occupants of 
the rooms made their own beds, and thus made the 
work lighter for the hotel help. Generally there was 
a splendid impression made on all the officers and employees
 about the summer resort. On Sunday a 
great number of the employees requested reserved 
seats for the public lecture. Many of them received 
the volumes of Studies in the Scriptures before we 
left. Many were the interesting "items concerning the 
convention ; many were the kind expressions 
by the people who met the Bible students. We hope 
much good will be done, and that the sweetening influence
 of those who were there produced a lasting 
effect upon all with whom we came in contact. 


ADORATION 


I love my God, but with no love of mine, 

For I have none to give; 
\ love thee, Lord, but, oh, the love is thine, 

For by thy life I live. 
I am as nothing, and rejoice to be 
Emptied, and lost, and swallowed up in thee. 


Thou, Lord, alone, art all thy children need, 

And there is none beside; 
From thee the streams of blessedness proceed, 

In thee the bless'd abide, — 
Fountain of life, and all-abounding grace, 
Our source, our center, and our dwelling place. 


JEREMIAH COMMENDS THE RECHABITES 

November 2.— Jeremiah 35:1-8, 12-14, 18, 19. 

THE KINGDOM OF JUDAH NEARING ITS END — JEREMIAH'S EFFORTS TO SAVE HIS COUNTRY— INGRATITUDE AND MALICE OP THB 
LEADERS — UNAPPROVED FAULTFINDING AND NECESSARY EXPOSURE OF DANGER AND DANGEROUS TENDENCIES — THE WILL TO 
OBEY AS OFFSET TO NATURAL RETICENCE— MODERN DISESTEEM FOR JEREMIAH AND FOR THE LORD'S WORD GENERALLY. 

"Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God"— l Corinthians 10:31. 



HE lesson for today was evidently intended to be 
a temperance lesson; but the subject matter 
teals much more decidedly whh obedience than 
with over-indulgence in eating or drinking. 
Jeremiah lived in the most critical time in the 
history of the Jews. He was the prophet of 
the fall of Judah. At this time Judah was on 
the vergQ of ruin, though the actual downfall 
of Jerusalem did not occur until some eighteen 
years or so later than the time of^this lesson. 
Jeremiah in his public ministrations was bold, 
and his enemies probably thought that he enjoyed denouncing 
them, their sins, crimes, wrongs, their disobedience to God, 
which were all prevalent and growing in the kingdom of 
Judah. But privately, it seems, the prophet was of a gentle, 
sensitive nature, shrinking from public life. It was only^ his 
faithfulness to Jehovah that led him to prophesy the calamities 
which had been revealed to him. 

It would be difficult to find words inspired by deeper interest
 and compassion than some of those in the last part of 
the eighth and the first part of the ninth chapters of his 
prophecy: "For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I 
hurt O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
 of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of 
the daughter of my people!" And even Isaiah, with his firetipped
 tongue sublime, hardly exceeds the tender and exultant 
strain of Jeremiah in chapter 31:28: "And it shall come to 
pass that like sls I have watched over them, to pluck up and 
to break down, and to throw down, and to destroy, and to 
afflict; so will I watch over them to build, and to plant, saith 
the Lord". 

GEEAT CALAMITIES FORETOLD 

The prophet Jeremiah denounced the sins of the Jewish 
nation with great courage, and with an eloquence at once 
solemn and grand. He declared that the miseries which the 
people suffered were the special judgments of Jehovah, and he 
proclaimed repeatedly and openly, and in the most public 
places of the city, still heavier calamities, which he said were 
impending. Some of the people were annoyed and some were 
troubled at these prophetic warnings, and some of them were 
deeply incensed against Jeremiah for uttering them. 

Jeremiah could not lay much claim to popularity. No man 
can attack the pet shortcomings of a whole nation, or any 
considerable portion of a nation, without becoming unpopular. 
Such things are not unknown in our day; and the records of 
history bear abundant testimony that it has always been so. 
Jeremiah's sensitive nature made it all the more difficult for 
him to stand firm when they charged him with being disloyal, 
with being pro-Chaldean, with interfering with the military 
operations of the country. Yet this he did, and thus showed 
hh real courage. 

PRIESTS RESENTFUL AT GOD'S WORD 

Finally, on one occasion, he took his stand in one of the 
public courts of the temple, and addressing the concourse of 
priests and representative people that were there, he declared 
that, unless the nation repented of its sins and turned to God, 
the whole city should he overwhelmed. Even the Temple, the 
^acred house of God, should be destroyed, and the very site 
abandoned. He 'diminished not a word' of all that the Lord 
had given him to tell the people. — Jeremiah 26:2. 

The priests and the prophets and the people who heard this 
denunciation were greatly exasperated. From the order indicated
 in the account it seems evident that the priests were 
the most hotly incensed, because the prophecy implied that 
they would soon be out of a job. The priests' action had influence
 with the prophets; for they too began to realize the 
"dignity" of their position, to be conscious of the fact that 
they too were prophets as well as Jeremiah. No such message 
had been given to them, and besides, if it had, they had too 
much respect for the "institutions" of their country and, especially
, too much respect for their own standing in the community
 ever to deliver so ungracious a message. Nay verily ! 

What share the populace had in the demonstration was 
eridently, as usual, merely to furnish a sort of dramatic background
 for the star players. 


THE PROPHET SEIZED AND TRIED 

At all events they seized Jeremiah, and brought him before 
a great judicial assembly for trial. The judges asked him 
why he uttered such predictions, averring that by doing so 
he acted like an enemy to their country, and why he had 
spoken against the holy Temple, concerning which they were 
commanded to exercise the greatest deference and respect 
The excitement was very great against him ; the people, goaded 
on by the ecclesiastical functionaries of that time, demanded 
his life, could hardly, it would seem, be restrained from open 
violence. In the midst of this scene Jeremiah was calm and 
unmoved, and replied to their accusations in substance as 
follows : 

'Everything which I have said against this city and this 
house I have said by the direction of the Lord Jehovah. Instead
 of resenting it, and being angry with me for delivering 
my message, it becomes you to look at your sins and repent 
of them and forsake them. By so doing the Lord will hare 
mercy upon you, and will avert the calamities which otherwise 
will most certainly come. As for myself, here I am in your 
hands. You can deal with me just as you think best You 
can kill me if you will; but you may be assured that if yom 
do so, you will bring the guilt and consequence of skedding 
innocent blood upon yourselves and upon this city. I hare 
said nothing and foretold nothing but by the command of the 
Lord.' 

STEADIER HEADS PBEVATX 

The prophet's calmness and reasonable utterances produced 
an effect of greater sobriety upon both the rulers and tMe 
people. The finding of the princes was that he was not 
worthy to die, since he had spoken in the name of the Lord 
Apparently, however, some were more angry than ever, and 
were still eager to put the prophet to death. So certain of 
the elders of the land, sagacious laymen they were, reminded 
them of how Micah had spoken in similar manner in the days 
of Hezekiah against the city and the Temple; and so far from 
putting him to death for his warnings, they feared the Lord 
and were converted from their evil course and the city was 
spared. This conservative element in the mob prevailed- Jeremiah
's case was allowed to pass. It appears, however, that 
his safety was rather owing to the personal influence of one 
Ahikam than to any general feeling favorable to Jeremiah, 
that his life was preserved; and it would seem that ke was 
then either under some kind ol restraint, or else was in 90 
much danger from the animosity of his opponents as to make 
it prudent for him not to appear in public unless by tke Lord's 
special direction. 

THE SONS OF KECHAB TESTED 

It was shortly after this incident that the Lord directed 
Jeremiah to go to the house of the Rechabites, speak to them, 
bring them into the house of the Lord, the Temple, and to 
offer them wine to drink. Now the Rechabites were not 
properly of the twelve tribes, but they were of Abrahamic 
stock and circumcision. The names of the Rechabites show 
that they continued to be worshipers of Jehovah. Their rigid 
Nazaritish life seems to have been generally known. They 
not only did not drink wine, but they did not dwell in fixed 
habitations, nor own them; neither did they sow seed or plant 
vineyards. That austere method of living was probably enjoined
 upon them by their patriarch Jonadab, partly as a 
protest, and partly as a protection against the debauching 
effects of the licentious living of the Phoenicians and others 
with whom they would come more or less into contact 

This austere and abstemious mode of living made impossible 
for them to be admitted into the house of the Lord, into one 
of the chambers assigned to priests and Levites, within its 
precincts. They were received by the sons or followers of a 
"man of God", a prophet or devotee of special sanctity. Here 
they were tempted and found proof against the temptation, 
and their steadfastness turned into a reproof for the unfaithfulness
 of Judea and Jerusalem. 

RECOGNITION FOE THE EECHABITES 

The narrative of this trial ends with the stateraeat of * 
special blessing upon the house of Jonadab: "Jonadab, th« 
son of Rechab, shall not want 'a man to stand before me forever
". To stand before the Lord meant one thing — to aenre 


300 


OCTOMKK 1. . 4 H, 


THE WATCH TOWER 


;ior 


him in some priestly capacity, as did the Levites. (See 
Deuteronomy 10:8; 18:5, 7; Genesis 18:22; Judges 20:28; 
Psalm 134:1 ; etc.) The purity, the consecrated life, but above 
all the faithfulness of the sons of Rechab gained for them, 
as it gained for other Nazarites, this honor. Jewish writings 
support the implied meaning of this account when thy tell us 
that the Rechabites were adopted into the families of Israel, 
being probably incorporated into the tribe of Levi. 

The logic underlying this little tableau is something like 
this: If the Rechabites were so faithful to the behests of 
Jonadab, who was merely a patriarch of that family and himself
 an imperfect man, how much more reason was there for 
Judah to be obedient to the laws of Jehovah, given to them at 
the hand of Moses, since Jehovah was the God of all wisdom, 
justice, love, and power! 

If this incident be taken as teaching or implying that God 
enjoins prohibition of wine upon all classes of people, it proves 
too much. For wine was only one of the things which this 
ascetic tribe of Arabian nomads was forbidden. If we force 
the conclusion from this Scripture that it is wrong to drink 
wine, then we, in turn, are forced to the admission that it is 
wrong to build houses, to own them, to own farms, or to 
plant them — a conclusion which the reverend gentlemen who 
chose the topic for us would hardly be willing to admit. 

THOROUGH CLEANSING NEEDED 

Since prohibition is on the statutes of the land it is eminently
 proper for all to obey the law in this respect, but it is 
futile, as well as weak, to try to twist this account of the 
faithfulness of the Rechabites into a divine approval of man's 
puny efforts at legislating righteousness onto an unwilling 
world Prohibition is like dressing up a leper in evening 
clothes. He may or may not be more presentable in society, 
but he is still unclean. His real cleansing must begin from 
within, and that will not begin until those whose interests are 
identified with the corruptions of religion have been supplanted 
by the Sun of Righteousness, with healing in his beams. 

This blessing of the Rechabites with an honored position in 
the national life of Israel would be comparable to bringing in 
a band of Gypsies and making them vestry-men in the 
Cathedral of St. John the Divine. It would *be bitterly resented
 now; it was surely resented then. Possibly as a sequel 
to this cutting and dramatic rebuke of the festered iniquity 
of his people Jeremiah found himself in the "shut up" condition
 which he mentions in chapter 36:5, wherein it was not 
longer his privilege to go into the house of the Lord. But 
there, when he could not reach the rulers and the people with 


his voice, he dictated a prophecy to Baruch which was read' 
to the princes and the king. When it was destroyed, he wrote 
another, even more vehement than the first 
JEREMIAH STILL UNLOVED 

No wonder Jeremiah was unpopular. If a radical lecturer 
were to appear in the Stock Exchange on Wall Street and 
preach the utter downfall of the whole financial system and 
the triumph of forces long considered by them as foes, he 
could hardly be less loved than Jeremiah. And this faithful 
mouthpiece of the Lord, second of the major prophets, is still 
unpopular with the same class which there opposed him. In 
a contributed letter published in the Pensacola Journal, of 
July q, and evidently written by a high priest of militarism, 
the whole story of Jeremiah is treated in a cynical and superior 
manner. Among much else the writer, who signs himself 
"Gideon" and who claims to be a Christian, says: 

"Jeremiah weakened the forces of Israel and Judah 

and in both kingdoms formed a Defeatist Party. The Chaldeans
 are already raiding through Dan and Gad and Jeremiah 

cries out for the Jews to surrender without a fight One 

day word comes of Egyptian reinforcements and the Chaldean 
army hurriedly raises the siege of the northern cities, calls in 
the raiding columns and runs. Jeremiah, deciding his game 
is overhand lost, tries to escape with them, but is caught at the 
border," etc. "Finally the Jewish war party is shut up in the 
three cities of Judah proper, with the Chaldeans raiding on 

all sides The king takes Jeremiah for what he is— a 

Babylonian agent. He [the king] does not take the trouble 
to ask terms of Nebuchadnazar, the opposing general He 
goes direct to the enemy with his gates and asks for terms of 
capitulation." 

HIGHER CRITICS AND REAL WISDOM 

This man is so wise that he stands in his own light Over 
against his personal fancy we find real facts such as these : 
The New Testament quotes Jeremiah fifty-three times. 
Thirteen of the books of the New Testament quote Jeremiah. 
These books were written by seven different authors, at least 
four of whom were of the twelve apostles. All three of the 
synoptic gospels quote Jeremiah, and no less than six different
 times do they represent Jesus himself as quoting this 
wonderful prophet. Can this Christian militarist think that 
Christ was either an ignoramus or a deliberate imposter? The 
great Apostle Paul quotes Jeremiah eleven times. Was Paul 
a much-deceived and beclouded leader? And did God err 
when he permitted such a person to write a third of the New 
Testament? ! 


•WHAT POWER IS AT THE BOTTOM OF IT?" 


Dear Brethren . 

It is with the sweetest and most happy reflection upon the 
recent convention at Cedar Point, O., that I am writing this 
morning. What a blessing to have been there! What a 
privilege! What an opportunity! What a responsibility to 
thus have been associated with the dear Master himself for 
a whole week! For that he was present personally there can 
be no doubt. Was Brother Russell present there? Beyond 
any doubt in this world- Who else were there besides all 
these friends and helpers? Was Satan?* Beyond any doubt, 
he was there as an onlooker, but standing aloof: "Thou preparest
 a table before me in the presence of mine enemies". 
(Psalm 23:5) But what gratitude fills our hearts as we have 
this added proof that "he who is for us is more than all that 
can be against us". 

This meeting was a miracle — the most wonderful meeting 
ever held on this earth. Neither the world of politics, science, 
nor literature can or ever has staged such a meeting. Think 
of 5,000 poor people coming from every quarter of the globe 
at their own expense, consuming over a quarter of a million 
of dollars simply to "go to meeting". 

Think of the calm, deep, peaceful earnestness of almost 
every soul present — self forgotten. And while there were no 
bands playing, no flourish, no hilarity, no rudeness, yet there 
was unbounded joy, and seriousness. 

It seems to me it is quite necessary that we every one calmly 
and prayerfully meditate upon these things — go beneath the 
surface to see what power is at the bottom of it — that we may 
get the most good and the real meaning out of it. 

What was the Lord's object in staging this meeting? Unquestionably
 it was to satisfy a soul hunger in the heart of 
the church for the "meat in season" — a desire to know exactly 


what part they were to play in this final struggle between the 
forces of light and darkness; to do away with all uncertainty 
as to where his favor rested; to call to immediate action every 
consecrated soul; to send a wave of influence quickly throughout
 the whole world — a "wireless" if you please. All this was 
reflected in the tone of almost every discourse. This tone has 
never been observed in any other meeting. It means action 
now, it means to arms! 

Can any true son of God have any doubt about this work 
now? It seems impossible. Wliy even the world can clearly 
see and feel the truthfulness of our message and positionTherefore
, any of those who have tasted of the good word of 
God and been made partakers of the holy Spirit, to renounce 
it certainly means condemnation. 

The new work is awakening the hearty enthusiasm and cooperation
 of the whole church. What a happy thought it is 1 
What an army ! What quaking amongst the Midianites and 
Amalekites! as we hear them inquiring, "Where is God?" 

It seems to me the Lord's preference and arrangement 
should easily be recognized by every one of us, and should fill 
us with a spirit of thankfulness. 

We certainly owe a debt of gratitude to our brethren for 
the admirable and able manner in which this colossal meeting 
was handled. "May the God of all grace abundantly supply 
all your needs through Christ Jesus our Lord." Since this 
convention is over it has been a constant struggle to get back 
to earth again, and to get the machinery going once more. 

In lots of love to you every one, and seeking to please the 
Lord in every thing, I am, 

Your brother and fellow servant, 

0. L. Sullivan.— PUg. 


PETER'S GREAT CONFESSION 

November 9. — Matthew 16:13-24. 

PUBLIC SPINIOK IN REGARD TO OUR LORD—DUE TIME FOR HIS DISCIPLES TO RECOGNIZE HIM AS MESSIAH— PETER PROBABLY SPOKESMAN
 FOR THE TWELVE — HIS STATEMENT A REFRESHMENT OF HEART TO OUR LORD — OUR LORD HIMSELF, NOT PETER, THE 
FOUNDATION STONE OF THE TRUE CHURCH— THE TWO KEYS OF THE KINGDOM AND THE DOORS UNLOCKED BY THEM. 

"Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." — Verse 16. 



ETER the Apostle was a grand character, as this 
lesson well illustrates. Yet, like all strong 
characters, he had proportionate opportunities 
and liabilities to misuse his strength for evil. 
This lesson, relating considerably to him, points 
a moral respecting the necessity for meekness, 
humility and wise direction of those who 
possess strength of character. 

The incidents of this lesion occurred toward 
the close of our Lord s ministry, probably about 
six months before his crucifixion. For about 
three years our Lord had, with his disciples, been proclaiming 
the kingdom near at hand and working miracles which testified
 that he was Jehovah's Anointed One. Meantime his tame 
had oi course spread in every direction. King Herod, who 
had beheaded John the Baptist, seems to have started the suggestion
 that Jesus was John risen from the dead — probably 
having little information respecting Jesus, while he had considerable
 knowledge of John. Others, wishing to credit 
properly' our Lord's wonderful works and mighty acts, claimed 
that he was the Elijah prophesied to precede Messiah's coming
. Still others thought of him as Jeremiah or some other 
of the great prophets risen from the dead. But very few 
seemed to have thought of him as the Messiah; for they expected
 Messiah, when he would come, to be very kingly, very 
great and of very high standing with the nation and the ruling 
class. No doubt they thought that they greatly honored Jesus 
in crediting him with being the forerunner of the Messiah. 

Apparently our Lord had not particularly expressed the 
matter of his Messiahship during these years, leaving it rather 
to be recognized by those who should obtain the opening of 
the eyes of their understanding. He spoke of himsetf as the 
Son of God. He spoke of his relationship to the Father, and 
testified that his mighty works were done in the Father's name 
and power ; but he said little respecting his being the Messiah 
until now. 

PETEB'S STATEMENT COMFEEHENSIVE 

Now the proper time had come that the disciples should 
recognize definitely his office; and his question regarding what 
people in general said of him was merely to introduce the 
matter to the disciples and to give the opportunity to ask 
them, "Whom say ye that I am?" Then it was that Peter 
displayed not only the strength of his faith in the Lord, but 
also his own strength of character and his zeal, answering 
promptly, "Thou are the Christ [Hebrew, the Messiah], the 
Son of God— the Living." And although we may safely 
assume that Peter spoke for all of the apostles, in harmony 
with our Lord's question, nevertheless the fact that he was 
the spokesman would imply that he was the most thoroughly 
imbued with the sentiment that he expressed. His statement 
is quite comprehensive, too. Not only did he recognize Jesus 
as the Messiah, but he also recognized our Lord's divine 
authority and paternity. 

Evidently it was a refreshment of heart to our Lord to have 
this full and frank statement from Peter. At least one of his 
disciples had profited by the lessons of the preceding three 
years, and had come to the point of full assurance of faith 
in him; and the others, while less expressive, were probably 
making progress nevertheless, and would be greatly helped 
and strengthened and built up by this good confession. 

PETEE A USEFUL STONE IN GOD'S HOUSE 

Our Lord's response, "Blessed art thou, Simon, son of 
Jona", does not so much signify "I will grant a blessing upon 
you because of this confession," but rather, "You have been 
blessed of God greatly in that you have been enabled to discern 
this great truth, hidden from so many. Flesh and blood (mankind
 in general) do not so believe, and could not so have 
taught you nor convinced you. You have been drawn of my 
Father in heaven; and through your responding to the leadings 
of his providence the eyes of your understanding have been 
opened that you are thus able to see and appreciate this great 
truth/' 

Then followed a blessing, a prophecy of coming usefulness, 
partly, at least, the result of this good confession, as it was 
also the result of a proper condition of heart: "Thou art 
Peter [petros, a stone, a rock] and upon this rock Ipetra, 


this great stone or rocky mass, the great truth which you have 
con tossed, namely, my Messiahship] I will build my church". 

Our Lord did not purpose to build his church upon Peter, 
but upon the great truth which the Father had laid as a 
foundation for his plan and had revealed to Peter, and which 
Peter had so nobly expressed. But Peter might indeed be 
one of the living stones of the spiritual temple erected upon 
this great foundation-fact. Peter himself gives us this interpretation
 of the matter in his epistle (1 Peter 2:4-7), assuring 
us that the whole church as a building of God is growing 
more and more complete through the addition of each member, 
who as a living stone is built up into and under the headship 
of Christ, the great chief cornerstone and capstone of the 
whole— the figure being that of a pyramid. See Studies IN 
the Scriptukes, Vol. I, Study 5; Vol. 3, Study 10. 

The same thought is given in the description of the New 
Jerusalem, in which Peter is represented by one of the twelve 
foundation stones, the other apostles being equally foundation 
atones, and all the faithful in Christ being built upon the 
foundation of the divine plan, and upon the testimony of these 
twelve apostles, — Revelation 21 .12. 

This was probably the first intimation our Lord had given 
oi his intention to build a church, or that any period of time 
wou)d elapse between the work he was then doing and the 
establishment of the kingdom. This was a gradual way of 
bringing great matters to the attention of the apostles, matters 
which necessarily would conflict with many of the ideas and 
hopes that had already taken possession of their hearts. 

THE ONE TRUE CHUECH OF CHBIST 

It cannot be claimed that our Lord referred to any of the 
Christian sects when thus speaking of his church. All are 
forced to admit that these earthly systems are entirely ignored, 
not only in this statement, but in every other statement which 
our Lord ever made respecting his church. He never recognized
 more than one church, nor did the apostles ; and both 
Jesus and his apostles reckoned that every true sheep, every 
true grain, every wise virgin and every faithful servant of 
this Gospel age would belong to the one church of Christ, of 
which the Apostle says that their names are written in heaven 
(Hebrews 12:23) They need no earthly record; and such oi 
them as are rightly informed will want no sectarian name, but 
will be thoroughly satisfied with the name of the Lord. And 
they will want no earth)y creed-fences to separate them from 
each other, but will desire more and more to be one in fact 
and in theory. 

The church of Rome, as being the oldest of all human 
church systems, claims the name of Christ, and holds that the 
Apostle Peter was its founder. But it can produce no evidence
 to this effect; for there was no Roman Catholic church 
in existence until centuries after Peter's day. The primitive 
church authorized by our Lord, and built upon the testimony 
of the apostles and through their ministry after the day of 
Pentecost, was a very different institution from any of the 
present-day man-made, creed-bound and clergy-lorded systems. 
We understand that our Lord is now calling his true people 
out of this Babylon or mixed condition of present-day 
"churchianity" into the light, the liberty, the fellowship with 
him and with all who are his, which properly belong to the 
one flock, which has but "one Lord, one faith, one baptism" 
"THE GATES OF HELL", THE GBAVE 

Our Lord's declaration that "the gates of hell [hades, the 
death state] shall not prevail against" his church is worthy 
of careful notice, especially in view of his words following 
this statement, to the effect that all who would be his disciples 
must follow him in sacrifice into death. This must have been 
an astounding thought to the apostles, as they had, so far 
from expecting death, anticipated some kind of transformation 
to glory, honor, and immortality. The declaration, therefore, 
that the gates of hell, the gates of the grave, shall not prevail 
against his church, signified not that his followers should not 
enter those portals of death, but that eventually those prisondoors
 of death would open, would not be permitted forever 
to prevail against the faithful. 

As a matter of fact, the gates of hades closed over our 
dear Redeemer himself for portions of three days; but they 
did not prevail. On the contrary God's power prevailed; and 
our Lord arose from the dead He left the prison-house. 


302 


OCTOBK* I, 19*9 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


303 


He came forth a victor. And so likewise throughout this 
^o^pel age the gates of death closed behind the apostles one 
after another, and after all the faithful of the Lord's people, 
** well as others. Our Lord's assurance then is still comforting
 to his followers, that the prison-house of death, with its 
strong bars and Rates, shall not prevail, shall not in the end 
conquer, but that he who was raised from the dead by the 
•power of the Father will raise us up also, making us also 
victors over death and over the grave, so that eventually we 
■an say, 4 '0 death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy 
victory?" But we cannot say this as long as we are subject 
to death, nor as long as we are under the power of death, 
^>ut only when the deliverance shall come in the resurrection. 
Although our Lord does not here speak of others than the 
church prevailing against the gates and bars of the tomb, he 
^Kewhere gives us the assurance that through his prevailing, 
and through our subsequent prevailing through his name and 
his assistance, ultimately the whole world of mankind — or as 
many of them, at least, as will accept of the favor — shall be 
delivered from the power of death into perfection of life. 
Then shall be brought to pass, in the mo^t absolute sense, the 
prophecy just referred to. (Isaiah 61:1-3) Adamic death 
.and its victory over the human family will then be completely 
■annulled, through the atonement accomplished by our Lord 
and through the restitution which he, with his church, will 
.ircomplish as a result. Moreover, any who fail of eternal 
lite shall not fail because of the present prevalence of so-called 
\damic death, but will be the victims of their own wilful sin, 
^nd will experience its penalty, the second death, whose bars 
<iiid gates will never open, and against which they can never 
prevail; for Christ dieth no more, and will release no one 
from the second death. — Romans 6:9; 2 Thessalonians 1:9; 
Acts 3 123. 

THE KEYS Or THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN 

Of course the apostles could not at that time understand 
■uur Lord's words as they did afterward, and as we now 
understand them. (John 7:39) Nevertheless these various 
declarations respecting the future immediately followed, our 
Lord saying, "I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of 
heaven". What a riddle this must have seemed to poor Peter 
and his associates ! They would doubtless conclude that it 
meant that in view of Peter's confession our Lord would 
■make him grand treasurer of the kingdom, or something of 
that sort. Only in the light of their fulfillment in subsequent 
events can we judge accurately the meaning of these words. 
■But looking through the experiences of Peter and the church, 
we find that there were two doors which required to be opened, 
and that Peter was used of the Lord in opening both of them. 
Hence it was properly stated of him that he had the keys, the 
power, the opportunity, the authority, to do the work in both 
instances ; and he did it. 

Our Lord himself did not open the doors into the kingdom 
*n the full sense of the word. He merely called out faithful 
laborers, who should afterward in his name open wide the 
doors. Indeed, the doors into the kingdom could not be 
opened to any one until first of all the great transaction^ of 
Calvary had been accomplished. Our Lord came to give himself
 a ransom for all mankind, because a ransom was necessary
 before mankind could be released from the Adamic condemnation
 or could have any part either in the kingdom proper 
or in the hoped-for blessing promised through the kingdom 
to all the families of the earth Hence the apostles (whom 
the Father had given especially to Jesus, and of whom none 
was lost save the son of perdition, whose place was subsequently
 filled, through the Lord's appointment, by the Apostle 
p au l — John 17:12; Romans 1 :i) did not and could not receive 
recognition from the Father until after our Lord Jesus had 
finished his sacrifice and had risen from the dead and had 
ascended on high to appear in the presence of God in their 
behalf, and on behalf of all men, for whom he had died. As 
soon as the sacrifice for man's sin was presented to the Father, 
the evidence of its acceptance was indicated to mankind by 
God's acceptance of the faithful apostles, and of all who were 
then in the proper condition of heart, to the plane of sonship 
and their begetting of the holy Spirit to a new nature; and 
this was marked or indicated by the outpouring of the holy 
Spirit at Pentecost, accompanied by "gifts" of the SpiritActs
 3:32, 33- . t »,-.«.«. 

It was then that Christ's kingdom was established in those 
who had received him. And then began the work of declaring 


the good tidings of great joy which must eventually be to all 
people, but which at first was restricted for -hrce and a half 
years to fleshly Israel, in fulfillment of God's covenant with 
them that favor should continue to the full end of seventy 
weeks mentioned by the prophet.— Daniel 9:24. See also 
Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. 2, Study 3. 

THE DOOES OF THE KINGDOM OPENED 

In this work of opening the door of the kingdom to Israel 
we find, according to the record, that the Apostle Peter took 
the first, the most prominent and initiatory part. As we read, 
"Peter, standing up with [the others of] the eleven, lifted up 
his voice and said." (Acts 2:14) Peter was the spokesman. 
Peter used the "key'. Peter opened the door, the other 
apostles cooperating and assisting. 

The other of the two "keys" was not used for three and a 
half years afterward; for not until then could the door of 
favor be opened to the Gentiles. But when the time came for 
opening the door, we find that it was Peter who was especially 
designated of the Lord to do it. He was sent from Joppa to 
Cornelius, to tell him words which would be to the saving of 
his house— the opening to him of the privilege of membership 
in the kingdom of Christ, he being the first Gentile converted, 
the first one to whom the Lord authorized the preaching of 
the high calling of joint-heirship with Christ in his kingdom. 
Subsequently the Apostle Peter referred to this matter, saying
, "Ye know how that a good while ago God made choice 
amongst us that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the 
word of the Gospel".— Acts 10:1-43; 15:7. 

BINDING AND LOOSING IN HEAVEN AND EAETH 

Our Lord further said to Peter: "Whatsoever thou shall 
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ; and whatsoever thou 
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven". This statement
 has given rise to the claim among Romanists that Peter 
was the first pope, and that he had an authority superior to 
the other apostles. But we find that very nearly the same 
words were used to all of the apostles as recorded by the same 
evangelist (Matthew 18:18) Again, a very similar declaration
 was made to them all, as recorded by John, saying, 
"Whose soever sins ye remit they are remitted unto them! 
and whose soever sins ye retain they are retained". (John 
jo:23) We understand these declarations not to be general 
and applicable to all of the church, but chiefly to the apostles, 
on the strength of our Lord's words. (John 6:70; 15:16; 
Revelation 21 :i4) We deny that the popes of Rome or any 
other persons have ever been apostles or have ever exercised 
apostolic authority. In a word, we deny the central claim of 
Romanism and Episcopacy; namely, Apostolic Succession. 

We understand this investment of Peter and the other 
apostles with special authority to bind and to loose, to remit 
and to hold, to signify that God would specially control their 
utterances, so that their decisions and writings might properly 
be considered authoritative. Not that God bound himself to 
do and to decide according to the imperfect judgments of the 
apostles, but that he has guaranteed us that he would so guide 
and providentially overrule in the affairs and in the language 
of these chosen and faithful ones that his people might rely 
upon it that such things as the apostles fixed had the divine 
approval. For instance, it is at their mouth that we learn that 
we are jusified from all sin through faith in the redemption. 
They did not make it so; but under divine direction they were 
guided in the stating of it so; and we may rely implicitly upon 
their statements, which, moreover, we find to be in full accord 
with the principles of righteousness and with the various 
declarations of the divine Word. 

The apostles inform us also that certain sins can be remitted 
or forgiven — sins of weakness and of ignorance, traceable to 
our fallen nature, which we have received by heredity, and the 
penalty for which our Lord has already borne. They inform 
us that other sins — wilful sins — are not forgivable and may 
indeed be sins unto death, unto the second death. Herein we 
see reasonableness also; for we perceive that Christ did not 
die for any except the Adamic transgression and for those 
sins which directly or indirectly may be traceable to it ; and 
that wilful, deliberate transgressions cannot therefore be forgiven
, but must be expiated. If committed with considerable 
light, but not full light, the expiating penalty may be "stripes" ; 
but if committed with full wilfulness and against full light, 
the penalty could be nothing short of death, the second death. 
—1 John 5:16; Luke 12:47, 48; Hebrews 6:4-6; 10:26, 27. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies byTravelinq Brethrea 


ADDRESSES BY BEOTHEE W. A. BAKEE 


5 

iWonia, N. Dak. . .Oct 

14 

6 

?argo, N. Dak " 

16 

8 

3rand Forks. N. Dak. " 

17 

10 

Surrey, N. Dak. ... " 

18, 19 

12 

Dutlook, Mont 

'21. 22 


dinneapolis, Minn. . Oct. 

'ease, Minn " 

tfilmar, Minn 

ivansville, Minn. . " 
inderlin, N. Dak. . . " 


ADDRESSES BY BKOTHER R. H. BARBER 

ftock Springs, Ga. ..On. 6 ftockmart, Ga Oct. 11 

Cloudland, Ga " 7 Atlanta, Ga " 12,13 

3adsden, Ala " 8 Dallas, Ga " 14 

Rome, Ga " 9 rallapoosa, Ga " 15 

Cedartown, Ga " 10 Athens, Ga " 16 


ADDESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


Lansing, Mich Oct. 8 

Charlotte, Mich. ..." 9 

Woodland, Mich. . . " 10 

Kalamazoo, Mien. . . " 12 

South Haven, Mich. . " 13 


3enton Harbor, Mich. 
South Bend, Ind . . 
Marcellus, Mich. . . , 
Battle Creek, Mich.. 
Albion, Mich 


Oct. 


14 
15 
16 
17 
18 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J, A. BOHNET 


Little Sioux, la. ...Oct. 
8ioux City, la. 
Winside, Neb. , 
Stanton. Neb. . 
Clearwater, Neb. 


9 
11. 12 


Cherokee, la 

Alton, la 

Inwood, la 

Chancellor, S. Dak. 
Menno. S. Dak. . . . 


.Oct. 13, 14 
. " 15 

. " 16, 17 
. " 18, 19 
. '* 20,21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. O. BOWIN 


Elma, la Oct. 1 

A.ustin, Minn " 2 

Whalan, Minn " 3 

Eureka Center, Minn. " 5 

Fairbault, Minn. . . . '* 6 


St. Paul, Minn Oct, 7 

Minneapolis, Minn. . " 8 

Superior, Wis " 9 

Duluth, Minn " 10 

Two Harbors, Minn. " 12 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 

Piedmont, Ala Oct. 11, 12 Pell City, Ala. ...Oct. 18, 19 

' 13, 14 Temiaon, Ala " 21 

15 Randolph, Ala " 22 

16 Montgomery, Ala. . " 23,24 

17 Dpelika, Ala. ... " 25, 26 


Anniston, Ala 
Lincoln, Ala. 
Riverside, Ala 
Seddon, Ala. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 

tiuncie, Ind Oct. 11, 12 Plymouth, Ind. . . Oct. 17 

Vlarion, Ind " 13 Warsaw, Ind " 19 

WabaBh, Ind " 1* Ft. Wayne, Ind. ..." 20 

Peru, Ind '* 15 Barrett, Tnd " 21 

L»og&n sport, Ind. ..." 16 Auburn, Ind. . . 22 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERR 

Lancaster, Pa Oct. 5 Vlahanoy City, Pa. Oct. 10 

VTork, Pa " 6 shamokin, Pa " 12 

heading, Pa " 7 Hazelton, Pa. . . . " 13 

PotUville, Pa " 8 Wilkes Barre, Pa ' 14 

Tamaqua, Pa " 9 Benton, Pa. ... ' 15, 16 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER 0. MAGNUS ON 

Paducah, Ky Oct. 8 Marion, 111 Oct 15 

Mounds, 111 " 9 Centralia, 111 *' 16 

Thebes, 111 " 10 Patoka, 111 " 17 

Anna 111 " 12 Vandalia, 111 " 18 

"arterviJle, UK ..." 14 Pans, III * 19 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER S. MORTON 

Java Va Oct. 9, 10 Greensboro, N. C. . Oct. 18, 19 

Danville, Va " 12 Charlotte. N C " 20 

High Point, N. C. .. " 13 Shelby, N. C " 21 

Welcome, N. C " 15 Gastonia, N. C " 22 


Winston-Salem, N C. 


Lb', 17 


Hickory, N. C. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. H. PICKERING 


Muskogee, Okla. . 

Peggs, Okla 

Bidding Spgs., Okla 
Porum, Okla. . . . 
Tomaha, Okla 


Oct. 


1, 5 

2, 3 
6. 7 
■*. 9 

10 


Slider, Okla. . . 
Ft. Smith, Ark. 
McCurtin, Okla. 
McAlester, Okla. 
Wilburton, Okla. 


.Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 


Gloversville. N. Y. 
Schenectady, N. Y. 
Glens Falls, N. Y. . . 
Warrensburg, N. Y. 
Ticonderoga, N. Y 


Oct. 


8 

9 

10 

12 

13 


Rutland, Vt 

Granville, N. Y. . . 
Watervliet, N. Y. 

Troy, N. Y 

Albaay, N. Y. . . . 


23 


12 
13 
14 
16 
17 


.Oct. 14 

. " 15, 16 
. " 17 

. " 18, 19 
. " 19,20 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. C. RICE 

Dexter, Mo Oct. 9 Rector, Ark. .. . 

Poplar' Bluff, Mo... " 10 Jonesboro. Ark. . 

Chaonia, Mo! " 12 Gilmore, Ark. .... 

Clarkton, Mo " 14 Memphis, Tenn. . . 

Piggott, Ark " 16 W. Helena, ArK. 


.Oct. 


17 

19 
20 
21 
22 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 

Crafton, Ky Oct. 6 Paducah, Ky Oct. 14 

Hopkinsville, Ky. . 8, 9 Mayfield, Ky " 15 

Guthrie, Ky " 10 Gadsden, Tenn. ..." 16. 17 

Big Sandy, Tenn " 11,12 Memphis, Tenn. . " 19 

lola, Ky " 13 Okolona, Miss. . . " 20 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THOBNTOW 

Boston, Mass Oct. 5 Plimpton, Mass. ...Oct. 10 

Franklin, Mass. . . . " 6 Plymouth, Mass. . . " 12 

Attleboro, Mass. ..." 7 N. Duxbury, Maoa. . " 13 

Fall River, Mass. .. " 8 lirockton, Mass. ... '* 14 

New Bedford, Mass . " 9 Quincy, Mass " 15 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER D. TOOLE 


Joplin, Mo Oct. 

Seneca, Mo. 1 " 

Pittsburgn, Kun. . . " 
Eldorado Sp'gs, Kan. " 
Clinton, Mo 


12 
13 
14 
15 
16 


Chilhowee, Mo. . 
Kansas City, Mo, 
Lawrence, K.m. 
Topeka, Kan. . . 
Abilene, Kan . . 


Oct. 17 

. " 18, 19 

. " 20 

, " 21 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. F. ZINK 


Manistique, Mich. 
Marinette, Wis. . . 
Green Bay, Wis. , 
Bonduel, Wis. . . . 
Clintonville, Wis. 


Sept. 29, 30 
.Oct. 2 

. " 3 

. " 4. 5 

. " 6 


Shiocton, Wis Oct. 

Black Creek, Wis. . . " 
Sheboygan, Wis. . . ** 
Milwaukee, Wis. ... " 
Waukesha, Wis " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAETJERLEIN 

Passaic, N. J Oct. 12 Stroudsburg, Pa. ... Oct. 


Easton, Pa. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. T. COHEN 

Oct. 19 Pt. Chester, N. Y. . .Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKBY 

Harelton, Pa Oct. 19 Wilkes Barre, Pa. .Oct 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. DONALD 

Slatington, Pa Oct. 19 Lehighton, Pa Oct. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 

Newark, N. J Oct. 19 Poughkeepsie, N. Y. Oct. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Pen Argyl, Pa Oct. 19 Bangor, Pa Oct. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUDGINGS 

Kunkletown, Pa. . . .Oct. 19 Deep River, Conn. . . Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 

Lancaster, Pa Oct. 19 Philadelphia, Pa. ...Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 

Watertown, N. Y. ..Oct. 12 N. Brunswick, N. J. Oct 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Fall River, Mass. , .Oct. 12 Brooklyn, N. Y. ...Oct. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 

Boston, Mass Oct. 19 Pittsfield, Mass. . . .Oct 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 

Worcester, Mass. . . .Oct. 19 Yonkers, N. Y Oct 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

Schenectady, N. Y. . .Oct. 19 Johnstown. N. Y.. . Oct, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H, ZOOK 

Elizabeth. N. J Oct. 19 Tarrytown, N. Y. ..Oct. 


BETHEL HYMNS FOE NOVEMBER 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens to 
the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord." then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered. 
Hymns for November follow: (1) 130; (2) 186; (3) 323; 
(4) 261; (5) 140; (6) 191; (7) 192; (8) 184; (9) 183; 
(10) 166; (11) 136; (12) 112; (13) 121; (14) 233; (15) 
134; (16) 277; (17) 286; (18) 263^ (19) 306; (20) 119; 
(21) 120; (22) 238; (23) 267; (24) 198; (25) 106; (26) 
69; (27) 239; (28) 228; (29) 125; (30) 245. 


7 

8 

lOll
 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. W. BETLEB 

Bethlehem, Pa Oct. 12 Long Branch, N. J. .Oct. 26 


Conventions to be Addressed by Brother J. F. Rutherford 

Philadelphia. Pa. ...Oct. 5 Baltimore, Md. ...Oct. 12 








$?£■ 


felft'li 




— ROC K' OF ACES ^y 

Other foundation can " 
; no man lay- C*£ 
a ransomTfor a l L ^ % 




*i 


;**>■ 


r/*^ 


:v- v-; 


^-« 



L-^ 


ti\' \\ 


s <y 


^ ~±. ^ 


VOL. XL OCTOBER 15 No. 20 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — A.M. 6048 

CONTENTS 

Views from The Watch Tower 307 

Is Christendom a Failure? 307 

The Old World Gone 308 

Violet Rays for Agriculture 309 

The Heart of Jerusalem 310 

Progress in Palestine 311 

Advance Sanitation in Jerusalem 312 

Cleansing from All Unrighteousness 313 

Justification Follows Consecration 313 

Why Justification is Necessary 314 

Cleansing from Unrighteousness 315 

Witnesses oi Christ's Glory 316 

The Transfiguration Scene 316 

Jesus Corrects John's Narrowness 317 

The Golden Age 318 

Jesus Teaches Peter True Greatness 319 

"/ "till stand upon my watih, and 'will set my foot upon the 
Tower and will :<atch to see :<. hat He :i ill say unto me. and 
what answer I shall make to them that oppose me." — I[ab.\2 1 

mi 


-t^. "-v* :jr. 


*v 



Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the sen and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring; men shearts falling them for fear and for looking 
lo the things coming upon the earth (society); for the powers of the heavens (ecciesiastlclam) shall be shaken . . . ^When ye isee these things begin to >come ito paae, 
then know that the Kingdom of God is at hand. Looi up. lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh.— Matthew 24.33. Mara 13.29, Loie ^l.25-Jl 


THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 

THIS Journal ia one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,* now teafi 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towkb Bible & Teact Society, chartered A. D, 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and of 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports ot its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
▼ery helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei MinUter (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being bo generally repudiated — . 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
alL" (1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what Is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has been 
hid in God, ... to the Intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Age* 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring Its every utterance Into fullest 
lubjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
bath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It Is held as a trust, to be used only In 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
urge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference Is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

ffhat the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been In progress throughout
 the Gospel Age; — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :16, 17 ; Eph. 2 :20-22 ; Gen. 
28 :14 ; Gal. 3 :29. 

rhat meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

ffbat the Basis ot Hope, for the Church and the World, lies In the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world/' "In due time."— 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1:9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be **partaker of the Divine nature," and share HIa 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church Is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service ; to develop In herself every grace ; 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 ifL 

fhat the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to aU by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Eedeemer and His glorified 
Church— when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

H9 FEDERAL STREET, PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Tomer Editorial Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these colums. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rithkhfokd, \V '. E. \ r A.v Ambcrgh, F. H. Robison, Geo, H. 
Ftshhr, W, H. Pack. _^___ 

ANNL'Au SUBSCRIPTION PRICK |l.OO IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONKV KY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Terms to the Lord'i Poor aa follows— All Bible Students who, byreason
 of old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay for this 
journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card each May stating 
their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious
, that all such be on our list continually and in t ouch with the Studies, etc . 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS— Please remember that as 
a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal or for a 
new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are indicated within a 
month by change in date of expiration of the subscription on the Tower 
wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please give old address as well as 
new. This is very important, saving us much time and unnecessary correspond
 ence. 


ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT FITTSBtR* 

UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3RD, ; 


;h. pa., postoffice 


SOCIETY REMOVED — CORRESPONDENCE TO BROOKLYN 
In harmony with announcements previously made the 
Society has removed its headquarters to 124 Columbia Heights, 
Brooklyn, N. Y., to which address all communications, remittances
, etc., should be sent. Barely enough _ of our force 
has been retained in Pittsburgh to publish this issue (and 
possibly another), as the strike in the printing trades in 
Greater New York was found to make such action advisable. 

The first issue of The Golden Age has been mailed; though 
conditions caused by the oncoming strike combined to make 
the first issue a little disappointing in appearance. But rather 
than cause delay of the first issue we are sending it out as it 
is, hoping that some such adjustment will be made in the 
printing trade as will make possible the early issue of the 
second number in good form. 


CHANGES IN CLASS SECRETARIES 
It sometimes occurs that class secretaries remove from one 
city to another and the class for which they were secretary 
fails either to choose another person for this work or fails to 
notify us of the change. The consequence is that notices of 
Pilgrim visits are sent to the old address, forwarded to the 
new address, and possibly do not come into the proper hands 
until it is too late to arrange for meetings. Please notify the 
Pilgrim Department at once if changes in the address or in 
the namp of class secretaries occur. 


ORDERS BY BRITISH FRIENDS 

Orders for the reprint of Towers, subscriptions for The 
Golden Age, and other orders of friends residing in Great 
Britain should be sent through the British office. Address all 
such orders Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society, 34 Craven 
Terrace, Lancaster Gate, London, W., and make remittances 
to the British office for same- The war somewhat disturbed 
free communication between the London office and the home 
office and there has been some confusion in the minds of the 
friends about their communication through the London office. 
For this reason we state that the same relationship that has 
existed for years between the British Branch and the home 
office at Brooklyn still exists. 


NOT FASTING BUT FEASTING 

My Dear Brethren : 

Loving Greetings. I feel that I must write a word of appreciation
 for the feast that we so continually enjoy from the 
Watch Tower. What a privilege is yours, to feed the household
 of faith, what a blessing to serve; and what a privilege 
is ours to be served. It is no longer a time of fasting for the 
church, but a time of feasting; surely the Bridegroom is with 
us, and serving as he promised. 

I have been very much impressed by the article on "The 
Cross oi Christ", May 35th Tower. Never before have I 
had such a vivid realization of the sufferings of our dear 
Master; but yet we can appreciate only a very little of all 
his sufferings for us, and what it meant to the heavenly 
Father too, in those last dread hours. When we see the manifestation
 of such love, instinctively we cry: "What shall I 
render unto the Lord for all his benefits?" 

We are being richly blest at the London Tabernacle; the 
favor of the Lord is with Brother Hemery in a very marked 
manner; he is a tower of strength to us, and to the brethren 
up and down the country; a veritable pillar in the church. 

Many are those who, forming themselves into Unions, 
Societies and Institutes, would draw us away from the Watch 
Tower, the Seventh Volume, and the Society, but the Towers 
and the Volumes are such a continual blessing to me that to 
cast them aside would in my own mind, be a willful act of 
starvation, almost spiritual suicide. The Father has promised 
that he will turn his "hand upon the little ones" (Zachariah 
13:7), and now that the sanctuary is cleansed, the time is 
marked for Zion to awake and put on her beautiful garments. 
With confidence we can say: "As the mountains are round 
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his people from 
henceforth, even for ever". 

May you still be blessed of the Lord and, as you bring joy 
to others, your joy will be full. Sister Briggs joins with me 
in sending our fervent Christ love. 

Your brother by his favor, H. C. Briggs.— Eng. 


JCH TOWEH 

AND HEPALD OF CHRIST5 PRESENCE 



Vol. xl 


October 15, 1919 


No. 20 


VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 


IT would be a very blind and indifferent person 
indeed who could not see the trend of ecclesiastical
 affairs in the world to-day. The 
waters are being divided. The peoples of 
Christendom are slowly taking their point of 
view from one side or the other — either from that of 
God's Word or from the side of materialistic worldly 
wisdom. Here and there are evidences that some see 
with considerable clearness the object and purpose of 
the church during this Gospel age. A contributor to the 
May 10th issue of The Alliance Weekly (New York) 
expresses one phase of the situation so well that it is 
worth quoting from at considerable length: 

"If the program of Christianity demands such outward 
success as shall bring all men to accept Jesus Christ as 
Savior and Lord in this age, the amelioration of all injustice 
and social inequality, the banishment of all forms of vice and 
immorality, the removal of all conflict and strife between men 
who labor and those who exploit labor, and such a cure and 
healing of all the ills of sin that through the church the 
kingdom of heaven shall be inaugurated, — if this is the program
, then there is no escaping the conclusion : Christianty 
is at the crossroads ! 

"The burdens of a diseased civilization are breaking the 
back of the world. Outraged justice, because of increasing 
crime, is calling for more courts and a higher type of justice 
to vindicate the rights of the oppressed. This means higher 
taxation and the people are saying to their legislators : 'Go 
slow*. Insanity increases so rapidly that some experts are 
saying that the whole world will be insane in fifty years if the 
increase continues at the present rate. Social impurity and 
marital infidelity pollute society and fill divorce courts with 
the scandal of daily life. We are bringing back some of our 
boys who fought to make the world safe for democracy, and 
instead of finding that victory has brought immediate and 
final results we are standing on the crater of a volcano of 
political and industrial upheaval. Machine politicians are 
seeking to make things politically safe for 1920, great industries
 are seeking to readjust and save for themselves pre-war 
profits, and men who toil are looking on and preparing to 
defend the rights of labor from further aggression and oppression
 if it has to be done by the bayonet. Like a man with the 
chills, the whole fabric of modern civilization is shaking with 
disease and unrest. Life has never seemed so cheap, and never 
less stable and secure. Such are some of the signs of the 
times. 

IS CHRISTENDOM A FAILURE? 

"The modern church, facing the fact that it has lost control 
of the forces of civilization, and having lost the vision of the 
Master for the age, has virtually ceased preaching the gospel 
and is now trying to camouflage the issue by a 'social service' 
propaganda. It is spending its time seeking to buy up the 
services of efficiency experts who shall teach us how to socialize
 aliens, build and conduct community centers, and entertain 
and amuse this age so sick with its sin that something has 
to be done to rest its nerves. It the church is under commission
 and contract to convert the world, fumigate the 
nations, and make the world a safe place in which to live, 
then it is open to indictment on every count— we are no longer 
at the crossroads ; we are lost ! Christianity is a failure, and 
we are bankrupt! 

"But if, on the contrary, the Bible teaches that such is not 
God's plan through the church for this age; if the church is 
not under commission to convert the world^ but simply to 
evangelize it, that is, give it the gospel as a witness, the issue 
shifts and God's purpose in the age has another objective. If 
God now is only visiting the Gentiles to take out of them a 
people for his name, his purpose is elective, and not world 


conversion until the next age. In this event we may expect 
to find just what we do find, two harvests ripening, one for 
judgment, and the other for the completion of God's larger 
purpose in the coming age. If the unrighteousness, lawlessness
, and inhumanity of this age must ripen for judgment as 
in the days of Noah and Lot, as Jesus said would be the case, 
then the unrest, immorality, crime, apostasy and social degeneracy
 simply become signboards that enable us to locate 
how near we are to the end of the way, or are like sounding 
lines that tell the depth of the sea so the sailors can begin to 
get ready to anchor. If the church is simply that company of 
people who have received Jesus Christ as Savior and Lord and 
who have separated to him from the world, then it does not 
seem strange that some men will not now have this man Christ 
Jesus to reign over them. There is no promise that every 
knee shall bow and confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the 
glory of God the Father in this age. That is one of the glories 
of the kingdom age. 

"When tested by this rule, Christianity is not a failure. 
The gates of hell are not prevailing against it. He said the 
wheat and the tares should grow together until the end of 
the age; therefore, we should not expect anything different. 
Apostasy has thrown its dark shadow over the age, but the 
true church has not lost its way. It is not at the crossroads, 
but in the middle of the road, faithful to her Lord and the 
ministries assigned her, pressing with vigor on to the goal, 
her cornation day." 

Time-honored ecclesiastical customs are finding 
themselves besieged by various modernist ideas. An 
item in the August 27th issue of the Pittsburgh Dispatch
 informs us that country ministers are to be 
re-educated to enable them to cope with the world 
problems of the new era which is now confronting the 
church nominal. The Presbyterian Board of Home 
Missions is launching such a scheme and expects to 
spend $10,000 for the re-education of ministers in 
1920, and $25,000 a year for special courses to be 
offered to the most promising ministers who are discovered
 by this process of re-distillation. Dr. Warren 
H. Wilson, of the Presbyterian Home Board, is reported
 by the Dispatch as saying: 

"The demands upon a pastor in a small community are far 
beyond what he has been prepared to meet. He has been 
taught to preach, to study the Bible, to, teach and to visit 
his people in their homes. But he is called on to lead the 
community in work for better roads, consolidation of schools, 
in reform movements, financial 'drives' and in recreation problems
. He is called on to be a pastor, not a preacher only." 

It will be readily seen that such demands call for the 
qualifications of general manager for a large industrial 
undertaking, rather than for personal devotion and 
dedication to the service of God's Word, which is 
truth. The effect of such a course as that proposed 
will often be to eliminate some of the most sincere and 
spiritually influential in favor of the astute and socially 
brilliant. But no damage will come to the Lord's 
cause by such elimination, for the eliminated ones will 
be, by their very humiliation, prepared to understand 
the Lord's purposes in full and to co-operate with them 
— even if late. 

GOATS NOT SHEEP 

Efforts are being made in several States to teach the 
Bible, along with arts and sciences Rev. C. W. 


307 


308 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Laufer, in The Christian Educator (Philadelphia) 
says that "American educators are convinced of one 
thing, namely, that religion must lay hold of, permeate, 
and possess the social order. ... If civilization is to 
continue and democracy is to grow in strength, society 
must recognize the presence, power, purpose of the 
living God, and all that he has made known concerning 
sin, salvation, righteousness, life, and immortality". 

Doubtless those who are fostering this movement 
have some good motive back of their efforts. But 
a good motive is not sufficient to bring a movement in 
alignment with God's principles and purposes. Great 
injury might be accomplished through forced instruction
 in the Lord's Word for those who do not care for 
its precepts. It is the ancient mistake of trying to 
make sheep out of goats. 

To the Herald and Presbyter, one of the oldest 
church papers in this country, is attributed the following
 paragraph : 

"Those who imagine that there is to be any sort of surrender
 to these wicked forms of error on the part of the 
evangelical church, are greatly mistaken. Some of these fads, 
as Russellism and Eddyism, have adopted insolent methods of 
propaganda, and chuckle because they think they are going on 
unrebuked. But this sort of error is not to be successful, nor 
its flaunting organization to be recognized as Churches of 
Christ by evangelical Christian bodies. We are glad that there 
is to be a more determined and united effort to rebuke and 
restrain these false systems." 

Just what is meant by the word "restrain" does not 
appear. But we do know that ecclesiastical bodies 
have persisted in making the mistake of applying such 
civil power as was within their hands to the suppression
 of what they considered to be false doctrine. 
But, someone may say, do you not seek to suppress 
them? The answer is that we do find fault with other 
religious bodies in proportion as they seem to us to be 
misrepresenting the message and purpose of the Gospel
. If they honestly believe that we are teaching error 
(using the Bible as a source of authority) it is theit 
privilege to criticize our teaching. Religious tolerance 
does not mean supine indifference to error. We welcome
 criticism if such criticism is based on the Bible. 
But when the subject of doctrine is largely ignored and 
political or civil power is invoked to sustain one's 
religious views, that, to our understanding, is a violation
 of the principle of religious tolerance. 

TROUBLE IN SWITZERLAND 

In the economic field of human experiences difficulties
 are everywhere present. Economic difficulties 
always find more or less of expression through social 
and political channels. Switzerland is the oldest republic
 in the world, and this little country has endured 
many things. Its people are not of one race, nor of 
one language, nor yet of one religion. The largest 
portion of the Swiss people are of German stock and 
speak either German or Swiss patois — usually both. 
Another large portion of the people speak French, and 
still others Italian. A small portion of mountaineers 
speak Romanche, a dialect most closely favoring its 
ancient mother, Latin. But notwithstanding these 
points of divergence, there is remarkable unity among 
the Swiss people, especially on the point of love of 
liberty. Freedom has been their most cherished birthright
 and the chief inspiration for their patriotic fervor
. The Nashville Banner of August 5th, touches 
upon the Swiss situation when it says : 


"The neutrality of Switzerland from early times has been 
respected by the greedy European empires and monarchies, 
and, though the Swiss are the best marksmen in the world 
and make excellent soldiers, the country has escaped the 
horrors of war. 

"But all is not serene in Switzerland; the world-wide unrest, 
with the same cause and same manner of exhibition, is creating
 disturbance there. A Geneva dispatch says: 

" Troops sent by the government to quell strike riots at 
Basle and Zurich were forced to use machine guns mounted 
on automobiles during the disorders yesterday. 

" 'The strikers at Basle ripped up the pavements and bombarded
 the troops, injuring many. A number of strikers 
were killed and wounded and many were arrested/ 

"The Swiss have been a remarkably happy and well-governed
 people in the past and if they are wise they will continue
 to pursue the tenor of their way after the old order and 
avoid radical innovations. The dispatch from Geneva continues
 ; 

"'At Basle the outbreak was said to be of a Boshevik character
, while at Zurich the disorders were attributed to the increasing
 cost of living. 

" 'Newspapers have stopped publication and tramways have 
discontinued operation. Operations of the gas and electric 
services are threatened. Ring-leaders of the strikers are reported
 to be youths 19 and 20 years old. The military are 
guarding all banks and factories/ 

"One cause seems to be hot-headed youth, filled with new 
and dangerous ideas, and the other the universal trouble, the 
high cost of living. The scarcity of bread in Paris was the 
immediate cause of the French revolution — and the strain to 
live is the chief source of disturbance now. The dispatch 
quoted above draws a difference between the cause of the 
trouble at Basle and that at Zurich, but closely analyzed they 
are one and the same. It is only the manifestation that is 
different. . . . 

"The chief thought connected with these disturbances in 
Switzerland is that the high prices of which we sorely feel 
the effect in Nashville, and which the administration at Washington
 will bend every effort to set right, is neither a local 
nor a national affliction; it is world-wide. The people everywhere
 are restive because of it, and the disposition to find 
some corporation, individual or set of individuals supposed to 
be responsible for the condition and vent on them or him 
the popular fury, is causing violent outbreaks in many localities
 and leading to turbulence and disorder. 

"What is chiefly needed is quiet and industry. The world 
is the same now as it was before the German armies crossed 
the Rhine just five years ago on their mission of war and 
destruction. If the people will work and produce now as they 
had done before that time, and not threaten the world with 
more disorder growing out of revolution, conditions will 
soon again become normal." 

THE OLD WORLD GONE 

Those who view matters from the standpoint of the 
Scriptures must conclude that with this editorial writer 
the wish only was father to the thought, when he 
voiced the expectation that the world might return to 
normal conditions. The Gentile times have ended. 
The old world is gone and is in process of disintegration
. It can never return, and no one who has any 
conception of the grandeur which Christ's oncoming 
kingdom will bring to mankind and to his dwelling 
place, earth, can have any desire to see the old order 
reinstated as it was. What he probably desires is that 
conditions of peace and measurable security, which is 
associated in his mind with the times which were, be 
re-established. 

Several elements contribute to the world-wide unrest
. One of them is the wanton display of wealth on 
the part of the few ; and another is an actual shortage 
of or extremely high prices for the necessities of life. 
Concerning the former cause the Springfield, Mo., 
Republican, of July 27th, had this to say in an Associated
 Press dispatch from London: 

"There is no lack of jewels for those who have the price 
and are willing to pay. Many beautiful pieces of jewelry, the 


October 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


309 


history of which is not given by the dealer, but which experts 
say could only come from the wealthiest families of Russia, 
are finding their way into the market. Enormous prices 
are being asked and promptly paid, while the cost of ordinary 
stones, diamonds for instance, has risen to unheard-of heights. 
Many old English families also are selling off their jewels. 

"Flowers and food for the elaborate entertainments which 
are beginning to mark the appearance of the newly rich are 
commanding fancy prices, such as $25 for an orchid and $1.50 
for a peach. 

"Automobiles are very scarce and expensive in Britain. 
Some of them command as much as $10,000 to $15,000, and 
they are models of three and four years ago, while new 
machines are almost unobtainable. The maker of the most 
famous English car turns out only about 800 each year, and 
it is said he has already booked his entire output" for this 
year and next. 

"This extravagance is attracting wide attention from newspapers
 and public men. 'Peace has brought an orgy of spending
/ says one writer, 'which high prices do nothing to check. 
The higher the price the easier it is for those who have money 
to draw the big lines of demarkation between themselves and 
the crowd.' " 

The crop condition, especially as that word applies 
to the wheat product of this country, is far from encouraging
. There were most sensational losses in 
wheat during July, amounting to 124,000,000 bushels 
in winter wheat and 97,000,000 bushels in spring 
wheat, making a total loss of 221,000,000 bushels. The 
losses reported from both the great wheat belts were 
due to unfavorable weather conditions in the Southwest
, and to blight, black rust, scab, and grasshoppers 
in the Northwest, or spring wheat section. The 
Chicago Herald and Examiner, of August 9th, makes 
these remarks : 

"Never in the history of the country have farmers been 
as disappointed because of the wheat crop losses this year. 
At one time the combined crops were estimated at 1,250,000,000 
bu. These figures were the estimates of the best crop experts 
in the United States, whose correspondents are men of great 
experience and judgment and who gave conditions as they 
found them. 

"The condition of Spring wheat at the present time is 53.9, 
compared with 80.9 on July 1 and 79.6 on August 1 last year. 

"There was a big loss in white potatoes, which are second, 
as a food, to wheat. The potato crop is estimated at 357,000,000 
bu., compared with 391,000,000 bu. a month ago and 400,000,000 
bu. a year ago, with a five year average of 366,000,000 bu/* 

VIOLET RAYS FOR AGRICULTURE 

But something encouraging is given us in the agricultural
 field which, while we can not expect it to 
bring immediate relief, may be one of the agencies 
used by the Lord in causing the earth to "yield her 
increase" during Messiah's reign. A Japanese scientist
, Taizan Tsuji by name, has been making agricultural
 experiments with the ultra-violet ray, a very 
penetrating light of high actinic value, but practically 
invisible to the human eye. The Pittsburgh Press, for 
May 14th, has a few interesting remarks on this discovery
 : 

"These rays vibrating 750 trillion times per second, exist in 
the sunlight but are largely absorbed by the gases of our 
atmosphere, at the expense of plant life which they stimulate
 greatly. Dr. Tsuji grew pineapples riper, larger, sweeter 
and juicier by exposing the rows 40 minutes each morning 
to the ultra-violet rays from a mercury vapor lamp. Similar 
results were obtained with sugar cane and etiolated bananas. 
Tsuji predicts that, as soon as the rays can be produced 
cheaply, sugar cane will require 12 instead of 27 months between
 planting and harvesting, and that bananas will be picked 
green, shipped to market and ripened when needed. 

"Electricity is another new crop stimulant. A British government
 scientist has achieved important results by stringing
 high-tension wires in a network with 30-foot meshes about 


five feet above ground. This process is established in England 
and is now being used on a large scale. Fields thus electrified
 have crop yields of wheat, barley and oats increased from 
25 to 30 per cent. The quality of the grain likewise benefitsmore
 weight, less chaff and more flour per bushel. 

"Curiously enough Fry, the electrician who has made most 
progress in the new field, knew little about agriculture. Outsiders
 often account for most progress within an industry— 
they come with a fresh viewpoint and see the obvious. Spinning
 was revolutionized by a barber, weaving by a minister, 
and, despite the teakettle story, Watt was a manufacturer of 
delicate scientific instruments when he invented the steam 
engine. May we not confidently expect that the world's food 
problem is going to be solved permanently in the near future 
by the agricultural application of electricity, the violet ray, 
and the ore from which is extracted radium?" 

Tens of thounsands of people are manifesting an interest
 in spiritism who were entirely passive to it before
 the wan That such an interest is present in the 
world could hardly be doubted by anyone glancing at 
some of the regular periodicals. The Atlantic Monthly
, the Hibbert Journal, Unpartisan Review, Harper's 
Magazine, the Cosmopolitan, Hearsfs, the Metropolitan
, and many other periodicals, have been carrying 
articles by prominent writers on the subject of spiritistic
 manifestations and theories. Life, under date of 
September 4th, makes the following remarks, rather 
serious, when compared with its usual lightsome 
strain : 

SPIRITISTIC JOURNALISM 

"There are now two groups of periodicals : those that pander 
to the growing appetite for spiritist literature, and those that 
have not yet come to it. Not 'pander' but 'minister' is the 
word that people would use who are interested in the spiritist 
literature and like to keep the run of it A little more every 
month they are ministered to just now, both in the periodicals 
and by books. 

"There must be many other magazines implicated in attention
 to these psychical and spiritist proceedings lately held in 
so much disapproval by cautious persons who valued their 
reputation for common sense. Reputable characters and publications
 are gradually being drawn into contemplation of them, 
puzzled and incredulous as yet, but inquisitive. The literature 
of the subject increases so fast and is so much read that it 
begins to be impolitic for folks who claim to be awake to 
ignore it. The New York Public Library reports its readers 
as 'turning from books on the war to those on South America, 
the export trade, Spain and the Spanish language, religion, 
spiritualism, psychic phenomena, applied psychology and 
technical subjects. The librarian in charge of the Central 
Circulation Branch reports that readers are demanding books 
on all phases of religion, are eager to know how great a part 
religion is to play in our reconstructed world, and are 'intensely
 interested in spiritual subjects of all kinds, and are 
turning with new eagerness to the writings of Sir Oliver 
Lodge and his investigations and speculations into the spirit 
world.' 

"This is scandalous, of course, to people who insist on keeping
 their feet on the actual earth, but the prospect is that we 
shall have more of it before we have less. One hears there 
is much more in England than here. 

"For people who don't know anything at all about these 
burgeoning interests, it may be suitable to explain that the 
foudation for them seems to have been laid by the studies and 
reports of the psychical research societies, extending over 
forty or fifty years; that the interest in all such matters has 
been immensely stimulated by the war and its attending bereavements
 and by the present parlous state of society, and 
that the most popular disclosures that attend this movement 
a\e those that come in the form of so-called 'automatic writings
,' which have been cropping up of late like mushrooms 
in all parts of the country. They purport to be records, by 
sensitives or mediums, of information communicated through 
them but not derived from their own minds, nor from any 
mundane source that they know of. That there are a lot of 
these communications is unquestionable. That the persons 
through whom they come are honest as a rule, and not consciously
 deceitful, is little doubted. That some of the communications
 are extremely curious will be admitted bv most 


310 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


people who read them, but how or whence they come, whether 
from the subconscious minds of mediums or by telepathic 
communication from minds of other living persons, or out of 
the minds of the questioners who receive them, or from the 
spirits of the dead, is all still matter of discussion, investigation
 and dispute. 

"No one need be dismayed to know more about contemporary
 spiritism and the automatic writings. They are mighty 
queer, and in any but the flounder type of mind that likes to 
He still on the bottom and look like mud, they are bound, 
if known, to excite immense curiosity. But very many people 
still know nothing about them. Presently some conclusion 
about them will be reached, but it will be based not on 
prejudice but on knowledge, and the knowledge it must rest 
on seems to be accumulating very fast." 

In substantiation of these findings a London dispatch
, quoted by the Daily Oklahoman, of June 8, 
adds: 

"A wave of spiritualism, such as no country has ever experienced
 before, is rolling over Great Britain, carrying with 
it thousands of persons of high and low degree. Backed by 
men of science and letters, with Sir Arthur Conan Doyle as 
the leader, the movement has assumed such proportions that 
when a gathering is held in London the Royal Albert hall, 
one of the largest amphitheatres in the world, is engaged. 

"Conspicuous among the growing membership are the wives 
and mothers of soldiers slain on the battlefield, and since the 
recent announcement made by Sir Arthur that no less than 
thirty women, from his personal knowledge, have been vouchsafed
 the deep consolation of direct communication with their 
beloved lost, scores of sorrow-stricken women have made 
the seance their church and the medium their father confessor
." 

"WALLS BETWEEN TWO WORLDS" 

Sir Conan Doyle speaks for himself in a syndicate 
article published in the Pittsburgh Post, of August 
24th. There is evident sincerity in his attitude toward 
spiritism and in his desire to render some service to 
suffering humanity. We would be glad indeed if he 
and others who are deluded by deceiving spirits could 
see the truth on the subject and know that God's provisions
 for mankind are infinitely better than anything 
which the imagination can form. Sir Arthur says in 
part: 

"I have now traced my own process of conversion up to the 
time of the war. I hope the reader will admit that it was deliberate
 and showed no traces of that credulity with which our 
opponents charge us. But I was culpably slow, I think, in 
throwing any small influence I may possess into the scale of 
truth. I might have drifted on for my whole life as a psychical 
researcher, showing a sympathetic, but more or less dilletante, 
attitude toward the whole subject, as if we were arguing about 
some impersonal thing such as the existence of Atlantis or 
the Baconian controversy. But the war came, and when the 
war came it brought earnestness into all our souls and made 
us look more closely at our own beliefs and reassess their 
values. In the presence of an agonized world, hearing every 
day of the deaths of the flower of our race in the first promise 
of their unfulfilled youth, seeing around one of the wives 
and mothers who had no clear conception whither their loved 
ones had gone, I seemed suddenly to see that this subject 
with which I had so long dallied was not merely a study 
of a force outside the rules of science, but that it was really 
something tremendous, a breaking down of the walls between 
two worlds, a direct, undeniable message from beyond, a call 
of hope and of guidance to the human race at the time of its 
deepest affliction. 

"The objective side of it ceased to interest me, for having 
made up my mind that it was true there was an end of the 
matter. The religious side of it I saw to be of infinitely 
greater importance, and it is of this which I will presently 
speak. The telephone bell is in itself a very childish affair, 
but it may be the signal for a very vital message. It seemed 
to me that all these phenomena, large and small, had been the 
telephone bells which said to the human race : 'Rouse yourselves
 I Stand by! Be at attention! Here are signs for you. 
They will lead up to the message which God wishes to send/ 


[t really counted. A new revelation seemed to me to be in 
course of delivery to the human race, though how far it is 
still in what I may call the John-the-Baptist stage, and how 
far some greater fulness and clearness may be expected thereafter
, is more than I or any man can say." 

To this is added the testimony of Professor James 
Hyslop, long connected in a prominent way with the 
American Society of Psychical Research. An interview
 with him is published in the Washington Star, 
of July 6th : 

"This much is to be remembered: Science already has given 
to wise men who have come in contact with it such an assurance
 as faith never could have given any one. We know that 
there is future life and progress in it. We do not just believe 
it. 

"We know that any man or woman makes a step forward, 
and a great one, in voluntary sacrifice of self. There is but 
one real sin in this life, and that sin is selfishness." 

SCIENTISTS NOT ALWAYS SCIENTIFIC 

It would seem that Professor Hyslop has gone beyond
 the bounds of science in this statement. What 
has voluntary sacrifice of self or the sin of selfishness 
to do with proving a future life and progress in it? 
The universal craving for continued life lies at the 
root of these erroneous statements. But some of the 
remarks which this distinguished gentleman makes 
are well worthy of notice. Some of them follow: 

"I always have maintained, and still maintain, that we can 
hope for nothing of paramount importance from such investigation
 until its claims have been scientifically proven 
beyond the slightest possibility of reasonable doubt. For such 
investigation funds and enthusiasm never have been ready." 

"We find the estimate of biblical times more accurate than 
that of modern science. In other words, we learn that many 
sufferers are literally 'possessed of devils' — that is, are controlled
 by bad or mischievous spirits." 

"The evil spirits seem to be as disconcertingly plentiful as 
the physical disease germs; unable to affect normal human 
beings they seem to seek as prey those weakened by outside 
troubles (as disease or disaster) of the sort which disturb 
relationships between mind and body. Of the existence and 
persistence of these evil or malicious spirits there is a mass 
of evidence such as cannot be controverted." 

Sir Oliver Lodge, while he has investigated a great 
deal and written a great deal on the subject of spiritism
, is not quite so sure of his ground. He has a statement
 in the Detroit Nezvs, of June 1, in which he says: 

"The boundary between the two states — the known and the 
unknown — is still substantial, but it is wearing thin in places, 
and, like excavators engaged in boring a tunnel from opposite 
ends, amid the roar of water and other noises, we are beginning
 to hear now and again the pickaxes of our comrades 
on the other side." 

"THE HEART OF JERUSALEM" 

The most happifying visible development on earth 
to-day is found in connection with the Jewish Zionist 
movement. The St. Louis Globe-Democrat, of August 
10th, makes a brief editorial review of the situation, 
especially as it bears upon European Jews : 

"The results of the war have given no greater happiness 
to any people than to the Jews of the world. There is no 
need to dwell on Jewish oppression in the past. It was practically
 universal until comparatively recent times and in a 
few countries. But as a result of the various treaties made 
with the countries that have recently sprung into existence, 
the Jews everywhere are promised a freedom of action and 
development along normal lines that would have been considered
 impossible five years ago" 

"There is some question as to how many Jews in the United 
States will return to their native countries. We are inclined 


October 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


311 


to reduce the number Mr. Marshall estimates, for there is 
little occasion for a Jewish exodus from the United States 
or fron? England. Never have they been more prosperous 
than in these countries and there is no prospect of greater 
pea^e and plenty elsewhere. But the unrestricted right to 
live anywhere is a blessing Jews may well celebrate." 

We can readily believe that comparatively few of 
the Jews in America and England will exchange their 
places here for new ones in Palestine, because a comparatively
 small number of the Jews have faith in the 
ancient promises. This has always been true. The 
Lord, speaking through his prophet, Isaiah, in extending
 the message of comfort to his chosen people, after 
protracted suffering, said: "Speak ye comfortably 
to [Hebrew, to the heart of] Jerusalem." It was so 
after the Babylonian captivity. There was the heart 
class who had not grown at ease in Babylon and who 
were willing, yes anxious, to face all the inconveniences 
and rigors of the return trip to Judaea and to rebuild 
the temple and the city. The bulk of captives were 
very comfortably situated in Babylon, having social 
and commercial ties which they did not care to sever. 
Likewise there is now a heart class to the Jewish people
 at large. Their hearts throb and burn at the prospect
 of restoration of their ancient land to its pristine 
loveliness and charm. 

More actual work toward the rehabilitation of Palestine
 has been done in the last few months than most 
people realize. There are still but few Jews there, 
but the spirit of determination and cooperation has 
been aroused in Zionists the world over to such an extent
 as to make the actual carrying out of their projects 
of secondary importance, and of but slight difficulty. 
We clip the following from the Maccabaean, the Zionist
 monthly, of August: 

PROGRESS IN PALESTINE 

"Mr. Louis Robison, the assistant treasurer of the Zionist 
Organization of America, is a gentleman who is accustomed 
to deal with realities. He is a dispassionate observer of facts, 
and while he has always been an ardent lover of Palestine 
and expects to be a resident of Palestine, his vision is unclouded
 by sentimentality, and he therefore makes an excellent 
reporter of things as they are. 

"Mr. Robison has just returned from Palestine where for 
a number of weeks he has been in the closest contact with the 
various forces that are at work in the country." 

"'I had the opportunity, at various stages of my journey, 
to come in touch with living proof of the determination and 
capacity of the Jewish people to build up a Jewish home in 
Palestine. I met Jews in Palestine and on the way to Palestine 
who were a real inspiration. A story of the wanderings and 
tribulations which some of them have undergone on their way 
to the Homeland reads like a romance. Thus I met at Port 
Said a group of six young people who had wandered from 
Russia across Siberia to Shanghai and from there around 
the continent of Asia to Port Said. There they were waiting 
for permission to enter Palestine. I asked one member of 
this group, a young woman, what her occupation had been 
in Russia. She told me she had been a bookkeeper. I expressed
 the belief that she would be successful in finding 
work in Palestine in that capacity.' 

"'A bookkeeper?' she replied. 'Why, a bookkeeper I could 
have been in Odessa. In Palestine I want to work on the 
soil.' It was a really wonderful spirit which animated these 
young people. 

" 'In Port Said, also, I met a number of individual Jews, 
all waiting for permission to enter Palestine, who, together, 
represented all the four corners of the world. There was a 
merchant from Irkutsk, a Jew born in Siberia and whose 
native language was Russian. He was on his way to Palestine 
as representative of a group of Siberian Jews, all of whom 
are ready to liquidate their affairs and stake their all on 
Palestine. He told me he knew of hundreds in Siberia, and 
many of them people of large means, who were making plans 
to settle in Palestine. This man was anxious to go to Palestine
, survey the ground, and report back to the people who 


had sent him. Then there was a merchant from South Africa 
who was on his way to Palestine in a similar capacity, representing
 a group in the Transvaal. A third was a Jewish 
dentist from the Argentine who had given up a very large 
practice in that country and was also proceeding to Palestine 
as representative of a group of Argentine Jews. A fourth 
came from London and was going to investigate conditions 
for himself and a large group of English-Jewish merchants 
who were ready to sell out and settle in Palestine as soon 
as feasible.' " 

The May issue of The Chosen People announces the 
fact that Zionists are planning to have a million Jews 
in Palestine in order to outnumber the Arabs. There 
seems to be no anxiety about money to buy land, nor 
is there a dearth of trained agriculturists. The thing 
necessary to enable them to get the upper hand in Palestine
 is a large Jewish population. The Arabs realize 
this and underhandedly have tried to stir up their own 
people against the Jews. But no danger has come to 
the fleshly seed of Abraham, nor will it to such an 
extent as to interfere with the divine promises. 

An old quotation from the Literary Digest, of July 
10th, 1915, gives some general facts about the land of 
Palestine : 

"Palestine, it is estimated, can accommodate a population 
of 6,000,000. With the establishment of new political control 
of the Holy Land it is intended that Jews shall migrate there 
from Russia, Germany, Austria, and other European states. 
Thus, the leaders of the movement say, a solution will have 
been found for the race-old Jewish problem. Not only will 
the Jews have their own land, but an end will be brought 
to the discrimination against them in other countries." 

ROOM FOR ALL ASPIRING ZIONISTS 

We read in 2 Chronicles, 13:3, and 14:7, that King 
Jeroboam of the ten tribes and King Asa, of the two 
tribes, put an army of one million, three hundred and 
eighty thousand men into the field of battle. This 
would indicate a still larger population. Yet they 
were not possessed of all the countries to the limits 
and boundaries specified in God's charier granted to 
Abraham. (Genesis, 15:18) On the other hand, the 
Zionists do not expect half of the Jews to migrate to 
Palestine. 

On the 20th of July the Zionist organization handed 
out a statement concerning the situation both in the 
Holy Land and in other parts of the world. This 
statement was published and commented upon in all of 
the largest papers of the country. Among other things, 
the statement says that from Poland and nearby countries
 some delegates have started to Palestine on foot 
- — unable to restrain their impatience longer. The 
New York American, of July 21, says further on this 
point : 

"To control the human flood, the Zionist Organization has 
formed emigration committees in a number of countries, while 
tens of thousands of young men from every class have 
organized agricultural training groups and other groups for 
the study of all technical and scientific questions bearing on 
the settlement of Palestine. 

"Boris Goldberg, chairman of the Zionist Organization of 
Greater Russia, reports that under the pressure of the social 
revolution, as carried through by extremists, the subsistance 
of seventy to seventy-five p«er cent, of the Jews in Russia 
has been destroyed. 

"Experimental farms are being established in Russia, according
 to the statement, for the training of Jewish young 
men, and builders, carpenters, and other kinds of skilled 
laborers are being classified. 

"In Bulgaria, the report says, the Jews have established a 
Bulgarian Palestine bank, with a capital of 10,000,000 leva, 
one-half of this sum to be devoted to the purchase of land 
in Palestine and the other half to the promotion of commercial
 relations. 


312 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


"The American organization has recently reported that the 
roster of the first 5,000 applications showed 135 occupations, 
including all forms of manual labor and professional administrative
 callings. Jewish farmers headed the list with a 
capital running into several millions of dollars," 

The New York Sun, of the same date, adds : 

"Holland reports similar vast preparations, especially among 
the Russian, Rumanian, and Galician Jews who took refuge 
in Holland after Antwerp was captured. In Germany many 
university students are anxious to go to Palestine to teach 
their people and assist in building up a new State. Reports 
from Morocco, Algiers and Egypt indicate coming movements 
of vast proportions. Reports from Canada state that many 
Jewish farmers are preparing to go to Palestine, and this is 
true also in Chile and Nicaraugua. In the Argentine the 
younger Jews are organizing themselves in groups of fifty, 
each group with an average capital of 15,000 francs. 

"In this country and England the Zionist organizations, 
while preparing to contribute largely to the emigration, expect 
to furnish administrators, engineers, specialists and civil 
servants who will devote themselves especially to helping 
Palestine absorb the great mass pouring through her gates." 

WHOLE VILLAGES TO MIGRATE 

Tt would seem that the desire to get away from some 
of the European centers has been so strong that not 
only whole families but whole villages are ready to 
move at the first opportunity. The New York 
Tribune, of July 21, substantiates this thought: 

"In many cases whole Jewish communities have firmly resolved
 to leave Poland and emigrate to Palestine. Five 
thousand families in Warsaw registered for the migration 
before April 4th last." 

But there are families in this country in comfortable 
circumstances who seem just as anxious to go, according
 to the Duluth News-Tribune, of July 29th : 

"Twenty Jewish families of Duluth are ready to leave for 
Palestine as soon as law and order are established there, 
according to Rabbi Israel Telpitz, rabbi of the Adash Israel 
Chevre Kadisha congregation. The wealth of each of these 
families ranges from $5,000 to $30,000. 

" 'Only a very small number have left for Palestine as 
yet,' said S. Mendelson, who is a member of the district 
Zionist board. 'We will not accept any more applications for 
the journey to the Holy Land until the political status of 
Palestine is established by the League of Nations. We hope 
that we may start for the country by the middle of October. 

" 'I intend to leave with the other Duluthians as soon as 
possible. The land as I remember it from my visit in 1882, 
is a big desert and it will require a lot of courage and patience 
to transform the country. We are making a special effort to 
interest the young Jewish people in the city in the project.' 

" 'As is the case in other parts of the country, a large 
number of the men preparing to leave Duluth are those of 
the professionals and technical crafts. No matter what their 
trade is here, they all expect to become farmers over in 
Palestine/ 

"'Taken altogether, there are around 800 Jewish families 
in the city, and within a short time after law is established 
in the Holy Land, we expect a large number of them to be 
on their way across.' " 

Mr. Nathan Straus, well known as a merchant and 
philanthropist, entertains the hope of becoming Jerusalem
's first mayor. An extract from the New York 
Tribune quoted in the Minneapolis Tribune, of August 
1, comments upon this desire on the part of Mr. 
Straus: 

"If Nathan Straus, New York's distinguished merchant and 
philanthropist, wishes to be the first mayor of Jerusalem, 
let us hope it will not be deemed an unwarranted intrusion 
in the politics of another community to express a wish for 
the gratification of his ambition. 

"Mr. Straus, by a long life of service to this community, 
has earned a right to take a series of sabbatical years to 
devote himself to new usefulness, while being carried on our 


rolls as a citizen emeritus. In Jerusalem, which his benefactions
 long ago reached and where his name is deemed 
blessed by those who have suffered during the long night, 
he will surely be welcomed. It would be of good omen to 
have as the first magistrate of the new Zion one whose 
thought was not to get something for himself or for hangers 
on. 

"It has been the habit, and is still the habit, of some to 
smile incredulously at the Zionist ideal. But its adherents 
were never as many as now. It is a fact of history that one 
group of the dispersed of Judaea, even though living in plenty 
and honor in Babylon, were moved to gc to the ancient site, 
then as much a mess of prostrate brick as Verdun, and did 
recreate the city and rebuild the temple. Thus was rebuked 
the polite derisiveness of the best circles of Babylon. 

"Even though Jerusalem becomes no great capital in commerce
 and population, it will have power a> a spiritual capital 
of a sort much needed by an unquiet world. 

The Boston Post, for July 2j, gives a part of a statement
 issued by Mr. Straus concerning his conception 
of some of the immediate needs in the city of Jerusalem
 : 

"Jerusalem stands on a hill, and there is every reason why 
it should be made as healthful and delightful a place to live 
in as the most modern city in the world. What is chiefly 
needed is modern water works. There is plenty of water to 
be had if proper pumping stations were erected. At the 
present time water is the most precious possession of the 
household. It is kept in cisterns under lock and key; every 
drop of it is valuable, because there is no water system available
. The defects of the sanitary arrangements of this city 
on this account are terrible." 

ADVANCE SANITATION IN JERUSALEM 

These needs have begun to be met, and movements 
are already under way for the rehabilitation of the 
ancient city and also for providing it with such needs 
as will make it sanitary and conducive to the happiness 
of all its inhabitants. The Charleston (S. C) News, 
of August 3d, contains quite a lengthy article on this 
subject, parts of which we quote; 

"When the British occupied it on December 9, 1917, Jerusalem
 was a typical Oriental holy city. Its Haram-esh-Sherif 
was sacred to Mohammedans from India to Morocco; its 
Wailing Wall was sacred to Jews from Arabia to Chicago; 
it* Church of the Holy Sepulchre was sacred to Christians, 
whether Greek Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Armenian, Syriac, 
Coptic, Abyssinian or Protestant. It was picturesque, mediaeval
, filthy, and the scene of constant religious bitterness. 
No city in the world has such a long record of blood-spilling 
as Jerusalem. 

"Four-fifths of its population lived on religious charities. 
Millions in money and millions more in treasure have poured 
into it through the centuries to keep candles burning, while 
the great majority of its population lived in parasitic idleness 
and fearfully unsanitary conditions. It had no industry, but 
lived a curiously artificial existence, making its living chiefly 
on its Russian pilgrims. Its ordinary language was— and is— 
Arabic; most of its European population belongs to the Greek 
Church; and on December 9, 1917, it came under the soldieradministration
 of the British Army. 

"It consists of the ancient walled city, which is so small 
that one can walk around it in an hour, and a great modern 
suburb lying in clean, dusty disorder over the hills to the 
north, northwest and west. No census of any degree of reliability
 has been taken in recent years, but its population 
is estimated at between 55,000 and 70,000. These are estimated 
to be divided into 28,000 Jews, 20,000 Moslems and 12,000 
Christians. Within the walls of the ancient city, there are 
quarters for Jews, Moslems, Christians, and Armenians. 
Without the walls, there are great French, German, Italian, 
Russian, Greek, English, and American properties. 

"When the Egyptian Expeditionary Force of the British 
\rmy occupied h', the first tasks to be tackled were those of 
feeding the population and of replacing the stench of the 
ancient city with a sanitary system. These tasks accomplished, 
there remained the finer task of preserving the ancient city 
and its life. It augured well for Jerusalem that this task 
devolved upon such men of vision as General Sir Edmund 


OCTOBH* 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


313 


H. H. Allenby, Commander-in-Chief of the E. E. F., MajorGeneral
 Sir A. W. Money, Chief Administrator of Palestine, 
and Brigadier-General Ronald Storrs, Military Governor of 
Jerusalem. 

"Brigadier-General Storrs summoned to his aid C. R. Ash* 
bee, whose work in city planning and civic life has brought 
him into touch with the best ideas in Europe and America; 
Major Ernest Richmond, son of Sir William^ Richmond, the 
British painter, an authority on Sacrascenic art; W. H. 
Maclean, city engineer of Alexandria and a city planning 
expert; and W. A. Stewart, supervisor of technical schools 
in Egypt and an authority on arts and crafts in the Near East 
Mr. Maclean was employed to prepare a town plan for the 
new Jerusalem, Mr. Stewart to investigate textiles, looms, 
weaving and dyeing among the natives, and Major Richmond 
10 investigate the state of the Haram-esh-Sherif with a view 
to its repairing. 

"More recently, too, Mr. Ashbee, after exhaustive investigations
 into the tasks which confronted him, was made civic 
adviser to the city of Jerusalem, and thus the beginning has 
been laid of a new civil administration such as Jerusalem has 
never dreamed of before. 

'These appointments were followed by one of the most 
significant events which Jerusalem has ever seen. In the 
Pro-Jerusalem Society, the creation and the special child of 
Brigadier-General Storrs, all the previously hostile religious 
communities which for centuries have cut up the population
 of Jerusalem, are united. The list of its members is 
unique in the history of Jerusalem. 

"Before this society lies the unique task of unifying and 
rehabilitating Jerusalem. It is through this society that Mr. 
Ashbee is accomplishing much of his work in creating a new 
future for the sacred city." 


RUBBISH OF CENTURIES CLEARED AWAY 

"The preservation of the ancient city itself presents a great 
task. 

"This involves the isolation of the ancient walled city and 
its jealous preservation. Already much has been done by 
refugee labor in removing tons of rubbish from the citadel, 
and in scraping parts of the ancient wall free of the disintegrating
 plants which covered it. So heavily is Jerusalem 
overladen with centuries of rubbish that at one point where 
Mr. Ashbee's workmen have been laboring on the walls, a 
line of cactus had grown over the very top of the wall. When 
it is fully realized, Mr. Ashbee's scheme will produce a walk 
around the wall, with the waste spaces both inside and outside
 the walls appropriately gardened." 

"On the problems which confronted him, Mr. Ashbee has 
collected the best judgment of the world and is going one 
better for Jerusalem. What is the result of his work? For 
one thing, Jerusalem property is undergoing to-day the greatest
 boom in its history. Land in the vicinity is commanding 
as high as $1,200 an 'acre. Europeans and Americans who 
have lived here for years say that fifty years from now Jerusalem
's population will touch the half million mark." 

Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis, honorary 
President of the Zionist organization, has been in Palestine
 for some weeks and returned to America in the 
latter part of September and is expected to report his 
findings to the annual convention at Chicago. His 
powers of observation and his personal influence will 
lend much to the interest already aroused. 


CLEANSING FROM ALL UNRIGHTEOUSNESS 

"Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound." — Romans 5 :20. 


SUBJECTS are often complicated in our minds 
by too elaborate and intricate reasoning. The 
more simple we can keep our mental processes
, the better for us as a rule. In one 
sense of the word sin abounds everywhere, 
in the entire human family. But in the text under 
consideration the Apostle's thought seems to be that 
while sin has abounded in every member of the Adamic 
race, yet in some members of the human family it has 
abounded more than in others. If then, in imputing 
justifying merit to the church, God were to give the 
same amount of grace to each individual, some would 
receive more than they require, while others would 
not have a sufficiency. Hence the Apostle declares: 
"Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound". 
This statement implies that God supplies his grace in 
Christ to each penitent in proportion to the needs of 
the individual case. If there be more sin, there is 
also more grace; if there be more depravity, there is 
likewise more grace to cover the imperfections. In 
other words, the grace of God through Christ Jesus 
our Lord is not evenly distributed in the sense of giving
 so much to each individual, but it is fairly distributed
 in the sense of imputing to each one according 
to his necessity. 

When any member of the Adamic race begins to see 
that he is a sinner, and desires to turn from sin to seek 
God and righteousness, he is approaching that condition
 which God has arranged for his enjoyment. But 
he has not reached it as yet ; and he has received no 
blessings except those tentative ones which accrue to 
him because he has taken the right course in turning 
towards the things which God approves. He is now 
more pleasing to God in the sense that he is heading 
toward righteousness. Because he believes in God and 
seeks to please him, the believer ha* a measure of 


peace of mind as a result. But he has not come into 
the family of God, and his sins are not forgiven. The 
blessing which he now enjoys has come to him because 
he has taken the course of faith and obedience to 
God's law of righteousness. 

This attempt on the part of a believer to draw near 
to God is pictured in Israel's Tabernacle in the Wilderness
. The Camp, the Court, and the Tabernacle of 
Israel represented conditions through which all must 
pass who would attain joint-heirship with our Lord. 
The Camp represents the condition of the world in sin, 
needing atonement and desiring its blessings. The individual
 who leaves the Camp condition of general unbelief
 and enters into the Court is approaching the 
justified state; but he is not yet justified. As he enters
 the gate, he sees the Brazen Altar, and has a blesssing
 through the realization that ''Christ died for our 
sins, according to the Scriptures". But he is not as 
yet justified, although now he sees the divine provision 
for justification. He says, "I believe it," and has a 
corresponding blessing; for every step of faith, obedience
, and desire to please God which he takes is a step 
toward justification. 

REAL JUSTIFICATION FOLLOWS CONSECRATION 

His next step is that of cleansing by washing at the 
antitypical Laver — the Word of God. This act signifies
 the putting away of the filth of the flesh or the 
earnest effort to do so. But it does not mean that the 
person who is endeavoring thus to do is now justified. 
Whoever tries to put away sin and to live a moral, upright
 life is getting nearer to God; and by so doing he 
will bring himself a peace of mind which is very desirable
. If he has the right disposition, he will continue
 on in this course; otherwise he will eventually 
turn back. But in either case he is not justified. 


314 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


The believer who continues his earnest endeavor to 
approach nearer to God will in due time come to the 
door of the antitypical Tabernacle. Further than this 
no human being can go by any power of his own. 
Thus far he has been approaching God as a believer. 
He has cleansed himself from outward sins and gradually
 has come to see the privilege of devoting, or consecrating
, himself to Jehovah. This step of consecration
 is that of giving up one's own will in order to do 
the will of God. When the believer has thus presented 
himself to God in full consecration, he is not yet justified
, but is merely seeking justification. He has been 
taking the right course, however; for he is getting 
more and more of the experiences which are necessary 
to bring him to actual justification in the sight of God. 

This step on the believer's part is represented in the 
Tabernacle picture by the tying of the goats before the 
door of the Tabernacle. In the type the high priest 
then came out and killed the Lord's goat and proceeded
 to offer it as he had already done with the bullock
. In the antitype the great High Priest, our Lord 
Jesus Christ, accepts the believer; but even this does 
not justify him. "It is God that justifieth." (Romans 
8:33) Then the High Priest imputes his merit to the 
believer and presents his sacrifice to the Father, who 
indicates the divine acceptance by begetting the believer
 with the holy Spirit. This was typefied by the 
Jewish high priest's act of killing the goat. Now that 
the antitypical High Priest has imputed his merit to 
the believer and the Father has accepted the offering, 
the believer is therefore fully justified, accepted of 
God and begotten as a new creature in Christ. 

JUSTIFYING MERIT 

It requires the whole of the merit of Christ to justify 
even one human being. Our Lord Jesus could not divide
 up his life among twenty thousand millions of 
people, and give a little scrap of the merit of his sacrifice
 to each individual. Nor is this the Scriptural 
presentation on the subject. The proper thought is 
that our Lord has a sufficiency of sacrificial merit to 
justify the one man who sinned — Adam; and that 
since the entire race has become sinners through that 
one man, our Lord's giving up of his life on the human 
plane has provided a sufficiency of merit to justify 
both the one original sinner and all of his posterity, 
born in sin and condemnation through his failure. 

The work of ransoming Adam and his race includes 
much more than merely the providing of the ransom 
price. It includes the recovery of Adam and his 
posterity from the power of sin and death. Manifestly
 this work has not yet been accomplished; indeed
, it has scarcely begun. The only disposition thus 
far made of the merit of our Lord's sacrificial death 
has been its imputation to the church — by faith. The 
work begun by our Lord for the world has not yet 
been completed, nor will it be until the end of the Millennial
 age. Up to the present time he has merely 
laid down his life as the ransom price, has placed it 
in the hands of the heavenly Father. Nothing more 
in the way of a ransom price is needed. What our 
Lord laid down is sufficient to cancel the account of 
the one sinner, Adam, and all of his posterity, who are 
dying on account of his sin of disobedience in Eden. 
The merit of our Lord's sacrificial death, which is already
 in the hands of divine justice, has not yet been 
appropriated in a legal way. But it will be thus legally 
applied in the sealing of the New Covenant, with its 


full provision whereby all men may be rescued from 
Adamic sin and death. 

The church will not receive restitution ; for in coming
 to the Father in full consecration we agreed to 
give up our earthly rights in order to have a share with 
our Lord Jesus in the spiritual blessings which God has 
made possible to us through his son. If we have his 
spirit, we shall devote ourselves to doing the Father's 
will, even at the cost of our lives, as our Lord devoted 
himself. If we continue faithful even unto death, 
then the Father will be pleased to give us the divine 
nature, as he gave it to our Lord Jesus. — Philippians 
2:8-11; 2 Peter 1:4. 

WHY JUSTIFICATION IS NECESSARY 

We are sinners by nature who desire to walk in our 
Redeemer's footsteps, and to sacrifice our earthly interests
 in doing the Father's will, but we are unacceptable
; for only that which is perfect can come to 
God's altar. (Leviticus 23 : 17-25) The Father could 
not justly deal with us as he dealt with our Lord Jesus, 
for the reason that we are sinners under the sentence 
of death. But God has made a special arrangement 
for the church class. We each have more or less of 
physical strength, more or less of physical life, more 
or less of talent or ability, and perhaps some other 
things. These are our all — all that we have to devote, 
or offer to God. We have no right to life. The best 
we have is merely a little unexpired scrap of life received
 from Father Adam. This little scrap of life 
and talent we offer to God because we have been informed
 that God has provided for our acceptance 
through the sacrifice of Jesus. Then Jesus Christ the 
righteous offers himself as our Advocate. He is the 
One who had the right to human life, but who sacrificially
 laid it down for mankind. By that sacrifice 
he is empowered to give life everlasting to the world 
during the Millennium. But if we renounce our interest
 in the world's restitution provision, he will enable
 us to present our bodies a living sacrifice, holy 
and acceptable to the Father, — Romans, 12, 1. 

Whether or not we understand the philosophy of 
this matter, we may accept the fact. It is our privilege, 
however, to understand the subject better than did 
some of our forefathers; for God's due time has come 
for the wise to understand. (Daniel 12:10) The 
Bible tells us that since we desire our bodies to be devoted
 to death, we merely give our consent that what 
we have shall be sacrificed. Jesus, who would have 
given us life in the future age, with all the rest of the 
world, says, Tf you are willing to give what you have, 
I will appropriate on your behalf that which I would 
have given you in restitution times, and thus will make 
your sacrifice acceptable to the Father*. In other 
words, our Lord Jesus imputes to the church now what 
he otherwise would have given us bye and bye — during
 the Millennial age. 

IMPUTATION MADE ONCE FOR ALL 

Our Lord does not impute the same amount of 
righteousness to each ; for some require more, while 
others require less. Whatever we lack of perfection 
will be what he will impute to us now, instead of giving
 it to us bye and bye, in the restitution times. We 
do not understand, however, that this imputation is 
made daily — a little now, and a little then ; but that it 
was done all at once before we could be accepted by 
the Father. 


October 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


315 


Someone has asked: "As we grow in grace daily 
should we not need less and less of the Savior's merit 
to be imputed to us than at first?" We reply, No! 
Such a question shows a wrong conception of the subject
. The first imputation was made once for all, and 
makes us acceptable sacrifices. The new creature 
does not need the imputation of our Lord's merit; for 
the new creature is sinless. It was the old creature 
that needed imputation, in order that God could accept
 the sacrifice and beget us as new creatures. The 
moment when we became new creatures, old things 
passed away and all things became new. The old 
creature was counted dead from that moment, and is 
not to be recognized by us; for the Father does not 
recognize it. We are non-existent as old creatures. 
The new creature does not need justification; for it 
does not sin. 

At the time of spirit-begetting the new creature is 
not perfect, in the sense of being complete, nor will it 
be until after the resurrection "change". But although 
incomplete, yet it is holy. To sin, in the last analysis, 
is to do something wrong intentionally, wilfully. Ignorance
 is not sin. Weakness of our consecrated flesh 
is not sin on the part of the new creature. "He that 
is begotten of God sinneth not." The new creature 
is young and undeveloped; but, being begotten of God, 
he will desire to grow in grace, in knowledge and in 
all the fruits of the holy Spirit. He will strive to 
follow the teachings and the example of his great Lord 
and Head, and thus to become more like the heavenly 
Father. God has arranged that all things shall work 
together for good to all whom he begets as new creatures
. He will bless their every trial and experience. 
Even the slips which they may make in the blindness, 
weakness or what not of their sacrificed flesh he is 
willing so to bless that they may learn lessons therefrom
 and become stronger thereby. 

DOES THE NEW CREATURE SIN? 

If through weakness of the flesh the new creature 
is ensnared, he should go at once to the throne of 
heavenly grace, and get right with God. He will thus 
demonstrate that he loves righteousness and hates sin. 
Then he will seek to profit by the experience, and will 
endeavor to keep as far as possible from further similar
 failures. Nothing less than this would be in harmony
 with the covenant which he has made. 

Insofar as the sin or the trespass of which the new 
creature has repented is due to weakness of the flesh or 
to some other cause concerning which he was helpless, 
God would consider this as being due to the imperfect 
flesh, and would not hold it against the penitent new 
creature. But he would expect the penitent to learn 
the lesson embodied in the experience, even though the 
wrong doing would not be charged to the new creature
's account. Nevertheless it would be necessary 
for him to ask forgiveness of the Father and of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and to seek grace to avoid a repetition
 of the offense. The forgiveness for the fleshly 
weakness would be granted upon the basis of the original
 imputation, which covers his sins as long as he remains
 in the flesh. Nevertheless his flesh may be given 
stripes for its correction in righteousness. 

In proportion as there is a mixture of wilfulness in 
our sins, the transgression would be wilful ; for no 
matter how small the degree of our consent to sin, to 
that extent we would be in harmony with the enemy. 


We have enlisted on the side of Jehovah, and any 
sympathy toward unrighteousness implies a wrong 
condition on our part. The Father would be offended 
with such a new creature. Although he has not in the 
Scriptural sense committed full, wilful sin, yet he has 
trespassed — stepped beyond the bounds. If any new 
creature should sin wilfully, his act would indicate that 
the new mind had died. The new creature then would 
no longer exist; and the old creature, thus come to 
life, would be subject to the second death. If, however
, the new creature shows our Lord that he is not 
in sympathy with the sin, there is forgiveness provided 
for him. The Father accepts his intentions, and will 
not take from him the holy Spirit. Nevertheless, he 
will receive chastisements in his flesh. 

CLEANSING FROM UNRIGHTEOUSNESS 

In the forgiveness of the new creature's trespasses, 
the merit of our Lord Jesus would not be involved. 
Our Lord has nothing personally to do with atoning 
for sin on the part of the new creature. His atonement
 sacrifice was for the sin of Adam and his posterity
 — the original sin- — not for the new creation. If 
the new creature fails to be faithful to our Lord, he 
must receive chastisements in the flesh, in order that 
he may be helped to make straight paths for his feet. 
There is no atonement for new creatures. 

A trespass is not necessarily a sin, however. One 
may unwittingly trespass upon another's rights. For 
instance, we might step into another person's path unintentionally
 ; or we might bump into another, and 
might say, "Please excuse me". This remark implies 
that there has been a trespass, an occasion for asking 
to be excused for something done that was not quite 
right. To those who have come into the family of 
God, this matter of asking to be forgiven for a trespass
 means that the one asking forgiveness has not 
done as well as he might have done. When he has 
done what he can do to set the matter straight, he is 
to go to the Lord and seek forgiveness. Moreover, he 
is to assure the heavenly Father of his intention to do 
better in the future. 

The Father desires his children to notice every little 
thing they do that is wrong. We must acknowledge 
the right, and get the lesson which the wrong would 
teach. Thus to aknowledge the wrong will do us good. 
If it has not been intentional, he will freely forgive it. 
If we have been careless, chastisement as well as forgiveness
 may be necessary. 

This matter of cleansing from all unrighteousness 
is not merely the setting aside of our sins and trespasses
 in a legal way. To cleanse us from unrighteousness
 means to purify us. The cleansing is a 
gradual process, often accomplished through tears and 
tribulations. Water out of the faucet does not cleanse 
us the moment it touches us. We must use soap, and 
do special rubbing upon the places most soiled. So 
also the process of being cleansed from all filthiness 
of the flesh and the spirit is a gradual work, going on 
throughout our lives ; and doubtless it will continue 
until the end. The old creature was more or less unclean
 from the beginning; and we shall therefore never 
be able to cleanse the flesh thoroughly. As long as 
we are in the flesh, however, the cleansing of our flesh 
will be in order. Our wills are clean; and now our 
minds must be cleansed. "Blessed are the pure in 
heart; for they shall see God." 


WITNESSES OF CHRIST'S GLORY 

November 16. — Luke 9:28-36. 

"This is my beloved Son: hear ye him" — Mark 9:7. 


CONTINUING his lesson to the apostles, showing 
them that his glory and his kingdom could not come 
until after his suffering and death, our Lord declared
: "There be some standing here who will not 
taste of death until they see the Son of Man coming 
in his royal majesty". (Matthew 16:28; 17:1) 
Then, six days later (or eight days, counting the one in which 
this was uttered and the one in which it was fulfilled) our 
Lord took Peter, James, and John, the three apostles most advanced
 in faith and zeal, into a high mountain ; and while he 
was praying with them the transfiguration scene of our lesson 
occurred. 

It was a further lesson of instruction in harmony with what 
he had already explained; namely, that the Son of Man must 
be set at nought by the chief priests and the elders, and must 
be crucified and must rise from the dead ere he could enter 
into his glory — the kingdom in which he had promised them 
a share. The transfiguration scene was therefore a picture or 
'Vision" of our Lord's glory in his kingdom, and was designed 
to assure the apostles respecting the certainty of the kingdom, 
notwithstanding the apparent failure of all the kingdom hopes 
in our Lord's crucifixion. Doubtless this vision was essential 
as an assistant to the apostles' faith in Jesus as the promised 
Messiah, since the course of events which would follow in the 
next few months would be so different from everything that 
they had expected. 

Peter, one of those present on this occasion, fully substantiates
 this view that the transfiguration w r as a vision of Christ's 
dignity and glory in the kingdom; for writing respecting it 
he says : "We have not followed cunningly devised fables in 
making known to you the presence and power of our Lord 
Jesus, but were eye-witnesses of that majesty; for when he received
 from God the Father honor and glory, then there came 
such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved
 Son, in whom I am well pleased. And this voice which 
came from heaven we heard when we were with him in the 
holy mount."— 2 Peter 1 : 16-18. 

The several accounts show that our Lord entered into the 
mountain to pray, and that during the prayer the apostles fell 
asleep, but subsequently awakened and beheld the vision, the 
Master's face shining like the sun, his garments glitteringly 
white, and in his company two persons who for some reason 
they recognized as Moses and Elijah, although of course they 
had never seen either of these men and would not have known 
them without assistance. These they overheard talking with 
our Lord, the subject of the conversation no doubt being intended
 for the ears of the disciples, to convince them that the 
matters which would occur before long in Jerusalem and on 
Mount Calvary would all be features of the divine plan, harmoniously
 working out the blessed results promised and 
longed for, through the kingdom. "They spoke of his decease 
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem." 

THE MEANING OF THE VISION 

What is the interpretation of the picture? is a proper question
. We reply that it represented, first of all, that although 
our Lord Jesus must suffer death, even the death of the cross, 
in harmony with the divine plan, "being made a curse for us" 
(Galatians 3: 13), he was still the Son of God, whose glorious 
majesty and kingly power would later on be fully shown forth. 
Moses and Elijah, representing the law and the prophets, 
illustrate how the death of Christ was fully attested beforehand
. Moses spoke of the sufferings of Christ in all the arrangements
 of the law, its sacrifices, etc; and the prophets 
declared not only the coming glories, but also the sufferings 
which must precede them. This our Lord subsequently pointed 
out to the two disciples on the way to Emmaus, saying, "O 
fools and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have 
spoken! Ought not Messiah to have suffered these things, 
and to enter into his glory?" — Luke 24: 25-27. 

Again, this picture may be understood to represent the kingdom
 during this Gospel age, the kingdom as recognized by 
the Lord's people, but not by the world. In this view of the 
vision, our Lord's face shining as the s_u.., and his garments 
glistening white, would represent him in his present condition
, as no longer the man Christ Jesus, but the risen, glorified
 Son of the Highest, a spirit being. In this view of the 
matter Moses might be understood to represent the faithful 
of the past ages, and Elijah the faithful of this Gpspel age, 
the body of Christ in the flesh, who are to be associated with 
our Lord in the glory of the kingdom, and who meantime 
behold his glory with the eye of faith, and recognize the 


great transaction of Calvary as the basis of all kingdom hopes 
and blessings. See Studies in the Scriptures, Vol. 2, 
Study 8. 

THE TRANSFIGURATION SCENE A VISION 

We have called this scene on the mountain a vision ; and so 
indeed our Lord calls it, in the account given by Matthew 
(17:9): "As they came down from the mountain Jesus 
charged them, saying, Tell the vision to no man until the Son 
of Man be risen from the dead". And indeed a vision was 
just as useful to the purpose as a reality could have been. 
Thus it was that our Lord showed many things later on to 
one of these three witnessing disciples on the Isle of Patmos. 
He showed John, in vision, angels and thrones and crowns and 
multitudes and dragons, etc., in a manner which served the 
purpose equally well as though all those beasts, dragons, etc., 
had been actually created for that purpose. So in this vision. 
Our Lord's transfiguration was merely an appearance. Actually 
he had undergone no change. He appeared like as spirit beings
 are described — bright, shining like the sun, etc. ; yet he 
was not then a spirit being, and did not become such until 
his resurrection from the dead. He was still "the man Christ 
Jesus". But in the vision our Lord's countenance and his 
garments were caused to appear to be bright, glistening, etc., 
and the appearance served every purpose. Likewise, Moses and 
Elijah appeared to be present, but they were not actually present
; for it was merely a "vision". The Apostle Paul distinctly 
informs us that Moses and Elijah and the other ancient worthies
 are not yet made perfect ; and that they cannot be made 
perfect until after the church, the body of Christ, is complete 
and glorified with the Head, "God having provided some better
 things for us, that they without us should not be made 
perfect"— Hebrews 11:40; John 3:13; Acts 2:34. 

As a part of the vision came a misty cloud of light, which 
enveloped the group, including the disciples, who were fearful 
as they entered the cloud. This cloud, as a part of the vision, 
might properly be understood as saying to the apostles and to 
us, 'Although the glory and majesty of the Lord Jesus are 
unquestionably his, as testified to by the law and the prophets, 
and as a result of his faithfulness unto death, nevertheless 
that glory will in a considerable measure be hidden, covered, 
obscured for a time, so that you will see your glorious Lord 
and King only with the eye of faith, which, although more or 
less cloudy, will be bright to those who look unto him.' And 
the voice of God speaking in that cloud, testifying to Jesus 
as the Son of God, and instructing us to hear and obey his 
word, would seem to represent how that all through this 
Gospel age, while the misty cloud surrounds the glory of the 
Lord, we shall have great need to hearken continually to the 
Word of the Lord and to repose faith in its declaration respecting
 the Son of God, our Redeemer. 

BACK TO THE BATTLE OF LIFE 

After the vision our Lord and the three apostles descended 
from the mount to engage in the duties of life, to complete 
the lessons of faith and obedience, battling against the world, 
the flesh, and the devil. Yet, as the quotation from the Apostle
 Peter's letter clearly shows, the influence of this vision 
continued with the apostles through coming days, as it still 
encourages us to-day. And may we not learn a lesson to the 
effect that as this vision was granted when Jesus and the disciples
 were at prayer, so all those who seek God in prayer may 
to a large extent realize with the eye of faith this same 
blessed vision of the kingdom, the glories to come, and may 
to some extent recognize with the hearing of faith the voice 
of God saying, "This is my beloved Son" — to some extent be 
enabled to realize that as members of the body of Christ their 
sacrifice must also be accomplished in actual death before they 
can enter into his glory, since it is written that "if we suffer 
with him we shall also reign with him?" 

We cannot build tabernacles on the mountain heights of 
faith and hope, and expect to dwell there in enraptured vision 
always. We must remember that the duties ana the trials of 
present experiences in conflicts with sin and with self and 
with the adversary are essential to our development and are 
part of our covenant. But like the Master we should frequently
 seek the heavenly Father's blessing in prayer; and in 
proportion as we use this privilege will our hearts and our 
faces shine, and proportionately shall we be enabled to "show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light," and who has shined by his grace 
into our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of God as 
it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 


316 


JESUS CORRECTS JOHN'S NARROWNESS 

November 23. — Luke 9 :46-56. 

"Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ with a love incorruptible" — Ephesians 6:24. 


AFTER the vision in the holy mount representing the 
coming glories of Christ, there followed temptation. 
And this has not been an unusual course of events 
with the Lord's people ever since. Our highest 
and most glorious views of the heavenly things 
which the Lord has in reservation for his people 
are quickly followed by earthly trials and difficulties, which 
serve to test and to prove us whether or not we be of the 
kingdom class — whether or not we will be submissive to the 
heavenly moulding and fashioning, that we shall be made 
meet, fit, for the kingdom—whether or not, by full submission 
to the divine instructions in the school of Christ, we shall 
make our calling and our election sure to a place in the 
kingdom to which he has called us. 

The disciples had the same thought that all Jews entertained
 respecting the Messianic kingdom, that it w r ould be 
established by a great Messiah, a great King, who would bear 
rule over all the earth; that God's favored people Israel 
would be his special charge and nearest to him in association 
in his kingdom, and that through this kingdom all nations, 
all peoples, all kindreds, would be blessed even as God had 
promised and sworn to Abraham. These sentiments had been 
quickened in the minds of the people by the appearance of 
Jesus, his wonderful words of life and his wonderful works 
witnessing that "never man spake like this man", and that 
Messiah could do no greater works than Jesus did. Israelites 
in general were in perplexity because their chief priests and 
teachers and rulers in the synagogues, etc., all rejected Jesus 
and were his opponents. The disciples, however, believed on 
him, followed him and hung upon his words that they and all 
of his followers should yet be associated with him in his kingdom
 glory. 

Probably the disciples who were not with the Lord on the 
Mount of Transfiguration felt a little envy of those who had 
seen the vision and who subsequently told them. Could this 
mean that Peter, James and John, who were with the Lord on 
the Mount, would be more highly favored than the remainder 
of the discipleship when the kingdom should be established? 
As they journeyed, following Jesus at a little distance, the 
dispute grew quite warm in the arguments on the one side 
and on the other respecting which should be the greatest in 
the coming kingdom. 

Our Lord doubtless knew at the time their arguments in 
the dispute, but instead of administering a personal rebuke to 
those most at fault, he chose rather to make of the matter a 
general lesson, profitable, helpful, strengthening to them all. 
And is not his example valuable to all of his followers? Is 
it not wise on our part so far as possible to avoid personalities 
and the holding up of any individual to special criticism ? All 
mankind have faults and blemishes, some in one particular and 
some in another, and it is very rarely wise to single out an individual
 in the body of Christ for a special reprimand; it is 
generally better to do as our Master did in this instance — to 
give a general lesson on the subject which will be helpful to 
all, not only to those who are taking the wrong course, but 
also to those who are more nearly right in their views and 
conclusions. 

"AS A LITTLE CHILD" 

Our Lord inquired of the disciples what topic was so greatly 
absorbing their attention and leading to such warm discussion. 
It is to the credit of the apostles that they were ashamed to 
acknowledge that they had been disputing concerning which 
should be chief or greatest in the kingdom. The whole matter 
was to be a favor to them anyway; they realized that they 
had done nothing to merit so great an honor, that the call to 
a place in the kingdom was of grace, of favor. Why should 
they quarrel with each other respecting the Master's distribution
 of the royal favors? They felt abashed, and Jesus did 
not press the question. Knowing of the matter he allowed 
them to see that he had a knowledge, not only of their words, 
but also of their very hearts and intentions. Most skillfully, 
most gently, did he administer a rebuke; not in coarse, harsh 
terms did he berate those who were inclined to be self-seeking
; he did not threaten them. 

A child was near — he took it and set in their midst. Afterwards
, says Luke, he took it in his arms. Their attention riveted
 by this peculiar proceeding, they were prepared for the 
lesson, which many to-day misunderstand when they suppose 
that our Lord meant that the kingdom of heaven would be 
composed mainly of little children. No such words were uttered
 by our Lord and no such thoughts were communicated 


to his disciples. On the contrary, Jesus never called little 
children to be his disciples ; he himself did not begin his ministry
 as a child, but when he was thirty years of age. Nothing 
in this, however, signifies that our Lord had not a deep sympathy
 with children, as is illustrated by his taking some of 
them into his arms and blessing them and saying, "Suffer the 
little children to come unto me and forbid them not, for of 
such [like] is the kingdom of heaven". Our Lord loved the 
innocency and simplicity of a little child, and was quite willing 
to show his own humility in acceding to the wishes of the 
mothers that he notice their children and give them his blessing
. Indeed we can rest assured that no good man or woman
 could be without love for the innocency and simplicity 
of childhood. 

"GREATEST IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN" 

Neither should we understand that because Jesus' ministry 
began at thirty, and because those whom he called to his disciples
 were of mature years, that this would limit the age of 
any who might become the followers of Christ during this 
Gospel age. Quite to the contrary, we believe that some of 
very tender years have reached a sufficiency of information 
respecting our Lord and his work of redemption and his invitation
 to followers to take their stand intelligently with Jesus' 
disciples by full consecration of heart and life and every interest
, with apparently quite a clear conception of what they 
were doing. Indeed, we feel like encouraging those of the 
young who are disposed to make a full consecration of their 
lives to the Lord to believe that in so doing they are not only 
acceptable, but that additionally they the sooner enter into the 
rest of faith, and are spared many of the unfavorable experiences
 which come to those who first seek the world and the 
pleasures thereof. 

In this lesson, however, we should distinctly note that the 
Lord is neither addressing little children nor discussing them, 
except as an example or illustration of simplicity, docility and 
teachableness, and freedom from pride and ambition. This 
was impressed upon the disciples as they looked at the little 
child sitting there unconscious of the great honor thrust upon 
it, unconscious of being used by the glorious King of kings 
to illustrate a lesson. The thought of our Lord is clearly 
given in the fourth verse, which says, "Whosoever therefore 
shall humble himself as this little child, the same is greatest 
in the kingdom of heaven". 

Let us not lose sight of the fact that it is the kingdom of 
heaven that the Lord is discussing and not the world. This 
was the same thought the apostles had, not which of them 
would get into the kingdom of heaven and which would not 
get into the kingdom, but— supposing that all were going to 
be in the kingdom— which would be the greatest? The Lord's 
reply to this question is along this line, namely, that the one 
of them who would be the most childlike, most humble, most 
unpretentious, most willing to be taught and guided, would be 
the one who would be greatest. This thought applies to the 
church both in its present and in its future conditions. At 
the present time the church, the kingdom, is in an embryo 
condition, not glorified, not recognized even by the world, but 
recognized by each other and by the Lord. Humility and childlikeness
 among the brethren now should be esteemed as a 
mark of true greatness from the Lord's standpoint. Such as 
are of this childlike class we may know assuredly will be proportionately
 highly honored in the future, when the kingdom 
shall be established in power and great glory as God's agency 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth. 

THE HUMBLEST PROPERLY GREATEST 

In harmony with this thought that the humble, the teachable
, the simple, the unpretentious should be esteemed the 
greatest, we should expect to find in all the ecclesias, in all the 
companies of the Lord's people, that those chosen to the place 
of eldership and prominence in the church would be among 
the most humble of mind and of conduct in the whole company
. Any other condition than this would imply that the 
congregation had not rightly understood and appreciated and 
obeyed our Lord's sentiments expressed in connection with 
the incidents of our lesson. 

The 49th and 50th verses give us one of the most important 
lessons of the New Testament, which, had it been properly 
heeded, would have avoided most of the bitter religious animosity
 and strife, not to say bloodshed, of the past nineteen 
hundred years. The disciples had seen someone casting out 


317 


318 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


devils in Jesus' name and they forbade him because he followed
 not with them. Jesus' answer was perfectly plain; 
Forbid him not He explained to them that though the man 
was not intimately associated with them, he evidently had the 
Lord's work at heart. He had probably not recognized his 
opportunity of going to our Lord and asking his direction on 
his labors. For such a move great faith and great humility 
were necessary. It may be that the subsequent experiences of 
life brought this individual to a realization of his need of 
closer fellowship. The account does not inform us. 

The lesson here is a double one: first, that of religious tolerance
 ; and second, that of minding one's own business. The 
Master explained that the efforts of such a one were not directed
 against him but rather served as a signboard to call the 
attention of those who heard him to the Master himself. 
Furthermore, the man was doing a good work, and no good 
work should be forbidden. On the other hand, our Master 
did not tell his disciples to go and encourage the man in the 
course which he was pursuing, or to quit their own work and 
follow him ; nor did he tell them to go and contribute to his 
work. t 

Subsequent verses of our lesson relate an incident which occurred
 on the occasion of our Lord's journey from Galilee to 
Jerusalem, just before his crucifixion. While passing through 
Samaria some of his disciples went into a city for the purchase
 of bread and supplies for the party. The Samaritans 
recognized them and inquired, would the Great Teacher recognize
 the Samaritans and heal their sick or would he treat 
them as Jews in general treated them— unkindly ? They 
believed the latter. The Apostles frankly told them that the 
Great Teacher was sent only to the Jewish nation and would 
not stop to heal their sick ones, because he was "not sent save 
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel". 

Naturally enough the Samaritans resented this and were 
angry. They said, Very Well. Buy bread from the people 
whom you instruct and whose sick you heal. 

John and James were greatly incensed at this. Was not 
Jesus the greatest Teacher? Was he not the Messiah? Had he 


not, as such, the right to determine the will of God respecting 
who should and who should not receive his benefactions? 
With this answer they came to Jesus and, relating the circumstances
, asked, "Wilt thou that we command fire to come 
down from heaven to destroy these men and their city?" 

WHAT SPIRIT ARE YE OF? 

We listen with keen interest for the Master's response. As 
we once viewed the matter of the divine program it would 
have seemed right for the Great Teacher to have said to the 
Apostles, Never mind, my dear disciples; wait just a little 
while and all those Samaritans will die and my heavenly 
Father will deliver them over to the devils for an eternity of 
torture. In comparison with eternal torture that which you 
propose in the way of burning them for a few minutes would 
be as nothing. I appreciate, my dear disciples, your spirit, 
that it is God-like ; that you desire to do all the roasting and 
burning within your power, and I commend you for it. Continue
 thus to copy your God and to cause suffering to as 
many as possible of your fellow-creatures who do not think 
exactly as you do. 

Was this the answer of the Great Teacher? Thank God, 
No ! His teaching was the very reverse — sympathetic, loving, 
kind. And he had the Father's spirit and understood it and 
followed it perfectly. In answer to their query, we read, 
"Jesus turned and rebuked them" and said, "Ye know not 
what spirit ye are of ! The son of man is not come to destroy 
men's lives, but to save them!" 

The language spoken in Palestine in Jesus' day was the 
Syriac. One of the Great Teacher's titles is the Savior. And 
this, in the Syriac language, signifies, "The Life-Giver". The 
whole world was damned enough before Jesus came. He came 
not to damn (condemn) them more, but that they, through 
him, might have life!— John 10:10; 3:17. 

Life! Did they not have life? No. All human life was 
forfeited through father Adam's disobedience. All of mankind
 are dying as a result. A Life-Giver, a Savior from death 
(and not from eternal torment) , was what was needed. 


THE GOLDEN AGE 


THE first issue of The Golden Age is just off the 
press. It is brimful of interesting matter dealing 
with the present-day events of the world as well 
as discussing philosophical and religious questions 
of great importance. We are advised that subscriptions
 received number approximately 15,000 so far. 
This is unprecedented and we dare say there has never been 
another publication which has had so many subscriptions before
 the first number was issued. The people seem very desirous
 of having a publication that will explain to them the 
meaning of passing events and which holds out a hope for the 
future. The fact that many strangers have subscribed without
 having seen a copy of the magazine but upon merely being 
told about it is evidence of the public interest. The following 
is significant : 

"Yesterday I sold 26 in three and one-half hours." 

"I took orders for 95 in three days and one hour, working 
on an average of four hours daily." 

Another brother suggests that all classes subscribe for The 
Golden Age to be sent to each newspaper in their respective 
localities. By this means all the newspapers in the country 
would receive a copy regularly. We think this very good. 

From all parts of the country come reports that the classes 
are unanimously organizing for this work and many are the 
letters which express great enthusiasm for the opportunity of 
doing something to spread the glad tidings of the kingdom. 

Of course the adversary will attempt to hinder the publication
 and distribution of The Golden Age because it announces 
Messiah's kingdom. He will get the suggestion into the minds 
of some, even of the Lord's people, that it should not be published
 and will quite possibly be able to convince some. The 
truth has always found opposers among those who should be 
supporting it. — Matthew 23:13. 

We trust there will be none now to go as far as did the 
Pharisees in this direction; but there are some who object to 
the Golden Age on the, as it seems to us (> very weak claim 
that it violates Brother Russell's will. Their objection is devoid
 of real merit. Are we to understand that they would 
distribute no volunteer matter themselves, in announcement of 
the kingdom and that they would like to discourage others 
who wish to do so? Let us hope better things. The publication
 and distribution of The Golden Age in no wise violates 


the letter or the spirit of Brother Russell's will. The clause 
mentioned reads : "As the Society is already pledged to me 
that it will publish no other periodicals, [i. e. it will not enter 
into a general publishing business, but will confine its activities 
to the publication of the truth], it shall also be required that 
the Editorial Committee shall write for or be connected with 
no other publications in any manner or degree. My object in 
these requirements is to safeguard the Committee and the 
journal from any spirit of ambition or pride or headship, and 
that the truth may be recognized and appreciated for its own 
worth and that the Lord may more particularly be recognized 
as the head of the church and the fountain of truth" 

The plain intent oi these words is that no publication which 
would rival The Watch Tower should be issued. The objectors
 would, apparently, construe this will to mean that a 
member of the Editorial Committee could not write a discourse
 for publication in a newspaper for the benefit of the 
public; nor could the Editorial Committee or the Society 
publish anything for free distribution in the way of volunteer 
matter. Such a narrow construction was manifestly never intended
 by Brother Russell. His clear purpose was that the 
Committee should not write nor should the Society engage in 
issuing publications which would rival The Watch Tower. 
The Golden Age is not a rival of The Watch Tower, but it 
is the means of carrying to the public the truth now due and 
following out the very purpose Brother Russell had in mind 
in his lifetime, even long after writing the will. 

Let us see to it, dear brethren, that if we do not find ourselves
 in possession of such faith as prompts us to engage in 
the proclamation of the kingdom message, we do not, like the 
Pharisees, err in trying to prevent those who do wish to do 
what they believe to be the Lord's will. Let us remember that 
the mission of the church on earth now is to announce the 
Lord's kingdom and if he opens the way for us to announce 
it, we will surely be missing a blessing by saying that we will 
stand behind some-technicality as an excuse for not doing the 
Lord's work. The adversary would be pleased to take advantage
 of such an attitude. Let us remember our commission, 
set forth by the Lord through the Prophet Isaiah — 61:1-3. 

Participation or non-participation cannot be made the basis 
for fellowship in Christ, though it is bound, in the very nature 
of things, to make a difference of fellowship in Christ's work. 


JESUS TEACHES PETER TRUE GREATNESS 

November 30. — John 13:5-16, 36-38. 

'The Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many.' 


OUR lesson can only be properly understood by 
taking note of the surroundings. The feast at 
Bethany, followed by our Lord's triumphal entry 
on the ass amid the shoutings of the multitude, his 
several days' preaching in the Temple to large 
crowds, and the coming of the Greeks to inquire for 
him, all seemed to indicate a growing popularity; and the 
disciples, thoroughly unable to comprehend the Master's 
declaration that he was shortly to be put to death by the 
chief priests, were full of ambitious thoughts respecting the 
future — respecting their identity with the Lord, and how his 
exaltation as a king would bring them into prominence and 
honor with him, as well as confer upon them the coveted 
opportunity of accomplishing a large amount of good, blessing
 a larger number of people, etc. 

The thirteenth of Nisan apparently was spent by our Lord 
in quiet retirement, and the evening following, beginning the 
fourteenth, was the time appointed for the celebration of 
the Passover Supper in the upper room. Some of the apostles 
had, by the Lord's instruction, made ready beforehand; and 
now, as they assembled without a host to appoint them their 
places at the supper, a discussion as to their prominence and 
their rights to the most honorable places, nearest to the 
Master, is not surprising. Our Lord twice before had rebuked 
them on this very line, assuring them that unless they 
cultivated and attained a spirit of meekness like little children 
they could have no part in the kingdom. And only a week 
betore, while en route to Jerusalem, James and John had 
made the request that in the kingdom, when established, they 
might sit the one on the right hand and the other on the 
left hand of the Master, in closest proximity to his person. 
It was this spirit that controlled on this occasion, and led 
up to our Lord's washing of the disciples' feet as a lesson 
of humility and willingness to serve one another even in 
the humblest capacity. 

SELFISHNESS EVEN IN LOVE 

Nor are we tt> think of the apostles as each striving for 
the highest position merely from a selfish standpoint. Rather 
we should suppose that Peter, James, and John, whom the 
Lord had in various ways specially favored in times past 
and who seemed to be specially close to him, loved the positions 
nearest his person, not merely because of the honor thus implied
, but largely because of their love and esteem for the 
Master himself, and perhaps with the feeling that they appreciated
 this privilege more than some others could appreciate
 the same. Indeed we may suppose that a considerable
 number of the other apostles strove on their behalf, insisting
 that they should have the most honorable position. 
But however we view the matter, it is evident that a wrong 
spirit had been engendered, one very inappropriate to the 
occasion, especially inappropriate to the Memorial Supper 
which our Lord intended to institute after the Passover. 

It is difficult for us to gauge our own hearts thoroughly 
and hence we should use great charity in measuring the hearts 
and intentions of others, and should err rather on the side 
of too great sympathv and leniency than on the side of too 
strong condemnation. Doubtless had the apostles been inquired 
of respecting the matter they would have denied any elements 
of selfishness in their motives and conduct, and would have 
thought and spoken only of their zeal for the Lord and 
desire to be near him. This illustrates to us, what the 
Scriptures declare, that the human heart is exceedingly deceitful
—that it needs scrutinizing carefully lest, under the 
cloak of something good, it might harbor qualities which 
without that cloak we would despise or spurn. 

As further illustrating this subject, and as helping us each 
and all to apply the lesson personally, we relate a dream told 
by a Scotch minister, Horatius Bonar, shortly before his 
death : He dreamed that his zeal was represented in a package 
of considerable size and weight, and that some angels came 
to it and weighed it and assured him that it was full weight, 
an hundred pounds— all that was possible. In his dream he 
was greatly pleased with this report. They next determined 
to analyze it. They put it into a crucible and tested it in 
various ways and then reported the result thus: "Fourteen 
parts selfishness; fifteen parts sectarianism; twenty-two parts 
ambition; twenty-three parts love to man; twenty-six parts 
love to God." Awakening he realized that it was but a dream, 
yet felt greatly humbled, and doubtless was profited by it 
throughout the remainder of life. That dream may be equally 
profitable to each of us in leading us to a close inspection 
of the motives which lie beyond our words and thoughts 


-Matthew 20 :28. 

and doings — especially beyond our service for the Lord and 
for the brethren. 

Had our Lord and his disciples been the guests of some 
host on this occasion, it would have been considered the duty 
of the host to send some menial to wash their feet. This was 
the custom of the country, and very necessary to comfort. 
The open sandals or imperfectly sewed shoes allowed the 
dust of the highway to soil the feet, and really made washing 
a necessity after every journey, but particularly on a festal 
occasion of this kind. As the Lord's company were not guests, 
but merely had the use of the room, no servant appeared to 
wash their feet, and it would have been properly the duty 
and custom for one of the number to perform the menial 
service for the others. As we have just seen, however, the 
spirit of rivalry was warm in their hearts, and no one 
volunteered to render the service, nor had any one the right 
to demand it in a company in which the Lord had made no 
special rank and appointed none as menials. This, however, 
rightly understood and appreciated, would have left the 
greater opportunity for some of them to volunteer this service 
to the others. What an opportunity they all lost ! 

A FAVORABLE OPPORTUNITY LOST 

Our Lord apparently let the matter go to the full limit 
to see whether or not any of them would improve the opportunity
 and make himself servant of all : he waited until 
the supper was being served (not ended, as in our common 
version) ; then arising from the table he laid aside his outer 
garment or mantle and took a towel and girded himself — 
that is to say, ti^hLcned the girdle worn around the waist, 
which would hold rp the flowing under-garments and keep 
them out of the way of his activity. We can well imagine 
the consternation of the apostles as they watched this 
procedure, and then saw the Lord go from the feet of one 
and another as they protruded from the couches on which 
they reclined. The basin was merely a receptacle for holding 
the soiled water, the water being poured from the pitcher 
in a small stream while the foot was being washed, rinsed. 

Apparently the apostles were so astonished at our Lord's 
procedure, and so felt the condemnation which his course 
implied, that they knew not what to say, and so silence 
reigned until it came Peter's turn. Peter had a peculiar combination
 of character, part of which was extremely good. 
He objected to having his feet washed by the Lord, saying, 
"Dost thou wash my feet?" — 'It is not appropriate, Lord, that 
one so great as you should serve a person of my standing, 
a poor fisherman'. But our Lord answered that although 
Peter did not discern the full meaning of the matter, he 
would explain to him later when he had finished the washing 
of all. Peter's second remark was less praiseworthy than his 
first. He said: "Thou shalt never wash my feet". 

It was hard for Peter to realize that he was the disciple 
and the Lord was the Teacher, that it was for him to obey 
and not to dictate; but Jesus' answer, "If I wash thee not, 
thou hast no part with me," at once brought out the better 
side of Peter's impulsive nature. If his washing had anything 
to do with his nearness to the Master and his relationship 
to him, then he wanted it. Going even to the other extreme 
again, fearing to leave matters in the Lord's care, he cried, 
"Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head". 
There is a lesson for us in this matter: We are not to dictate 
to the Lord, not to attempt to be wise or good or obedient in 
ways that he has not directed. This is a hard lesson for some 
dispositions to learn — continually they want to do more than 
is written in the Scriptures. Such a course indicates either 
a lack of reverence for the Lord and his Word and the 
wisdom thereof, or else a too great self-confidence, too much 
self-esteem. A humble and trustful heart should learn to say, 
Thy will, O, Lord, thy way, and in thy time, not mine be done. 

WASHING THE FEET OF THE BATHED 

Our Lord's answer in our common version is somewhat 
obscure ; the revised version is better — he that is bathed 
needeth not save to wash his feet to be clean every whit. 
Properly they had all bathed in accordance with the Jewish 
requirement of the putting away of all filth at the beginning 
of the Passover season. Our Lord's intimation, then, signified 
that having bathed they merely now needed the rinsing of 
their feet, the cleansing of the members that had come in 
contact with the earth. Our Lord added, referring to Judas, 
"Ye are clean but not all". This expression shows us clearly 
that he had in mind a higher cleansing, of which this washing 
of their feet and their previous bath were but figures. 


319 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies byTravelinq Brethrea 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. A. BAKER 

Scobcy, Mont Oct. 23, 24 Lewiston, Mont Nov. 

Bonetrail, N. Dak.... " 25,26 Franklin, Mont " 

Epping, N. Dak " 27, 28 Butte, Mont " 

Shelby, Mont Nov. 1, 2 Wallace, Ida " 

Great Falls, Mont.... " 3,5 Athol, Ida " 

Virgelle, Mont " 4 Spokane, Wash " 


6,7 

8,9 

10,11 

12,13 

14 

15,16 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H. BARBER 


Irwinton, Ga. .. 
Davidsboro, Ga. 
Augusta, Ga. . . . 

Rentz. Ga 

Eastman, Ga. . . . 
McRea, Ga 


.Oct. 


20 Fitzgerald, Ga Oct. 13, SO 

21 Norman Park, Ga.... " 31 

22 Columbus, Ga Nov. 1, 2 

23, 24 Hrownwood.Ga " 4 

25, 26 Bainbridge, Ga " 6 

27,28 Dothan, Ala " 8,9 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


Keithsburg, 111 Oct. 

Muscatine, la 

Rock Island, 111 " 

Davenport, la Nov. 

Iowa City, la " 

Des Moines, la " 


29 Omaha, Neb Nov. 

30 Nebraska City, Xeb. . " 

31 Falls City, Neb " 

1, 2 Auburn, Neb " 

4,5 Tecumseh, Neb " 

6, 7 Lincoln, Neb " 


8,9 

10,11 

12 

13 

14 

15,16 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 


Inwood, la Oct. 16, 17 

Chancellor, S. Dak... " 18,19 

Menno, S. Dak " 20, 21 

Irene, S. Dak " 23 

Vermillion, S. Dak.. " 25,26 
Plankinton, S. Dak. " 27,28 


Mitchell, S. Dak Oct. 29, 30 

Mellette, S. Dak Nov. 1, 2 

Ipswich, S. Dak " 4 

Conde, S. Dak " 6 

Miller, S. Dak " 8,9 

White, S. Dak " 10,11 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 


Temison, Ala Oct. 21 

Randolph, Ala " 22 

Montgomery, Ala. . . *' 23, 24 

Opelika, Ala " 25, 26 

Roanoke, Ala " 27, 28 

Union Springs, Ala.. . " 29, 30 


Dothan, Ala. ... 

Elba, Ala 

Florala, Ala 

Opp, Ala 

Andalusia, Ala. 
Clayton, Ala. . . 


.Nov, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Ft. Wayne, Ind Oct. 20 

Garrett, Ind " 21 

Auburn, Ind " 22 

Elkhart, Ind " 23 

South Bend, Ind " 24 

Michigan City, Ind... " 25 


La port e, Ind Oct. 

Hammond, Ind " 

Hegewisch, 111 " 

Roseland, 111. 


Des Flaines, 111. 
Chicago, 111. . . . 


.Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M, L, HERR 


Easton, Pa Oct. 

Northampton, Pa. ... " 

Palmerton, Pa *' 

Kunkletown, Pa " 

Lehigh, Pa " 

AUentown, Pa Nov. 


26 Elmsdale, Pa Nov. 

28 Norristown, Pa " 

29 Linfield, Pa " 

30 Boyertown, Pa " 

31 Chester, Pa " 

2 Philadelphia, Pa " 


1,2 
3 
4,5 
6,7 
8,9 
10,11 


26 
28 
29 
30 
31 
2 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUSON 


Jacksonville, 111 Oct. 28 

Decatur, 111 " 29 

Taylorville, 111 " 30 

Gillespie, 111 " 31 

Bunker Hill, 111 Nov. 2 

Upper Alton, III " 3 


Palmyra, 111 Nov. 4 

Springfield, 111 " 5 

Quincy, 111 " 6, 7 

Warren, Mo " 8, 9 

Shelbina, Mo " 10 

Macon, Mo " 11 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER S. MORTON 


Hickory, N. C Oct. 24 

Asheville, N. C " 25,26 

Brasstown, N. C " 28,29 

Hendersonville, N. C. " 31 

Spartanburg, S. C.Nov. 2,3 
Greer, S. C lt 4,5 


Westminster, S 

Augusta, Ga 

Elko, S. C 

Charleston, S. C. . . 

Sumter, S. C 

Wilmington, S. C. 


C.Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. H. PICKERING 


Madill, Okla Oct. 31 McLoud, Okla. 

Sulphur, Okla Nov. 1,2 Harrah, Okla. . 

Wynnewood, Okla... " 3 Oklahoma City, 

Elmore, Okla " 4, 5 Kenawa, Okla. 

Tribbey, Okla " 6,7 Sapulpa, Okla. 

Shawnee, Okla " 8 Tulsa, Okla. ... 


Okla. 


.Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. C. RICE 


Kensett, Arlc Oct. 23, 24 

Rosebud, Ark " 25, 26 

Ward, Ark " 28 

Judsonia, Ark " 29 

Batesville, Ark " 30,31 

Little Rock, Ark... Nov. 2,3 


Hamburg, Ark. Nov. 

Hot Springs, Ark " 

Prescott, Ark " 

Emmet, Ark " 

Foreman, Ark " 

Ft. Smith, Ark " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 

Albany, N. Y Oct. 19, 20 Hanover, N. H Oct. 

Pownal, Vt " 21,22 Canaan, N. H Nov. 

Burlington, Vt " 23,24 Charlestown, N. H... " 

Morrisville, Vt " 25,26 Nashua, N. H '* 

St. Johnsbury, Vt.... " 27,28 Manchester, N. H... " 

Newport, Vt " 29,30 Pittsfield, N. H " 


6,7 

9 

10, 11 

12,13 

14 

16, 17 


9,10 
11 
12 
13 

14,15 
16,17 


4,5 

7,8 

9,10 

11 

12,13 

15.16 


31 

2 

3 

4,5 

6,7 

8,9 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 

Jackson, Miss Oct. 27 Bogalusa, La Nov. 


Wanilla, Miss, 
rlattiesb'i*, Misa. 

Louin, Miss 

Laurel, Miss. ... 
New Orleans, La 


28 

Ort 29, Nov. 2 
.... " 30 

.... " 31 

... " 3,4 


Folsom, La. 

Baton Rouge, La 

Pride, La 

Lake Charles, La 

Kelley, La 


5 

6,7 

8,9 

10 

12.13 

15,16 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 


Lawrence, Mass. 
Haverhill, Mass. 
Kittery, Me. . . . 
Kennebunk, Me. 
Portland, Me. . . 
Auburn, Me. 


...Oct. 22 
... " 23 

. . . " 24 

... " 25 

. .. " 26,27 
... " 28 


Canton, Me. . . 
Wilton, Me. .. 
Hallowell, Me. 
Pittsfield, Me. 
Belfast, Me. .. 
Bangor, Me. . . 


...Oct. 29 
... " 30,31 
. . Nov. 1, 2 
. .. " 3 

... '* 4 

. . . " 5 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER D. TOOLE 

Lenora, Kan Oct. 28 Loveland, Colo. . 

Norton, Kan " 29 Boulder, Colo. .. 

Seldon, Kan '■ 31 Stirling, Colo. ... 

Achilles, Kan Nov. 2,3 Haxtum, Colo. ... 

Denver, Colo " 5 Holyoke, Colo. .. 

Berthoud, Colo " 6 Cheyenne, Wyo. . 


.Nov. 


7 

9,10 

11,12 

13 

14 

16 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. F. ZINK 


Rockford, 111 Oct. 15 

Racine, Wis *' 17,19 

Tunnel City, Wis.... " 20,21 

Madison, Wis " 22 

Boaz, Wis " 23,24 

McGregor, la " 25 


Dubuque, la Oct. 26, 27 


Clinton, la 

Davenport, la " 

Muscatine, la " 

Burlington, la " 

Keosauqua, la Nov. 


28 
29 
30 
31 

1,2 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 

Brooklyn, N. Y Nov. 2 White Plains, N. Y..Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. W. BETLER 
Port Chester, N. Y..Nov. 2 Tarrytown, N. Y. . . . Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. T. COHEN 

ML Vernon, N. Y...Nov. 2 Yonkers, N. Y Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 

Jersey Gty, N. J.... Nov. 2 Bayonne, N.. J Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. DONALD 

Newark, N. J Nov. 16 Bloomfield, N. J Not. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 
Midland Park, N. J.. Nov. 9 Passaic, N. J Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER G. H. FISHER 
Washington, D. C.Nov. 2 Baltimore, Md Nov. 


16 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Elizabeth, N. J Nov. 2 Brooklyn, N. Y Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HUDGINGS 
Holyoke, Mass Nov. 2 Springfield, Mass. . .Nov, 


Troy, 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
N. Y Nov. 9 Albany, N. Y 


.Not. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. H. RIEMER 

Newburgh, N. Y Nov. 2 Kingston, N. Y Not. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 
Reading, Pa Nov. 9 Easton, Pa Not. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 

AUentown, Pa Nov. 2 New Brunswick, NJ..Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 
Schenectady, N. Y...Nov. 9 Johnstown, N. J Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 
Washington, D. C.Nov. 9 Baltimore, Md Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. J. WOODWORTH 

Scranton, Pa Nov. 2 Wilkes Barre, Pa Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H. ZOOK 
Nov. 2 Stottsville, N. Y Nov. 


16 
9 
9 


York, Pa. 


I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 

QUESTIONS FROM 

MANUAL ON SERIES SIXTH 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
Study XII— "Marital Privileges and Obligations" 

Week of Nov. 2 ^ Q. 1-9 Week of Nov. 16 Q. 


19-27 
2S-36 


Week of Nov. 16 

Week of Nov. 9 Q. 10-18 Week of Nov. 23 

Week of Nov. 30 Q. 37-44 

Question Manual* •■ Vol. VI, Studies in tfa« Scriptures, 10c cadi, postpaid- 


■M 


w, -* 


M^&3gs 


IBfflBF \*. V.> ^'' vl 

W0% J '../-. v.. v.;v !;:;* & t 


V' : :..^i 


.•/.% 


* ROCK OF AGES ^ty 
3ther foundation can *". 
no man lay - / / . y*.s 

A RANSOM TOR ALL^'j 


SES**' 




f/+?*X 


$& 


:^&*.:^ 




itiil 


VOL, XL NOVEMBER 1 No. 21 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919— A.M. 6<M8 

CONTENTS 

Green Leaves and Budding Hopes ... . 323 

Beyond the Mist of Dreams 324 

Tests of Faith for Zionists 325 

The Livery of the King 325 

How Maintained . . 326 

Joy for the Humble '327 

Future Advantages ^28 

Imitations of Humility 329 

On Brother Russell's Will M o 

The Golden Age 331 

Encouraging Experiences Reported 331 

Gethsemane : Watching and Praying ... . 332 

His the Bitter Cup ^ 

Delivered unto Sinful Men ^74 

Oppressed and Afflicted 335 

"/ will stand upon my watch, and will set my fooi upon the 
Touer. and unit watih to see what He zvtll sav unto me. and 
w kat answer I shall make to them that oppose me.' —Had 2 1 


mB.ZT.S. 





Upon tb« earth distress of nations with perplexity: the eta and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking 
to the things coining upon the earth (society): for the powers of the heavens (ecclestastlclsm) shall be shaken. . When ye see these things begin to eometojwss, 


i know that the Kingdom ol God is at hand. 


i up, lift up your beads, relolce, !ot your redemption draweth nigh. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; Luxe 21:2* -31 


THIS JOURNAL. AND IT© 6AGRED MISSION 


THIS Journal is one ot the prime factors or instrument* in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,** now beilUT 
presented In all parts of the civilized world Dy the Watch Towkb Bible 6 Tract Societt, chartered A, D. 1881, "For the Promotion
 of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Woro\ 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions And OL 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
*ery helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the older 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
ill." (1 Pet. l:li); 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has beec 
hid in God, , . . to the intent that now mi^ht be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Ager 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fulleai 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
nath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand, Its attitude Is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
tnow whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used 'only in, 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in Its columns must be according to our judgment ot 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
arge our readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing, 

TO VS THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Uedwrner and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3:16. 17; Eph. 2:20-22* GenJ 
U8 :14 ; Gal. 3 :2i). 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses; and when tae 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men through 
out the Millennium. — Rev. 15 .5-8. 

'.Chat the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies In the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for evert/ 
man," "a Ransom for all,'* and will be "the true Laght which lighteth every man that cometh into the world/ 1 "in due time." — 
Heb. 2:9; John 1 :0 ; 1 Tim. 2 :o. «. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Blfi 
glory as His joint-beir. — 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service ; to develop In herself every grace I 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age.— Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 ;& 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their redeemer and His glorified 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL STREET. PITTSBURGH. I'A . I*. S. A. 

The Watch Tower Editortal Committee: 
This journal is published tinder the supen ision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom ha\ e read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these rolums. The names ot the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rithkrkoru, \Y E. Van Amhtfu.h. F. H. Robkson, Geo. H. 
Fksher, W. E. Page 

ANVt'AL SUKSCRIPI ION PRICK $l.OO IN \n\AN'CE. 
SKND MONKY BY KX PRESS. K\SK I>R\FT, POSTAL ORDER, OR RKOISTKRKP 

Terms to the Lord's Poor as follows— All Bible Students who, by 
reason ot old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to j a/ for this 
journal, will be supplied Free if the> ->eiul a Postal Card each May stating 
their case and requesting its coutmuaru-e. We are not otih willing, but anxious
, that all such be on our list contmuallv and in touch with the Stv'IMes, etc. 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS Please remember that as 
a rule we no longer send a i.ard ot acknowledgment lor a renewal or lor a 
new subscription. Receipt and entr\ ot renewal are indicated within a 
month by change m date ot expiration ut the subscription on the Tower 
wrapper 

When requesting change ot" address, please give old address as well as 
Tiew. This is very important, sa\mg us much time and unnecessary correspondence
. 


KNTERED AS ShCON D-CI. \SS MWH'K \I IM 1" 1 SHI Ri . H . 
\ M>hR iHh \U <>}• \I\KCH ,;RI>, IV 


I'OSTOKKICK 


NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF 
THE WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

Xoticc* i^ hereby given that the annual meeting 01 the <hareholders
 of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Si»cht\ uill Ik 
held at Carnegie Hall, City of Pitt-lmr.Lch, Allegheny County. 
Pennsylvania, on the 3rd day of Januan, iojo, at 10 o'clock 
in the lorenoon, for the purpose of electing directors and 
officers for the ensuing year, and for thr transaction ot -u/h 
other business as may properly come before -aid meeting. 
F'irms for proxio will be sent teat with the 1 December 1st 
\\.\iai Towhk. 

\V. K. Van Amuukch, Secretary. 


PRINTERS' DELAY IN SHIPPING TOWER REPRINTS 

We are much chagrined in ha\ mg to apologize for the long 
and unexpected de]a_\s in getting the tir^t three volumes oi 
old Watch To\vi.k reprints into the hands of those who have 
ordered and paid for them. We wish to a^wrt the iriemU 
that everything in our power has been done to expedite the 
matter and to make good our promises of shipment. Urgent 
wire request as we go to press has brought the promise from 
our printers that they will begin shipment on November 15th. 
Strikes and other difficulties in trades _ involving binders' 
supplies seem to have been largely responsible for unexpected 
retarding of the work. 


X.OCAL CONVENTIONS AT THANKSGIVING SEASON 

Quite a number of local conventions will be held this year during 
the Thanksgiving season. Among the number already arranged for 
are : 

Chicago, 111., November 2 7-30. Brother Rutherford and several 
pilgrim brethren will be present. For further information address 
Entertainment Committee. 1305 Masonic Temple, Chicago, 111. 

Grand Rapids, Mich.., November 27-30. Brother Rutherford hopes 
to be present on the 28th. For further information address S. C. 
UeGTOot. 550 Lyon Street N. E., Grand Rapids, Mich. 

Cincinnati, 0., November 2 9. 30 Address Victor Schtaidt. 54 5 
West 7tU Street, Cincinnati, O.. for information concerning this convention
. 

Boston, Mass., November 27-30. Swedish. For further information
 address Seth W. Blom, 135 P St., South Boston, Mass. 

Toledo, O., November 2 7-30. For further information address 
C. W. Smith, 1021 Varland Ave.. Toledo, Ohio. 

Evansville, Ind., November 27-30, For further information address 
Mts. Helen Forstmeyer, 210 Read ^t., Evansville, Ind. 

St. Louis, Mo., November 27-30. J. B. Bernoudy. 7033 Lindell 
Ave., can be addressed for further information regarding this convention
. 

San Antonio, Texas, November 27-30. All meetings will be held 
in the I B. S. A. Hall, 117 N Floris. Friends wishing to attend 
notify Brother J, C. Cox. 124 Water Street. 

Brother Rutherford will address the following local conventions. 
F'aterson, N. J.. November Utli; Reading, Pa . November ] 6th ; Brooklyn
, N. V . November 23rd. lirand Rapids. Mich., November 28th; and 
Chicago. III., on November 30th. 

NATIONAL LABOE TRIBUNE 

Headers of The Watch Tower are familiar with the fearlessness of 

u'hirh the National Labor Tribune has put forth the message of 
Truth. Be in;: an independent paper, many read the message in it 
u In* would not read it mherw i«-e. H carries each week an article 
< on < erning the Hi vine Plan. We earnestly recommend that the 
friends e\ei"\ where show their appreciation by getting the Labor Tri 
hune into the hands of as many renders as possible. This paper lias 
served as a good medium U<t the volunteer message. 


BETHEL HYMNS FOR DECEMBER 

After the close of t lie hymn the Bethel family listens to 
the reading of ' 'My Vow L'ntu the Lord, ' ' then joins in 
prayer At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered. 
Hymns for November follow: (1) 95 ; (2) 14; (3) 125; 
U) 91; (5) 180: (6) 119; (7) 267: (8) 32S; (9) 218 
(10) 219; (11) 130; (12) 198; (13) 145; (14) 296; (la) 
288; (16) 114; (17) 315: (18) 293; (19) 44; (20) 205; 
(21) 326: (22) 256; <23) 255; (24) 139; (25) 140; (26) 
120; (27) 87; (28) 107; (29) 275; (30) 186; (31) 8. 



AND HERALD OF CHR1STS PRESENCE 


Vol. xl 


November 1, 1919 


No. 21 


GREEN LEAVES AND BUDDING HOPES 



Wozv learn a parable of the p<i tree 


N THIS parable our Lord was speaking, 
evidently, of the Jewish nation and its 
revivescence after a long period of disfavor
. This new life in matters Jewish 
was to be looked upon by the Lord's followers
 as one of the signs of the oncoming
 establishment of Messiah's kingdom 
for the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. Sometime before Jesus gave this 
little parable he had cursed the fig tree because it 
was barren, and it had withered so quickly as to astound
 the disciples who watched it The Master identified
 his little tableau with the Jewish nation when, 
using another figure of speech well known by ail the 
( >ld Testament prophets, he said: "Verily I say unto 
vou if ye have faith, and doubt not, ye shall not only 
do this 'to the fig tree, but also it ye shall say unto this 
mountain, be thou removed, and be thou cast intc the 
sea ; it shall be done". —Matthew 21 :2i. 

Speaking under the direction of the holy Spirit, 
those disciples or their successors did subsequently 
"declare the whole counsel of God" (Acts 20:27), in 
which was included pronouncements of the utter overthrow
 of the Jewish polity. If they did nothing else 
in this connection some of them at least recorded the 
strong words of our Master respecting the destruction 
of the temple, the misery which would come upon the 
populace, and other like utterances. In thus doing 
they were announcing to the mountain, or kingdom, of 
Israel its removal and its dissolution in the distressing 
times which did actually come upon Jerusalem and 
Judea, terminating, respectively, in the years 70 and 73 
A.D. Furthermore, the preaching of the disciples to 
the effect that the church "must through much tribulation
 enter into the kingdom of God" (Acts 14:22), 
thus become members of the Isaac class, and heirs according
 to the promise, had the effect of withering the 
natural hopes of Israel (the hg tree upon which our 
Lord found leaves of profession and expectation but 
no fruit worthy of their continuance in divine favor), 
for they had hoped that the Messiah would bring them 
worldly glory and material prosperity. 

THE LAND TO ABRAHAM 


that summer is nigh.' 


They were not without basis for these expectations; 
for Jehovah had promised the "land" to Abraham and 
to his seed after him, and the prophets had held before
 them the picture of a refreshed and happy earth. 
Being weak in faith, and hence slow of heart to believe
 all that the prophets had spoken, they could not 
see the period of waiting during which the spiritual 
seed of Abraham was to be gathered out, first from the 
Jews and then from the Gentiles, which spiritual seed 
was to be "as the stars of heaven" in brilliancy and 
height of glory. 

Since, then, the preaching of sacrifice dampened the 


vhen his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth Iraz'cs, ye knoi 
Matthew 24:32. 

earthly hopes of the Jews, as did also the destruction 
of its capital and national government, it follows 
logically that the proclamation of the earthly blessing 
and splendor, together with the restoration of its 
national capital, would cause the hopes of the fig-tree 
nation, Jewry, for centuries withered and barren, to 
spring up anew. The curse which our Lord denounced
 against the fig tree is rather too strongly 
stated in our King James version. The Greek text 
says: "Let no fruit grow on thee to the [termination 
of the] age". Now, at the termination of the age, we 
can see Jewish hopes springing forth like green foliage
, and taking the shape of Zionist activities. Only 
twenty-five years ago the Zionist movement was practically
 unknown. When it first made its appearance 
it appealed only to the poor Jews. The rich and 
prosperous very generally sneered at the movement as 
impractical, foolish, visionary. Rabbis, editors, and 
other prominent Hebrews decried the thing, fearing 
that the burden of disesteem and blame for the actions 
of their poorer brethren would fall upon them. 

But gradually Jewish sentiment has veered more and 
more toward Zionism, until today there are few even 
of the rich and prominent Jews who find it judicious 
to speak slightingly of it. The Annual Convention of 
Zionist Organizations of America was recently held 
in Chicago and was attended by prominent Jews from 
all over the country. The Chicago Daily Tribune, of 
September 13, carried an advance contribution by 
Judge Hugo Pam, outlining the general situation 
among the Jews : 

"The world war has brought to light one after another 
the great latent social and national problems of the world. 
Among these is the establishment of Palestine as a homeland 
for the Jewish people. 

"After eighteen centuries and a half since Titus took Jerusalem
, house by house, and rendered its soil barren and sterile, 
the Jews and Palestine had been strangers to each other. 
Since that time they have lived in dispersion, but in the hearts 
of all Tews, save a few who dc<ircd to be known as assimilalionists
, there has been a longing for the return of the Jews 
to Palestine, not merely from either a religious or sentimental 
standpoint, but from a consciousness oi national life which 
could best be expressed in the land of their fathers. Throughout
 these centuries the pious lew ha* prayed morning and 
night for the day to come when once more the land of Palestine
 shall be restored to the Jewish people 


FORCED BY POGROMS TO MOVE 

"The year 1S82 marked the beginning of serious progroms 
in the pale, namely, in Russia, Poland, Galicia. and Roumani.i. 
As a consequence, the Jews were compelled to leave the pale. 
The main stream of emigrants turned to the west, attracted 
by the small, but wealthy and powerful Jewish communities 
in western Europe, who had enjoyed comparative emancipation
. 

"Thousands settled in England, hundreds of thousands 
crossed the Atlantic and came to our shores, finding here two 
sadly needed requirements, a friendly government and a growing
 "land. 

"While this emigration to western Europe and to our 


323 


824 


THE WATCH TOWER 


flTTSBLROH, Y\ 


country was of a momentous consequence for those countries 
and for the Jews, yet it was not destined to be so important 
a factor in the development of the national life of the Jews 
as the tiny stream of pioneers which began at the same period 
to flow southeast from the pale to Palestine. This return to 
Palestine can be compared favorably in pioneering to the 
emigration of the Pilgrim Fathers to America. 

"The struggle has been a hard one; the difficulties great, 
the odds tremendous, at times the outlook disheartening, but 
courage never forsook them, despair never enveloped them. 

"In the great war just over, one of the great principles 
[ought for was the right of self-determination. It was this 
same principle* living eternally in the heart of the Jew, wh ; ch 
led to the beginning of the Zionist movement. The Zionists 
took up the cause of the colonists in Palestine who had made 
these great sacrifices ; but the Zionist organization not only 
has for its purpose the restoration of Palestine as a homeland
 for the Jewish people, but the establishment of a government
 therein, which shall take its place side by side with those 
governments which for the last few years have been hghtiner 
for the cause of humanity and justice." 

Two days afterward the Chicago Evening American 
published a first report of the convention sessions, 
parts of which we quote as follows: 

" 'Who will go to Palestine V 

"Dr. Stephen S. Wise, head of the Zionists, who are now 
in convention at the Auditorium Theater, today answered this 
important question by saying: 

" 'The question of who is to go to Palestine is one for the 
individual to decide. Palestine cannot now and never will be 
able to house all the Jews in the world. Maybe in a generation
 or two one-third of the world's Jewry may be able to 
dwell there. We now are endeavoring to retard immigration 
to Palestine until such time as the land can be made ready 
for those who desire to move there.'" 

"The opening session yesterday was marked for its fervor 
and feeling in anticipation of the realization of years of longing
 and hope for the rebuilding of their homeland. There 
were cheers and tears, weeping and laughter as the great 
crowd was moved by the words of an array of powerful 
speakers." 

BEYOND THE MIST OP DEEAMS 

On the same day, September 15, the Chicago Daily 
Tribune added the following items touching on the 
actual physical needs and development of Palestine : 

" 'Palestine is now a nation, ready for its people. It has 
grown beyond the mist of dreams. It has the needs of a new 
nation — schools, bridges, railroads, house building, development
 of the soil, water power, and sanitation. 

"Palestine needs the kind of men who will go there to make 
Palestine better — not the kind who will go to make themselves 
greater. We want men who will make sacrifices, not for 
profit, but for spiritual longing. 

"The work will take time. And remember that we are not 
building for the present, not for a century, but for all time. 
We must build slowly and we must build well.' 

"He [Judge Mack] closed his address with the statement 
that the enrollment of 150,000 Jews in the movement in the 
last year had proved that nine-tenths of the Jews in America 
are Zionists." 

"In a report of the activities oi the organization for the 
last year Jacob de Haas, executive secretary, gave a detailed 
account of the complete reorganization of the movement in 
this country." 

"The report carried the information that through the Palestine
 bureau under Israel Goldberg, 4,961 prospective Palestine 
immigrants were registered with a joint capital of $3,904,385. 

"According to the report, the Society of Zionist Engineers 
and Agriculturists acquired a membership of 354 persons who 
are deroting their scientific knowledge to the development of 
Palestine through the planning of railroads, harbors, hydraulic 
plants, and highroads." 

It seems that there was the most marked enthusiasm 
among all the delegates attending. An interesting item 
was mentioned by Professor Felix Frankfurter, confidential
 secretary to Secretary of War Baker during 
he war, and an attache at the peace conference: 


"Among the members of the peace conference [in ParisJ 

there was no dissent to the Zionist cause." 

The Scriptural aspect of the government which the 
Zionists hope to establish in Palestine was made very 
plain in this convention as reported by the Chicago 
Daily News, of September 16: 

"There will be no profiteering in Palestine. The land is to 
be owned by the state. AH its public utilities are to be owned 
by the people. As many as possible of its private industries 
are to be nationally operated. 

"There will be no loan sharks' in Palestine. Banking will 
be in the hands of the people as a state. It will be impossible 
for individuals to speculate in land or commodities. In fact, 
it will be impossible in Palestine for any individual to acquire 
a large fortune. 

"This sounds on the surface as if the new Jewish state of 
Palestine has had its government system specially arranged 
by Messrs. Lenin and Trotzky. To the contrary', the social 
democracy on which Palestine as a nation will begin its existence
 is something like 3.000 years old. It incorporates the 
Biblical communist laws of the Jewish tribes, and adds to 
them the experience in practical democracy given the world 
by the United States." 

" 'Certain reforms we will introduce are radical in appearance
, but they are no more than ordinary democratic reforms 
— the elimination of trusts, huge private fortunes and the like 
All these things will be possible under a British rule. 

" 'The Jews in Palestine, instead of working to pile up individual
 fortunes for a small percent of their people, will work 
to pile up the state's fortune, which in turn will be used for 
improvement of national conditions and the people's welfare.' 

"Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis spoke today in a 
private committee hearing at the Auditorium. 

" 'Palestine is capable of accomodating a million more Jew;* 
than it has; of being developed into a prosperous state in 
which the Jews may live, work and develop their nationalism 
to a point where it will contribute vitally to the world'*- 
progress and their own,' he said," 

ANCIENT HEBREW BEING HEVIVED 

The Hebrew language is expected to be used ven 
generally in Palestine, as is shown by remarks in the 
Chicago Daily News, of September 17, reporting on 
another day of the Zionist Convention: 

"Can Hebrew come back? Entombed for centuries among 
the rabbinical books of the race, almost as dead as the 
language the Babylonians and the Medes once talked, Hebrew 
is to be restored to the tongues of the Jews. At least the 
Zionists, assembled in their convention at the Auditorium 
theater, have made up their minds that it will. 

"This restoration of the ancient Jewish language was voted 
today by the delegates as part of the program to renationalize 
Palestine. Every reference to Hebrew was cheered and applauded
 by delegates, a good half of whom are themselves 
unable to speak it. A motion to devote 25 percent of all fundi 
raised for Palestine work to the Hebrew and Zionist education 
of American Jewish children and adults was passed enthusiastically
." 

"Hebrew is one of the most passionate and resonant of 
languages. It is a speech fit for intense expression, Oscar 
Wilde's Salome reads better in its Hebrew translation than 
in the original. So do countless English, French and German 
literary works. 

"It is a language which in itself elevates its speaker. Its 
idioms almost make wisdom easy. There is no reason why 
Jews should allow a language so rich in attainment to die. 
When Palestine becomes established as the Jewish homeland, 
Hebrew must become established as the talk of the Jews." 

In confirmation of this is the fact reported by The 
Maccabaean, for September, that a Hebrew daily is 
just being started- in Jerusalem, the first number appearing
 on June 18, 1919. The Maccabaean adds : 

"This day should become a red-letter day in the annals of 
Jewish journalism." 

From other similar items we choose the following 
one at random from the Philadelphia Record, of 
September 7, which speaks of the interest manifested 


NOVBMftEK I, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


325 


by Jews in Pottsville, Pennsylvania, in the re-establishment
 of Palestine. Parts of that news item we quote 
as follows: 

"Foreseeing pilgrimages to Palestine which will rival in 
numbers and enthusiasm the Crusades of the Middle Ages, 
prominent Jews of this region, working in connection with 
others in Philadelphia, New York, and Chicago, are literally 
'setting ail they have' and are preparing to make their future 
home, for some years at least, in Jerusalem. 

"Clinton B. Reed, a local real estate dealer, was astonished 
this week when a prominent Jew ordered all his houses in 
Pottsville placed on the market, so that he can have a free 
hand in going to Jerusalem. 'I expect to return to America, 
and will not give up my citizenship,' said this man, 'but I 
will be more or less out of touch with this country for 
several years and wish to have a mind free from investment 
worries.' " 

TESTS OF FAITH FOE ZIONISTS 

Of course we must expect that all will not be sunshine
 with the Zionist movement. Already prominent 
international politicians are beginning to realize the 
drift of the rehabilitation of Palestine. They begin to 
realize that with Palestine as a separate state, and 
especially with the Biblical principles of theocratic 
democracy in operation, their own sordid schemes for 
dominion and often unholy commercial aggrandizement
 will not show up in an advantageous light. 
Some have gone so far as to say that the greatest peril 
to the peace of Palestine is Zionism. They fear that 
that little war-ridden country will see another war unless
 Zionism is arrested. The following paragraph 
taken from the Buffalo Illustrated Express, and 
written by one of the many pro-British journalists, 
shows how Zionism's possibilities are viewed by some 
politicians : 

"Given peaceful development under British direction, it will 
develop into the peak of the British Empire, the keystone 
of the Cape-Cairo-Calcutta arch. But given the continued 
menace of Jewish immigration, its population will break out 
into an anti-Zionist war, which quite conceivably may bring 
down Egypt, Mesopotamia, Persia. Afghanistan and India and 
involve the world in a new* chaos." 


It should not be expected by either Christians or 
Zionists that so stupendous a matter as the fulfillment 
of the earthly phases of God's promise to Abraham 
would come unnoticed or unchallenged by the god of 
this world and by his colaborators in high worldly 
places. Jehovah intends that the return of Israel to 
Palestine shall be accomplished in such a way as to 
develop the faith of his fleshly people. If all went 
swimmingly along, with no great obstacles to be overcome
, the Jews might think that it was their own 
astuteness and sagacity, coupled with inborn energy 
and industry, which accomplished the restoration of 
their ancient homeland. 

But it is not likely that room will be left for any 
flesh to glory in Jehovah's presence. All the glory 
will belong to him. Zionists need not be discouraged 
or fear even though all the powers of the world should 
combine against them. The Scriptures intimate that 
some such difficulty as pointed out in the last foregoing 
quotation may be encountered a few years hence and 
that in the midst oi this, ( 'J ac °b's trouble'', God will 
appear and lend them assistance, fighting their battles 
as in the days of old. Probably this help will be rendered
 by the reappearance of such eminent worthies as 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who as princes in all the 
earth will be empowered to take hold of Israel and reestablish
 peace and order and gradually, with the assistance
 of others of the same class, spread the knowledge
 of the change of rulership from Satan, the god of 
this present order, to Messiah, the Anointed of God, 
who shall usher in the kingdom of righteousness and 
fulfill the desire of all nations. 

All the prophets have spoken glowingly of that time. 
Isaiah points out that "of the increase of his government
 and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne 
of David and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to 
establish it with judgment and with justice from 
henceforth even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of 
hosts will perform this." — Isaiah 9:6, 7. 


THE LIVERY OF THE KING 

"Be ve clothed with humility" — 1 Peter s;;. 



HE mighty ones of earth invest their servant
 class with such raiment as they 
choose ; and livery thus chosen is intended 
to comport with the respective stations, 
powers, and honors of the masters whom 
those servants serve. Not less so has 
Jehovah, the Mighty of all mighty ones, 
decreed the habiliments of those who are 
his voluntary slaves. (Titus 1:1; Philippians
 1:1) That vesture is humility. As the attendant
 of an earthly potentate could not hope to do the 
duties of his office clothed in raiment of his own 
choice, so the servant of the King of kings cannot expect
 to render service to his Master without the garments
 which his Lord has prescribed for him. 

Since the inspired Apostle uses the figure of clothing
 there must be some points of favorable comparison 
or analogy between clothing and its relationship to 
human experiences on the one hand and humility and 
its uses in the Christian life on the other. There may 
be others, but there are at least three proper uses which 
clothing serves in the economy of the human race : 
First, it serves as a covering; 
Second, as a protection; 


And thirdly, as an ornament. 

Attire which serves the first of these three purposes 
without the latter two is inadequate, as well as crude ; 
clothing which serves as a covering and as a protection
 and yet is in no degree ornamental seems inappropriate
 to the finer structure of the human frame; and 
trappings, however gorgeous or ornate, which cover 
and adorn, but which do not protect, are lacking in 
practicality. All three uses seem to be legitimate. 

So too with those who are in Christ; humility makes 
up the vestment which (t) covers us, or hides from 
view our selfish selves; (2) which protects us as new 
creatures from many a brunt and hurt felt by the 
proud and over-sensitive; and (3) serves the whole 
being as adornment, enhancing every other Christian 
grace — "the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, 
which in God's sight is of great price". (1 Peter 
3:4) The one who has humility will not be expecting 
so much in the way of deference to his position or 
ability and is, therefore, not disappointed when it is 
not forthcoming. But if he be hurt, he will be able 
to mollify the pain greatly by thinking that the affront 
was not intended, or, being intended in a measure, the 
offender did not realize how much the offense hurt. 


326 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


Clothes do not necessarily hamper one in his liberty 
of body; nor does the wearing of clothing narrow the 
sphere of usefulness. Quite to the contrary, clothing 
broadens the sphere of usefulness; and while it may 
hide the person, it does not hide the personality. And 
so it is with humility; it works nothing but advantage 
in the Christian life. Without it we could not be 
used at all by our heavenly Lord and King. 

The best dressed man is the one whose clothing is 
so fitting to his general self that, after he is gone, one 
does not remember what he wore, but merely retains 
an impression of his general personality. And certain
 it is that humility can be no conscious grace. 
The mantle of our humbleness must be, though noted 
by all other eyes, "unworthy in cur own". 

A DEFINITION 

For purposes of Christian practice we may define 
humility as being a willingness to occupy one's appropriate
 position in respect to the Lord, his people, 
his providences and his work. Or, in other words, it 
is the disposition, or preference, to do God's will and 
to follow his judgment rather than one's own. 

No more notable example of this spirit can be found 
than that of our Lord himself, who was "meek and 
lowly of heart", and who prayed in the hour of his 
greatest grief: "Not my will but thine be done". He 
had a will, a decided natural preference, not to suffer 
unnecessarily, or, possibly, as a blasphemer, but he 
had another and still higher desire and that was to 
follow the supreme will and wisdom of his Father. 

Another instance may be cited in the conduct of the 
Apostle Peter at the time of the conversion of 
Cornelius. Peter's previous experience, everything 
that he had been taught throughout his life, inclined 
away from the thought of preaching to the Gentiles. 
Yet when a special vision w T as given him indicating 
that God's will was different from his own judgment, 
he humbly laid aside his own thoughts, and gladly 
followed the vision, went to Cornelius' home and delivered
 the message. That he had not fully seen 
through the whys and wherefores of the situation is 
manifest by his uncertainty on the selfsame subject 
years afterward. 

Thus it will be seen that humility lies at the very 
root of obedience. The haughty spirit that went before
 the fall of Satan now "ruleth in the hearts of 
the children of disobedience". But we who would 
"follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth" are invited 
to "learn of him, for he is meek and lowly of heart". 

HOW ATTAINED 

As far as humility relates to imperfect creatures, it 
carries with it the thought of conscious inferiority — 
perhaps in comparison with fellow creatures, but certainly
 in comparison with God. Usually the inclination
 of mind favorable to humility is produced by a 
long chain of circumstances, the effect of which is to 
break confidence in one's own ability to plan and carry 
out his life to his own satisfaction. The individual 
comes to a point in life where he or she is willing to 
occupy his appropriate position in respect to the Lord 
and his providences, divine wisdom, as expressed 
through God's Word, to be the standard of decision. 

There are various circumstances, influences, and experiences
 which contribute toward bringing this willingness
 into the hearts of some people. Those who 
do not possess this disposition at one time in life may 


possess it later on, when failure of their ideals or 
endeavors have led them to see their own situation 
more nearly in its true light. Those who never have 
this disposition of humility will not be looking for divine
 favor because they are still filled with their own 
feeling of self-importance and self-superiority. "The 
wicked through pride zvill not seek God." (Psalm 
10:4) But with the Lord's people, those who are already
 in relationship with God through Christ and 
walking in the narrow way, the question is not so 
much how humility is originally attained or produced, 
but how it can be maintained. Those who stand in 
the relationship of sons to God may be sure that their 
humility was of an acceptable quality at the time of 
their consecration ; otherwise God would have resisted 
them, as he does all the proud. The great question, 
then, with the Lord's people is how to maintain the 
same attitude which they bore toward God's will at the 
time of their consecration, and maintain this throughout
 all the changes of their Christian way. 

HOW MAINTAINED 

There are a number of influences which help to 
maintain humility in the Christian heart. Among 
these we mention the influence of sentiment, the force 
of reason, and the encouragement of divine instructive
 providences. 

Some of the Lord's people might be inclined to exclude
 sentiment from this field. But the trouble with 
sentiment is not that it is wrong in itself but that it is 
sometimes allowed to be the deciding factor in our 
lives. The whole realm of sentiment and emotion is 
one which furnishes excellent motive power, but it will 
never do to take the place of justice and to direct our 
conduct. The trouble with father Adam, and the 
trouble with hundreds of millions of his progeny, is 
that they allow r sentiment to rule. Fire is an excellent 
thing and is indispensable as God has constitued human
 affairs; but it must always be kept within proper 
bounds. So also with sentiment. 

Under the heading of sentiment we have (a) appreciation
 , (b) gratitude, and (c) thanksgiving. Appreciation
 might be termed an intellectual sentiment. 
We get a view of God's greatness and of some of the 
beauties of his character as revealed in his Word; our 
minds reach out for these desirable conceptions and 
we appreciate the qualities of Jehovah which have 
prompted his wisdom to devise a plan whereby his 
justice can remain inviolate and still allow his power 
to effect the salvation of a sin-cursed and imperfect 
race. Many people see thus far, but do not allow their 
appreciation to sink deeper than their intellect. 

When appreciation percolates more deeply into the 
life and consciousness of the individual, when it goes 
as far as the heart, we call it gratitude. Gratitude is 
nothing more nor less than heart appreciation. We 
not only appreciate God's great plan as our minds 
might appreciate the design and workings of an intricate
 piece of machinery, but we realize that his 
beneficent designs will work blessing for us and for 
those we hold dear. \Y T e therefore become grateful to 
God. Both of these degrees of appreciation are 
powerful influences to the maintenance of humility on 
our part. They assist us in keeping our proper relationship
 to Jehovah in mind ; which means that we 
will be very, very small and he very, very great. It 
would almost seem that, if our appreciation were suffiNOVEMBKR
 I, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


327 


cientlv keen and our gratitude to God sufficiently 
genuine, there would be no room for pride. 

But "out of the abundance of the heart the mouth 
speaketh". If the heart is full of gratitude, some of it 
will rind expression in thanksgiving. Thanksgiving is 
the expressing by word, act, or general conduct the 
gratitude which dwells within our hearts. The expressing
 oi this gratitude tends to clarify in our own 
minds our vision of the causes for gratitude. This increases
 our original appreciation, the appreciation increases
 our gratitude, and so the whole cycle of sentiments
 is more or less self-perpetuating, if fed on the 
right kind of knowledge. The difficulty is that very 
small and comparatively insignificant influences in the 
earth tend to displace and to render obscure our understanding
 of God's plans and purposes. It is for 
this reason that we are admonished to meet together 
with those oi like precious faith that we may be refreshed
 and invigorated, fed and strengthened by a 
knowledge of God's will, and brought into conformity 
w T ith the image of him that hath created us as new 
creatures. — Colossians 3:10. 

REASON DOES THE DECIDING 

The faculty with which the Lord has endowed us 
and which enables us to decide or to determine the 
right or wrong course, the advantageous or disadvantageous
 way of life, is reason. Reason is a process of 
comparing. By it we compare the things which we 
have with the things which we do not have but need, 
in order to perfect our happiness and to make us acceptable
 in the sight of God. Reason looks at the 
matter of humility purely from the standpoint of advantage
 and disadvantage. Reason says that no 
matter how strongly sentiment might incline toward 
humility, that quality must not be exercised unless the 
proposition is worth while. Reason looks with cool 
calculation, first, at the present advantages, and second
, at the future advantages. 

Under the present advantages reason finds, first, 
divine favor. This in a sense includes all the other 
advantages. He "giveth grace to the humble". (2 
Peter 5:5) Divine grace, or favor, cannot be purchased
 with gifts of worldly value, but the sacrifice of 
a humble and contrite heart is ever acceptable to him. 
Men have waded through fire and blood over half a 
world to attain or maintain their favor with some very 
fallible earthly potentate. How much more willing 
ought we not be to secure the favor of the King of 
kings and Lord of lords ! 

But this is more than a matter of sentiment; it is a 
matter in which our vital interests are bound up. In 
Psalm 30:5 we read that in God's "favor is life". If 
his favor is withheld from the proud, then the proud 
have no prospect oi life— in his disfavor is death, as 
is shown by the experience of the world for six thousand
 years. Our very eternal existence is bound up 
with our possession of divine favor. This is to be 
had and is had by the humble, now. 

The necessity for humility explains many of the 
divine providences which would otherwise be quite 
inexplicable. When the Lord spoke to Moses of old 
he intimated to him that the experiences which would 
be his portion would be to "humble [him] and to 
prove [him]". (Deuteronomy 8:2) If we are unable 
to locate the cause of some particularly trying experience
, we may at least be sure that it will serve the purpose
 of either humbling us or proving us, and possibly 


both purposes at the same time. It may produce in 
us a greater degree or finer quality of humility than 
we possessed before, or it may merely put to the test 
the humility which we did actually possess. We may 
have been previously willing to occupy our appropriate 
position in respect to the Lord and' his providences, 
and this given experience merely demonstrated that 
fact to the Lord, to the brethren, and to us. Thus we 
have peace as a second present advantage from 
humility in heart and life. 

JOY FOR THE HUMBLE 

A third present advantage which we have from 
humility is joy. "The humble shall hear thereof [of 
God's message] and he glad/ 7 (Psalm 34:2) The 
whole world is seeking joy, gladness, happiness, but 
very few of them find it. Those who find it in some 
measure are soon confronted by the fact that the 
causes which gave it birth are subject to change and 
decay. Only those whose joy has its source in the 
glories set before us in God's Word can have assurance
 of its continuance. The proud are not glad to 
hear of God's arrangement for the future because it 
suggests a change from their present selfish practices 
and institutions. 

Another present advantage of humility in the heart 
is the assurance of divine assistance and encouragement
. He dwells "in the high and holy place . .^to 
revive the spirit of the humble and. . .the heart of the 
contrite ones". (Isaiah 57:15) Jehovah, he who is 
from everlasting to everlasting, has taken upon himself
 the responsibility of furnishing refreshing and reviving
 influences to those who are humble and contrite
 of spirit. Nothing we could do would ever give 
us the right thus to call upon Omnipotence for our own 
blessing and refreshment. Rut he stands willing to 
give it without money and without price to those who 
have such a sense of the fitness of things that they are 
willing to stay where they belong, be what they should 
be, do what they should do, or go where they should 
go, as indicated by God's Word. 

"The meek will he guide in judgment; the meek will 
he teach his way," ( Psalm 25:9) Whether the word 
judgment here be taken as referring to our individual 
power oi judgment and discernment of things or 
whether it be taken as referring to our judgment or 
trial period as new creatures makes no great difference
, because we will be guided in both respects if we 
are meek and humble before him. Meekness is merely 
the manner of conduct inspired by humility — humility 
being the inward disposition. 

Surely all of us need guidance. People in the world 
who have legal difficulties are very glad to secure the 
advice and counsel of a competent advocate before the 
law. Here is Jehovah, the very Author of wisdom 
and judgment, standing ready to guide us and to direct
 us in our efforts to decide and to pursue a rightful
 course. One of the ways he uses in guiding our 
judgment is to call our attention to the instructions of 
his Word. He shows us the advantages of his wav 
and the disadvantages of a selfish course. We would 
have very poor judgment indeed to refuse or to decline 
to enter the way which is fraught with so much of advantage
, even in the present time. 

Favor, peace, joy, refreshment, guidance: these are 
some of the present advantages deriving from the 
possession of humility. There are doubtless many 
others, but if there were not it seems apparent that the 


828 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Pa. 


present advantages alone of a humble walk with the 
[lord are much greater than any loss which we could 
possibly encounter. Indeed, the disadvantages are 
very few: a willingness to occupy our appropriate 
position in respect to God and his providences may 
cut us off from intimate association with the great 
ones of the earth. But that loss is only a seeming 
one, since "the whole world lieth in the wicked one", 
(i John 5:19) and friendship or intimate companionship
 with the world means nothing to the child of God. 

FUTURE ADVANTAGES 

The Master informs us that "he that humbleth himself
 [now] shall be exalted" — then. (Luke 14:11; 
18:14) He shall exalt us "in due time". There is a 
great system of compensation which the Lord inaugurates
 to the advantage of his people whereby the small 
inconveniences, discomforts, and privations of the 
present time which they encounter because of faithfulness
 to him and his Word shall be much more than 
paid for in the glories and beauties of the future. If 
faithful, we shall be exalted from conditions of sorrow
, sickness, suffering, death; exalted to happiness, 
health, peace and life. 

The Wise Man informs us: "By humility and the 
fear of the Lord are riches, and honor, and life". 
(Proverbs 22:4) There will be riches of divine favor, 
even beyond anything which we are now able to ask 
or think. There will be perfectness of mind. The 
Apostle assures us that "in him [in Christ] are hidden 
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". (Colossians
 2:3) So that if we but win Christ and be found 
in him we shall have the key to this storehouse of unsearchable
 wealth. It will mean perfection of 
memory, of judgment, power to reason abstractly or 
concretely on any subject without the possibility of 
error in the process of reasoning. It will mean the 
power to balance things in our own minds, to see and 
to maintain their proper relationship and to understand 
the differences of things. Those riches will also include
 our bodily perfection on the most glorious of all 
planes, the divine plane. It will mean a body so wonderfully
 constructed that it will not be dependent upon 
sustenance from any outside source. Then too there 
will be perfection of environment, of life, and of 
dominion. Those riches will also include riches of 
fellowship with Jehovah, with Christ Jesus, and with 
all the faithful saints of the Gospel Age. It will 
mean riches of opportunity, as well as capacity for 
blessing "the residue of men". — Acts 15:13-17. 

THE BRIDE'S CHIEF HONOR 

By humility and the fear of the Lord we are to have 
not only riches, but also honor. All of God's perfect 
creatures have the honor of divine favor, and all of 
them have glory in the sense of having perfect balance 
of character, even as God has. The bride has the 
honor of sharing the throne with her Lord and King; 
but this promised honor, we may assume, is something 
special. Surely it would, at least, include the honor of 
being where our Lord and Master desires us to be. 
There is a statement that implies such an honor for the 
church, and it is one of the most encouraging statements
 made by Jesus when he said, near the close of 
his earthly career, praying to the Father concerning 
the church : "Father, I will that they also, whom thou 
hast given me, be with me where I am". (John 17:24) 


From this we gather the thought that we are not to be 
merely tolerated by our glorious King; he is not merely 
conforming himself to the Father's wishes in the 
matter without the inspiration of his own desire. He 
really wants the church to be with him in glory; and 
to be desired by that heavenly Bridegroom is a great, a 
special honor coming to the bridal class. 

Another future advantage of present humility is 
life. Life, not in the small, flickering measure in 
which we now possess it, not even life as perfect human
 beings; nor is it life on the angelic, seraphic, 
cherubic, or archangelic planes. Our Lord informed 
us at his first advent that he went away to prepare a 
new, a unique and distinct place for the church. 
Theirs is to be life in such inexhaustible supply that 
they can use it for the benefit of the nations of earth 
and still have more than enough for all eternity. It 
will be immortality, incorruptibility. 

Life in any measure is a blessing. Life is included 
in the "blessings" given to the animate creation of 
Jehovah. (Genesis 1:28) This animate creation includes
 some small forms of organism which live only 
a few hours under the bark of a tree. If life in that 
small and constricted sphere is a blessing, how much 
more of a blessing is it on the highest of all planes, 
with no limitations, save those imposed by wisdom and 
justice? Surely there is no comparison. It is no 
wonder the prophet said that "the meek shall eat [of 
God's Word] and be satisfied". (Psalm 22:26) They 
are satisfied now to the extent that that is possible: 
they are filled full, but their capacity is very limited. 
Then they shall be filled with all the fulness of him 
that filleth all in all. 

DIVINE INSTRUCTIVE PROVIDENCES 

The means or agencies for the maintainance of 
humility in our hearts thus far considered have been 
means which we ourselves can apply. It would seem 
that they should be sufficient. There is all the advantage
 of sentiment on the one hand and of reason on 
the other. The coldest calculation with which it is 
possible for us to approach the subject of humility 
shows us that it is worth infinitely more than it can 
ever cost — worth more in the present life, to say nothing
 of eternity. But apparently these means are not 
always sufficient; otherwise it would not be necessary 
for the Lord to give us humiliating experiences. We 
may be following all the dictates of the Lord's Word 
as best we are able to discern them, when suddenly 
some particularly difficult and quite unforseen experience
 comes our way. It is humiliating. But if we 
are willing to occupy the awkward position which the 
Lord's providence has indicated for us under those 
circumstances we will have demonstrated the presence 
of true humility in our hearts. We will not fume or 
fret because of the painful thing — the thing painful to 
our pride or sense of self-respect. 

These divine instructive providences may properly 
fall under the heading of chastisements. And the 
Scriptures assure us that chastisements are not necessarily
 marks of divine disfavor but are intended to be 
for our blessing and for the purification of our motives
 and conduct. The humble heart will rejoice 
that the great Emperor of the Universe has had sufficient
 interest in that heart's welfare to give it instruction
 though the process of that instruction may sorely 
grieve the flesh of the new creature. — Hebrews 12:11. 


November i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


329 


THE F0E8 OF HUMILITY 

The enemies of humility are two : pride and vanity. 
Cn the minds of many people these qualities are the 
same, but in reality they are alike only in that they are 
both detrimental to the exercise of humility. Pride is 
a condition of heart found in those who are possessed 
of a disproportionate amount of self-esteem. The 
person who is proud may not be particularly interested 
in other people's conception of him ; his own estimate 
of himself is a very good one, and that is sufficient for 
him. Vanity is more likely to be found in those of 
small self-esteem but of correspondingly large approbativeness
. Approbativeness is not the quality which 
satisfies one with self-approval ; but it is that attribute 
which reaches out and desires the approval of others, 
pre-eminently. Pride relates more to our own opinion 
of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others 
think of us. Pride is a feeling of elation or exaltation 
on account of what one is .or has or is connected with. 
It is an inordinate self-esteem or unreasonable estimate 
of one's own superiority, which manifests itself in 
lofty airs, reserve, and often in contempt of others. 
It is doubtless for these latter reasons that the Wise 
Man said : "Pride goeth before destruction and a 
haughty spirit before a fall". — Proverbs 16:18. 

The person in whom vanity resides may actually 
feel in his or her private thinking that he is no one, 
has nothing worthy of special approval, and can do 
nothing extraordinary ; but at the same time the effort 
of such a person may be to create the impression in 
the minds of others that he is someone, has something, 
and can do many wonderful things. It is difficult to 
say whether the one whose natural inclinations are 
toward pride or the one whose troubles are with vanity 
has the more difficult time in the narrow way. One 
may be very much given to contempt of his fellow man 
and appear very self-sufficient in dealing with them, 
but at the same time have a deep reverential feeling 
toward God. Of such would likely be those who claim 
to love the Lord and yet who do not love them whom 
the Lord has begotten, (i John 4:20) Such a disposition
 would have to be overcome if progress in the 
Master's footsteps be made, foi he was both "meek 
and lowly of heart" and "he is not ashamed to call 
them [his followers] brethren". — Matthew 11:29; 
Hebrews 2:11. 

IMITATIONS OF HUMILITY 

On the other hand, the person who finds himself 
endowed with large approbativeness is much the more 
pleasant of the two individuals to be associated with. 
But he might not be truer or more faithful to the Lord. 
He might incline to "run well for a time" (Galatians 
5:7), when such running would not incur a strong 
disapproval of anyone standing highly in his esteem. 
The one with large approbativeness instinctively feels 
what will meet with the approval of those about him 
and will- bend to meet their wishes, not altogether 
out of desire to bless them, but with some measure of 
consideration for his own comfort. Of the two 
diseases vanity is much the harder to detect, even in 
one's own self, because it inspires a course of conduct 
filled with consideration for other people and approaching
 very closely in outward appearance to the 
conduct prompted by love. 

Some people naturally desire to be in the limelight 
of prominence. They consider themselves well qualified
 to occupy such a position. They may have either 


a disproportionate idea of their own importance, or 
their judgment may be in some measure correct — they 
may actually be possessed of superior endowments and 
may be merely recognizing the facts in the case, to this 
extent. To be humble does not necessarily mean to 
falsify to one's self about what one can do or cannot 
do. Humility means a willingness to occupy the position
 which the Lord points out for us, whether we 
think it commensurate with our powers and dignities 
on the one hand, or much too great for what we consider
 our very limited capacities on the other. 

Some people naturally prefer to remain in the 
shadow, and their desire is often inspired by a fear 
lest they might not appear to sufficiently good advantage
 if brought into prominence or special activity. 
What might seem to be a very meek, retiring disposition
 under such circumstances would be nothing more 
nor less than vanity. On the other hand, a person who 
finds satisfaction in self-approval feels that a serious 
mistake is being made if he is not given a prominent 
position of some kind. If the person who prefers the 
limelight stays willingly in the shadow because God's 
providence puts him there, then he is developing and 
manifesting the grace of humility ; and most admirable 
it is. On the other hand, if a person naturally prefers 
the shadow and the Lord's providence leads him out 
into the limelight and he is willing to endure the 
humiliating consciousness of his own deficiencies and 
shortcomings because the Lord placed him there and 
has not seen fit to remove him, if this be his attitude 
toward God's will irrespective of and in spite of his 
natural choice and predilections, that is humility. This 
retirement of self-will has been well exemplified by a 
prisoner of Christ Jesus, who, after years of incarceration
, w r as able to write : 

"Well pleased a prisoner to be 
Because, my Lord, it pleaseth thee." 

FEAR Or FAILURE DECEPTIVE 

Here is a circumstance which came to our attention 
some years ago : A brother in a fairly large class had 
for several years declined a nomination as deacon, always
 stating as a cause for his withdrawal the fact 
that he believed himself incapable of rendering acceptable
 service. Granted that this was his real, 
genuine conception of his capacity for service as a 
deacon, would it not have been the more humble way 
to let the Lord's providence be indicated by a vote of 
the class, rather than to trust to his own judgment in 
the matter? Looking behind his cause given there may 
have been a fear that he could not discharge his duties 
in such a manner as to call forth the approval of all T 
and to spare himself the humiliation he would sidestep 
the responsibility. If he had said to himself, as he 
subsequently did: It is my honest judgment that I am 
not endowed in such a way as to perform the services 
of deacon in a proper manner; but if the Lord's providence
 through the vote of this ecclesia indicates that 
I shall try, then I will not withhold my hand, but do 
the best that is within my power. If the class votes 
me down, I will have every assurance that my original 
judgment was good and no one will be injured in 
any manner by the vote. If the class votes me in, it 
will not necessarily change my conception of my 
powers but it will be an indication to me that the Lord 
wishes me to attempt the duties, and if I am not able 
to discharge them as creditably as I would like, the 
very humiliation connected with my failures may work 


330 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PlTTSBUKfiH Pa. 


a greater blessing tor me than I would be able to 
choose for myself. Furthermore, it may work a blessing
 for the class in that they will have learned how to 
choose better the next time. Such a course, finally 
pursued by the brother, did, we believe, retrieve for 
him the blessing which his former course of conduct 
would have lost him. The only means for ascertaining
 the Lord's will under the circumstances was not to 
consult his own choice, but to submit to a vote. 

Suppose an experience of this kind: Some good but 
tactless brother in a testimony meeting says to himself
: There are few here who are capable of giving a 
testimony as good as mine. 1 therefore feel justified 
in taking more than my share of the time; for while I 
am talking the time is at least not being wasted by 
someone incapable of expressing himself. The brother 
gets up in the meeting and consumes an entirely disproportionate
 amount of the time. Of course, the 
leader should not usually permit such a transgression 
upon the rights of others but, assuming that he did, 
the brother who disregarded the Golden Rule in this 
respect might be perfectly honest in his own heart 
about the value of his usage of the time. He might 
be conceited, it is true; but he might be honest. 

While he is thns expatiating some other brother 
might sit in the group and say to himself: I am sure 
I would never do any such thing as that as long as I 
live. He might be speaking the truth ; perhaps he 
would not thus encroach upon the rights of others. 
Rut his motive for avoiding such conduct might not 
be either pure love for the brethren or a keen sense of 
justice and right toward them. It might simplv be 
due to a sharp discernment of the fact that such conduct
 would bring upon him such criticism as he was 
even then leveling at the le<s considerate brother. 
While the conduct of such an one would be much 
more admirable and much more conducive to happiness
 on the part of the other friends present, his motive
 might not be any better in God's sight than that 
of the other brother. The motive of the one in that 
instance would be pride; the motive of the other would 
be vanity. Neither would be humility. 

DISCERNING THOUGHTS AND INTENTS 

Xo one can surelv discern for another his moi'ves 


in these matters; nor is it necessary to do so. The 
responsibility lies with each one; and it is for each one 
to get behind the scenes in hi- own heart, find out 
what is going on, and why. It is not a hopeless task, 
though it would be hopeless if we depended upon our 
natural qualifications to accomplish it. In the book of 
Hebrews we read that "the word of God is quick, and 
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, 
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and 
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discemer 
of the thoughts and intents of the heart". (Hebrews 
4:12) The standards set before us in the Scriptures 
are so clear that if the spirit-illumined mind honestly 
con-iders them it will be possible to discern whether 
our conduct emanates from the ^oul (the natural being 
and its inclinations'* or fr^n: the spirit — the new will, 
and the new mind which it has been gathering about 
it. The same thought is expressed in other language 
by the Psalmist : ''Wherewithal shall a young man 
cleanse his way' By taking heed thereto according 
to thy rcord". (Psalm iiq:o/i It is by a rigid examination
 or our conduct in comparison with the standards 
for conduct set up in God's Word that we are able 
to discern and, discerning, to cleanse ourselves of those 
things which do not conform to his will. 

"T will clothe her priests with salvation", is the 
promise of reward for such as wear the garment of 
humility with faithfulness throughout their present 
life. But "His [Christ's] enemies will I clothe with 
shame". — Psalm 132:16, 18. 

"To woo no secret, soft disguise, 

To which self-love is prone; 
Unnoticed by all oilier eyes, 

Unworthy in your own. 
To yield with cuch a happy art 

That :io one thinks you care; 
Yet say to your poor, bleeding heart, 

How little you ran bear. 

"Ah. 'tis a pathway rough to choose, 

A struggle hard to share; 
For human prick- would still refuse 

The nameless trials there. 
But since we know the gate > low 

That leads to heavenly fui^. 
What higher grace could God bestow 

Than such a hie a* this?" 


ON BROTHER RUSSELL'S WILL 


Dear Brother Rutherford: 

In view of the stress placed by certain brethren upon the 
importance of Brother Rusx/iTb will. 1 have had it in mind 
/"or some time to write \ on regarding a conversation between 
Brother Russell and myself in iqoo I have naturally hesitated
 to make mention of this matter, because my statement 
must rest upon m> unsupported word. However, certain 
brethren will recall that I made mention of this incident before
 Brother Russell's death and be fere his will came i:ito 
controversy. 

During the General Convention at Seattle in 1900. Brother 
Ku-st/il and I. with several other brethren, made a side trip 
to Hvcrctt. Washington. Brother Rn-scll has on ^vcr^ occasions
 discussed with me the various si flings at headquarters
. On this trip the conversation turned upon the 
Henninges and McPhail trouble, then before the church. In 
the discussion Brother Russell said: "I have made three wills 
and everyone whom I have named turned against me and 
went out of ihc truth". This circumstance is deeply impressed 
on my mind, for 1 replied: "Brother Russell, ii ( this is the 
cffect'yoiir wills have, please don't ever name me". He cited 
several examples, mentioning the names oi those involved in 
the 1 007 and 190S sifting. 


He explained that he made th(-v wilU not knowing ju-t 
what the Lord's will might be concerning him and he desired 
to leave matters in the best condition possible to avoid confusion
. He then said: "I have made my last will." and explain
* d that after his previous experiences he would now let 
the Lord work out these matters ;h he saw bc c t f plainly 
imphmu he would make no chancer 

hL uce, when his will wa- published. 1 was not surprised 
to find it practically as. f\r-t written, notwithstanding that 
changed conditions would -cemiiiLfly ha\e warranted change* 
or nw>dificntions. in some of its items. When the controversy 
was raised over the application of it* terms by these brethren 
their arguments had little weight in making my judgment as 
10 the merit oi same. While 1:0 doubt conscientious, in my 
opinion they did not have Brother Russell's mind upon the 
issues hnolved. 

While the cares and responsibilities of the harvest no doubt 
rest heavily upon your heart, the Lord is in the yoke with 
vou and he makes the burden light. Then, too, the sympathy 
and prayers of all the Israel of God are \ours, so "be strong 
and very courageous". 

With sincere love toward all at Bethel and everywhere, I am 
Your fellow servant, \V. A. B.\KE&.—PHg~ 


THE GOLDEN AGE 



HE second number of The Golden Age 
has been issued and like the first is full of 
matter interesting to Christians and nonChristians
. Its appearance is not all f hat 
might be wished, but it has been found 
very difficult to get it issued at all, due to 
the strike among the printers. Doubtless 
the god of this world will put all the obstacles
 in the way possible ; but so long as 
the Lord wishes the message to go forth in the printed 
page we may be sure it will get out in some shape. 

Some have been disappointed with the cover appearance
, expecting a more elaborate or gaudy cover. 
We note, however, that there is a great contrast between
 The Golden Age and other magazines, and this 
contrast alone would attract the attention of many. A 
colored cover would increase the cost almost double, 
and would preclude the issuing of the magazine for 
the subscription price now charged for it. It is 
deemed therefore more important to get the reading 
matter before the people than to attract them merely 
by the cover. We believe when the people observe 
the table of contents and read some of the articles, 
particularly those pertaining to the times in which we 
are now living, that their interest will be increased and 
they will w^ish to subscribe. The purpose for which 
the magazine is issued will appeal to the public, and 
those soliciting for it do well to study carefully the 
salutatory appearing in the first issue and emphasize 
the purpose for which the magazine is published. 

From every part of the country the classes report 
the completion of their organization and the fact that 
they are awaiting supplies in order to begin the work. 
The printer's strike has greatly interfered with getting 
out the necessary subscription blanks, receipt cards, 
etc. Hence the friends have not been supplied with 
these that they might proceed with the work. However
, the subscription list to The Golden Age now is 
about 20,000; and we may well imagine that, after 
the workers begin in every part of the country, the 
subscription list will rapidly climb. In almost every 
instance where someone has read a sample copy and 
has then been solicited a subscription has been obtained
. Up to date, however, very few sample copies 
could be issued. For the present friends will have to 
content themselves with canvassing with their own 
copy which they receive through the mail. As soon as 
possible sample copies will be issued and sent out to 
be used as suggested. Almost all subscriptions up to 
this time, however, have been tnken without a sample 
copy, and the interest that the public manifests in The 
Golden Age magazine is indicated by some excerpts 
from letters following. 

ENCOURAGING EXPERIENCES REPORTED 

"I have already taken twelve subscriptions, '' writes 
a brother, "from my acquaintances where I work. I 


feel sure that the Lord is going to bless the work. I 
took eight subscriptions in eight hours and did my 
other work besides. When I explained what The 
Golden Age is, they stated, That is just the kind of a 
magazine I want. One old man said he would stop all 
of his other magazines and take The Golden Age." 

Another writes: "A Brother at Cedar Point Convention
 remarked to me that he believed the work of 
The Golden Age was of the Lord and that the Lord 
would go ahead and prepare the people for it, and I 
have found it so. I canvassed ten of my fellow workmen
 and received nine subscriptions, and an additional 
one later which came through one of the nine, and all 
of this before either one of them even saw a copy of 
The Golden Age. In my two years experience in 
colporteuring I have never found anything to sell as 
readily as The Golden Age, and it is just what the 
awakened people of today want, and they eagerly subscribe
 for it. We find that, while there is a great 
cry and noise about no money, it is almost as easy to 
sell the Volumes with the GA for one year. The 
people seem to feel that the price for the GA is phenomenally
 cheap." 

Another says : "Our experience of late shows a 
marked tendency to make study take the place of the 
church and lyceum, since no real food is to be had in 
them. Likewise, nearly every thinking person is looking
 for a Biblical climax in human affairs, but know 
not which way is right." 

Subscription blanks and receipt cards are now being
 mailed out to the various classes and work generally
 will begin immediately. We advise all the friends 
to take the copy which they receive through the mail 
and exhibit it to those w T hom they canvass. Read 
carefully the sample canvass given in the booklet 
mailed to the class secretary, and if you have not a 
copy of this booklet apply to the class secretary and 
ask him to let you have his, or take a copy of the canvass
. Study well the contents of the magazine so as 
to be able readily to call attention to the important 
points. 

We strongly recommend that the pilgrim brethren 
at every public meeting mention the fact that The 
Golden Age magazine now published in the city of 
New York, and issued every other week, is the only 
magazine on earth that attempts to explain the presentday
 events in the light of divine prophecy and that 
enables the student to determine the importance of the 
time in which we are living, and to foreshadow the 
immediate future; that this magazine is published for 
the benefit of the people, that they might have a 
clearer vision and understanding of the times in which 
we now are, and hence it is issued at a very low cost 
in order that everyone may have an opportunity to 
avail himself of it. Then recommend that anyone 
who desires to subscribe, or even see the magazine, 
might leave his name and address with the ushers. 


THE BRIGHTER, BETTER DAY 


I am waiting, ever waiting, 
For the brighter, better day, 

Just beyond the clouds and shadows, 
That surround my lonely way; 


For a day of light and gladness 
Such as earth has never known, 

When in equity and justice, 
Christ shall reign on David's throne. 


331 


GETHSEMANE— WATCHING AND PRAYING 

December 7— Mark 14:32-42. 

EIGHT APOSTLES LEFT, THEN THREE MORE — OUR LORD SORE AMAZED AT THE REALIZATION OF WHAT WAS BEFORE HIM— HIS POWER 
TO SUFFER MUCH GREATER THAN OURS — JESUS DEPENDENT ON HIS OWN RIGHTEOUSNESS — "COULD YE NOT WATCH ONE HOUR?" 
— FACING THE CHARGE OF BLASPHEMY. 

"Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." — Mark 14:38. 



O ONE can thoughtfully read this lesson of oar 
Lord's dark hour in Gethsemane, and his 

"strong cryings and tears unto him [the 
Father], who was able to save him out of 
death" (Hebrews 5:7), without feeling that 
there is something thoroughly incorrect in the 
idea so prevalent among Christian people that 
our Lord Jesus was his own heavenly Father, 
Jehovah. It would surely have been a pretense, 
a mockery of prayer, for him to supplicate is 
here represented, unless it were true also that 
instead of being in any sense the Father, he was simply what 
he claimed to be, the Son, the sent of God, the only begotten 
of the Father, the firstborn of all creation, the beginning of 
the creation of God. (John 10:20; 1:14; Colossians 1:15; 
Revelation 3:14) There is absolutely no other standpoint 
from which the language of our Lord and the apostles and 
his course of conduct are reasonably interpretable. 

After leaving the upper room, where the Passover Memorial
 was instituted, our Lord and his disciples went to the 
Mount of Olives, to an orchard there, known as Gethsemane 
—the name signifying "oil-press place", probably because 
olives were there pressed and the oil extracted used both for 
light and for food. One of the Evangelists speaks of it as 
the "garden of Gethsemane", but the word garden, as used in 
olden times, corresponds more nearly to our word orchard ; 
it was not a flower-garden. There is a small enclosure now 
on the side of Mount Olivet, about 150 feet square, which is 
reputed to be the place of our Lord's agonizing prayer. It 
contains eight very old and very gnarled olive trees, and 
whether the exact spot or not, it represents it sufficiently well. 

SPECIAL LOVE, SPECIAL RESPONSIBILITY 

Our Lord probably had two reasons for going forth as he 
did that night. First, realizing that he wou'd be arrested by 
the traitor Judas and the band he would bring, our Lord 
probably did not wish to bring commotion or trouble up^n 
the friend who had so kindly permitted him the use of ih: 
upper room. Secondly, he desired the still quiet of midnight, 
out upon the hillside where he could be alone with God, 10 
pour out his soul in prayer and obtain the strength necessary 
for the ordeal at hand. In harmony w r ith this last thought, 
we find when our Lord reached the entrance to the orchard 
be left eight of the disciples there, as an outer guard, so to 
speak, or as pickets, to give notice ; and took with him the 
same three disciples whom he had specially honored on other 
occasions, Peter, James, and John; Peter, the bold and impulsive
, James and John, the so-called "sons of thunder" — 
the three most courageous, most zealous, most earnest, o f his 
disciples. These he wished to have nearest to himself in this 
time of anxiety. And yet, on this occasion, he desired to be 
still more alone in his prayer, for even these truest friends 
could not appreciate the situation : "of the people there was 
none with him". Hence he left these and went a ^tone's 
throw further, where he prostrated himself upon his knees, 
w r ith his face to the earth, as the various accounts show, and 
thus, alone, he communed with the Father. 

The different accounts of our Lord's experience on this 
occasion, grouped together, show us that mental anguish 
seemed to come upon him here with a force and poignancy 
he had never before experienced, and that the load became 
increasingly heavy — "sorrowful even unto death," a sorrow 
which almost crushed out his very life, says Matthew. Mark 
says (14:33) that he was "sore amazed", as though the sorrow 
had come upon him unexpectedly, as though he were bewildered
. Luke, who was a physician, says that he was "in 
an agony", a contest, a struggle, the language used in the 
Greek implying a struggle of increasing force and severity, 
so that "his sweat became as it were great drops of blood"; 
and this bloody sweat is not unknown to physicians today, 
although very' rare - It marks an extreme tension of feeling 
—sorrow nigh unto death. Prof. Tischendorf shows that this 
account of our Lord's bloody sweat is not found in the 
Vatican MS. No. 1209 and that although it appeared in the 
original Sinaitic MS- it was crossed out by a later critic. The 
passage is therefore doubtful, or at least questionable. 


DELICATELY STBTJNG BUT MIGHTY 

Infidelity has suggested that this account of our Redeemer^ 
sorrow, tears and prayers, attests his weakness. They argue 
that there have been many martyrs of various religions who 
have faced death with boldness, stoical firmness, sometimes 
with smiles, and that thK account shows Jesus to have been 
cowardly, and inferior instead of superior to others. But 
there is a philosophy connected with the matter which they 
seem not to grasp. There is a dullness and numbness connected
 with fallen, degraded, coarse manhood that can regard 
pain and death with indifference, — which permits them either 
to undergo it themselves without great emotion, or to inflict 
it mercilessly upon others without compassion. We are glad 
that Jesus was not one of those cold, stoical icebergs, but that 
he was full of warm, loving, tender feelings and sensibilities; 
and that we can realize consequently that he is able to sympathize
 with the most tender, the most delicate, the most 
refined, the most sensitive, more than any other human being. 
He must have felt keenly the conditions under which he had 
placed himself, in laying down his life on our behalf; because 
the more perfect the organism the more sensitive and highstrung
 the feelings, the greater the capacity for joy and the 
greater the capacity for sorrow; and our Lord being absolutely
 perfect must have been immeasurably more susceptible
 to the influences of pain than others. 

Besides this he had a perfect life, unforfeited, and knew 
it, and realized that he was about to part with it; while other* 
of the human family possess only a forfeited or condemned 
existence and realize that they must part with this sometime 
anyway. It would therefore be a very different matter for 
our Lord to lay down his life than for any of his followers 
to lay down their lives. Supposing 100 to represent perfect 
life, our Lord had the full one hundred units to lay down, 
while we, being more than ninety-nine-hundredths dead, could 
at most have only the one-hundredth part to lay down. A 
cold, stoical indifference to the loss of life, based upon knowledge
 that it could last but a short time longer anyway, would 
therefore be a very different thing from the clear knowledge 
which our Lord had, based upon his experiences with the 
Father "before the world was", and the realization that the 
life he was now about to lay down was not forfeited through 
sin, but was his own voluntary sacrifice. 

SELF-EXAMINATION AND PEAYEE 

There can be no doubt that this thought of the extinguishment
 of life was an important factor in our Lord's sorrow 
The Apostle clearly intimates it in the words (Hebrews 5:7), 
"Who in the days of his ilesh offered up prayers and supplications
, with strong cryings and tears, unto him who was 
able to save him from death, and was heard in that he 
feared'*— on account of his fear. Intent continually upon doing
 the Father's will, day by day had passed in self-sacrifice, 
until now, in a few hours, the whole would be complete; and 
the thought of this brought with it another thought, viz. : 
Had he done the Father's will perfectly? Could he claim, 
and would he receive the reward promised him, a resurrection 
from the dead? 

Had he failed in any particular to come up to the exact 
standard of perfection his death would have meant extinction; 
and although nearly all men fear extinction, none could know 
the full depth and force of its meaning as could he who not 
only had the perfection of life, but had knowledge of his 
previous glory' with the Father before the world was. For 
him the very' thought of an extinction would bring anguish, 
terror of soul. This thought seems not to have come to our 
Lord with the same force before this hour. It was this, 
therefore, that bore down upon him now so heavily as an 
astonishing sorrow unto death. He saw himself about ^ to 
suffer according to the Law as an evil-doer, and the question 
naturally arose, was he entirely blameless, and would the 
heavenly Judge thoroughly acquit him whom so many were 
disposed to condemn? 

After praying awhile he went to the three disciples in whom 
he had greatest confidence, and who, more than any others, 
were his tried and trusted companions, but he found them 
asleep. Luke explains that their sleep was the result of 


332 


November i, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


\V6S 


sorrow. The night and its lessons had been impressive; the 
memorial supper, which they did not fully understand, nevertheless
 left a weight of sorrow upon them, as the Master had 
intimated that it represented his death, and had further intimated
 that one of their number would betray him. The 
reaction from the sorrow brought a measure of stupor. Very 
gently our Lord upbraided them: "Could ye not watch with 
me one hour? Watch and pray lest ye enter into temptation." 
It is not merely that you need to watch on my account; you 
need to be in a watching attitude on your own account. An 
hour of severe trial is upon us all ; watch and pray lest ye 
fall in this evil time. 

THIRD PRAYER AND COMFORT 

Then our Lord went to pray again. We are told that his 
prayers were in the same words ; that is to say, that the same 
sentiments were expressed; and again a third time similarly: 
the one matter was weighing upon his heart. Could he rely 
upon it now, that having sought to do the Father's will, that 
having finished his course, he had done it acceptably? Could 
he have full assurance of faith that God would save him out 
of death by a resurrection? In answer to his petition a 
heavenly messenger was sent to comfort him, to assure him, 
to strengthen him. We are not informed what message the 
angel brought, but We can see that it was a message of peace; 
and that he brought assurances that our Lord's course had 
the Father's approval, and that he would be brought again 
from the dead by a resurrection. These were quite sufficient 
to give our Lord all the strength and courage necessary for 
the ordeal before him; and from that moment onward we 
find him the coolest and calmest of the notable figures brought 
to our attention. When approached by Judas and his band 
he was the most calm and self-possessed of all; when before 
the chief priest, Caiaphas, it was the same way; when before 
Pilate the same; when crucified, the same; he had found 
peace in the message that he was approved of the Father, and 
that all the gracious promises of glory t honor, and immortality 
were his, and now he could pass through any ordeal. 

The Scriptures assure us that our Lord was tempted in all 
points like as we (his brethren) are, and we see in this his 
experience in Gethsemane an illustration of one of the most 
severe trials which come to the Lord's people. It would seem 
as though the adversary at times attempted to discourage us 
by making us think that the trials and difficulties of the 
''narrow way" of sacrifice will be all unavailing anyhow, and 
that we might as well give up. When such thoughts come to 
those who are earnestly and faithfully seeking to fulfill the 
conditions of their consecration vows they constitute one of 
the severest trials that could overtake them; if they have 
given up this world and its affections, hopes, aims, desires, 
exchanging all these for the heavenly, then anything which 
seems to becloud the heavenly hopes, leaves them in a darkness
 more utter, more dense, than they could have known 
had they never seen and appreciated the glorious promises. 
And what course should we pursue at such a time? We 
should follow the example of our Lord, and seek the Father's 
face, anxious to know whether or not everything is right with 
him; anxious for some assurances that while the world may 
hate us, and say all manner oi evil against us falsely, we still 
have his approval; anxious for some fresh assurance that it 
will be well with us, that the Lord will grant us a part in the 
better resurrection to life eternal. 

But while we draw this correspondency between our experiences
 and those of our Lord we should not forget that 
there is an immeasurable difference ; that we are of the dying 
and ninety-nine-hundredths dead already, and that therefore 
we cannot so fully appreciate the meaning of death nor the 
meaning of life eternal; and besides all this we have the 
example of our Lord, and the further assurance that our 
share in the first resurrection is not to be attained through 
perfection of our own, but through his perfection, provided 
vre shall have attested to the Lord our full loyalty of heart, 
of intention, of will, however imperfect the results of our 
efforts to glorify him in our bodies and spirits. 

The Evangelist records that our Lord prayed: "Father, if 
it be possible, let this cup pass from me". 

HIS THE BITTER CTTP 

Here, then seems to have been the center of his thought: I 
shall be esteemed of all my countrymen as forsaken of God, 
and as accursed of him; I shall die as a blasphemer, as a 
malefactor; whereas my every sentiment is, and has always 


U_m, icalty, lo>alty to the Father. This, we believe, was the 
special feature of our Lord's anxiety, called the "cup" of 
sorrow, which he wished, if possible, might be removed. We 
believe that he knew his death to be necessary, unavoidable, 
as he had many times informed his disciples; but that it was 
this ignominious form of death, "even the death of the 
cross/' that staggered him; for it not only bespoke shame and 
misrepresentation before the people, and those whom he loved 
and to whom he sought to do good, but it carried with it also 
the thought that he was accursed of God; and if he were 
really accursed of God he could have no hope for a realization 
of the glorious promise of a resurrection. But when assured 
through the angel that he would not be actually accursed of 
God, even though he would for a time take the place of the 
accursed Adam and be "made a curse for us", his race, then 
even the cross and its shame could be endured with fortitude. 

In the case of our Lord and the apostles we see illustrated 
the value of watchfulness and prayer in the dark hour of 
trouble. Our Lord followed the direction he gave to the 
disciples: he watched, he prayed, he got a blessing, he was 
strengthened, and came off victor. They did not watch and 
did not pray, failing to realize the necessities of the occasion, 
and as a result we find them scattered, bewildered;— and one 
of them, the very strongest of them all, who boastingly had 
said a little while before, "Though all men forsake thee yet 
will not I," was so overpowered by his surroundings, and so 
weak through lack of the very strength he should have obtained
 through watching and prayer, that he denied the Lord 
with profanity. 

Whenever we find the Lord's people attempting to live a 
life of holiness and consecration, yet ignoring the injunction 
of our Lord to watch and pray, we know that they are unwise
 ; and that however much they may be virgins, pure ones, 
they are foolish; they cannot hope to gain the victory over 
self and sin and the adversary, single-handed, alone. If the 
Master himself needed strengthening, surely we also need It; 
and if he received it in response to supplications with strong 
cryings and tears, it is an intimation to us of the way in which 
God is pleased to bestow the full assurance of faith which is 
able to strengthen us as good soldiers to endure anv and 
everything in his name and service. Those who seek the 
Lord earnestly and in prayer are as sure to receive a blessing 
as was the Lord Jesus himself; and although there will not 
come to them the same kind of heavenly messenger to comfort 
and encourage them, nevertheless a heavenly messenger of 
another kind will surely be sent It may be in the person 
of a fellow-disciple, able to enter into and sympathize with 
us in our trials and difficulties, as none of the apostles could 
sympathize with our Lord or assist him. Or it may be that 
the messenger sent will be one of the apostles themselves, 
through the many gracious words of inspiration which God 
has communicated to us through them in his Word. But 
however the strength may come, it must be the assurance, 
not of men nor of angels, but of God, that we are pleasing 
and acceptable to him, — and that we may claim and expect 
the exceeding great and precious things which he has in 
reservation for them that love him. 

LEST YE ENTER INTO TEMPTATION 

So to speak, we are now in the hour of trial which cometh 
upon the whole world to try them. The present is represented 
in the Scriptures to be "the hour of temptation" or testing at 
the close of this age. It is the Gethsemane hour, in this sense 
of the word, to all who are the Lord's true people, fully consecrated
 to him. It is tht hour, therefore, in which we, like 
our Lord, should be seeking the Father's face to receive the 
full assurance that we are his, and that he is ours; and that 
we may rely confidently on his strength to carry us through 
this time. It is the time in which we are to make sure, as 
we sometimes sing: 

"Oh, let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

It is a time in which those who neglect the Master's words, 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation," will be sure 
to enter into temptation, and be tolerably sure to fall therein. 
And the fall will be severe, — and even though, like Peter, 
they should afterward be recovered out of it, it will be with 
weeping. 

Shall we not, then, more and more remember and put into 
practice, in every home in which The Watch Tower is a 
visitor, these words of our Lord, "Watch and pray, lest ye 
enter into temptation". 


DELIVERED UNTO SINFUL MEN 

December 14. — John 18:15-27; 19:25*2;. 

PETER AND JOHN FOLLOW JESUS TO THE HIGH PRIEST^ HOUSE — SOME ASHAMED OF TESC5— 1'ETER IN DANGER — HE IS SIFTED, BUT 
NOT OUT— THE STRANGE EXPERIENCES OF THE NIGHT— MIXED MOTIVES— THE MASTER'S LOOK — PETER'S FAILURE ALONG* THE 
LINE OF HIS STRENGTH— THE SEVERAL MOCK TRIALS — JESUS CRUCIFIED, PROVIDES FOR HIS MOTHER. 

"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son." — John 3:16. 



LTHOUGH most of the disciples fled when Jesus 
was apprehended in the garden, John's account 
tells us that John and Peter followed at a 
distance. Their deep interest in the Master 
would not permit them to go to their lodging 
places ; they must keep him in sight and know 
how things would go with him to the very last. 
They were powerle^ to assist him against such 
great odds, and in the face of his own refusal 
to be assisted; but they were not powerless to 
love him still. John, it seems, was somewhat 
acquainted at the high priest's palace (indeed tradition has 
it that he was a relative), and he readily gained entrance, not 
onl> for himself but aNo for PeUr. 

But these favor? and privilege:* became tests to Peter,^ and 
led to his denial of the Lord; and so it is with some of the 
Lord's people of today. When they are by themselves, or 
with others of like precious faith, they are bold and courageous
 to confess the Lord and to serve him, but if perchance 
they get into palaces or among the servants and officers and 
high priests of churchianity they arc ashamed of the Master 
and fear to confess him, lest they should be cast out of the 
privileges enjoyed in the society of those who have not yet 
recognized the truth. Far better would it have been for poor 
Peter had he openly declared; "Yes. I am one of his disciples; 
and since I presume that none such are wanted here I will 
go away". Such a course would have kept the road clear for 
him. John was known to be one 01 Jesus' disciples but apparently
 when he recommended the admission of Peter he 
did not explain who he was; quite possibly John had in mind 
the protection of Peter from any identity with the impetuous 
ear-cutting in the garden. 

EABTH'S HONOES A SNARE 

Peter's failure to take the proper course brought him later 
to a still more trying situation, when a kinsman of the man 
whose ear he had cut off asked him point blank the question: 
"Did I not see thee in the garden with him?" The situation 
was getting very embarrassing for Peter. It was now more 
than a question of leaving the fire and the privileges of the 
high priest's court; it was now a question of his identity as 
the one who had defended Jesus with a sword, and hence a 
question of his own possible arrest and trial at the same 
tribunal with his Master. One false step leads naturally to 
another ; to declare now for Jesus would have been a public 
testimony that he was a liar. This would have been the truth, 
but a very embarrassing truth to admit. It might have led to 
his apprehension, so Peter concluded that in self defense he 
must not only repeat the lie already told, and again deny his 
Master, but must make the matter stronger before his 
accusers by cursing and swearing. Perhaps he thought that 
this lapse into the uncouth language of the fishing smack 
would tend to divert the attention of his audience from the 
real issue. 

Poor Peter' Truly, as our Lord had told him, Satan had 
desired to have him. to sift him, and surely he was being 
severely sifted at this time. It seems almost a miracle that 
he recovered his balance and repented and found forgiveness 
t'nr his M11-. It would seem that our Lord's prayer on hus 
behalf operated through his pre\iou- announcement to Peter 
of this denial; for after he had thus denied, and after he had 
noticed the cock crow, Peter remembered the Lord's words: 
"The cock -hall not crow, till thou hast denied me thrice". 
With feelings better imagined than they can be described, 
l\ler hastily left the hmh priest's courtyard, now of his own 
accord, going out into the shadows of early morning, that he 
might weep bitterly and. doubtle— , entreat the Lord's forgiveness
. 

The last hour or two had hem \ cry strange to Peter. 
Pearlier in the night the Lord had asked the disciples how 
many swords i.he\ had among them: the answer was, Two. 
One of these was in Peter's possession. What could the Lord 
mean but for them to use those swords at the proper time? 
Peter could not then see that those swords were merely to 
emphasize the fact that our Lord's submission to arrest was 
voluntary. When the time came for the use of force in the 
defense of his Master Peter was very prompt with the sword. 


Doubtless he thought he was doing just what would please 
his Master. But no: he was rebuked and humiliated before 
the whole company. What could it all mean? 1 But, at all 
events, he would keep as close to his Lord as he could. There 
were probably mixed motives in his denial of Jesus, first, tru 
desire for personal safety and, second, a desire to be near 
Jesus. Quite possibly he figured that hiding his identic 
would keep for him the privilege of being near the Lord and 
of being of some possible service. Fear for his person-il 
safety could hardly have been the sole motive, because lie 
could have gone elsewhere in the first place and been in safet\ 

THE LOOK OF LOVE 

Luke's account of this >ume night, after telling of Peter's 
three ^denials, says: "And the Lord turned and looked up' mi 
Peter" (Luke .22:61) What may we suppose was in that 
look of the Master? Was it a look 01 disappointment? That 
would hardly be the proper word, for our Lord had known 
of the deflection beforehand. Was it a look of contempt or 
bitterness? Xo : the perfect balance of ' Jesus as a perfe;t 
man, to say nothing of his vantage ground as a new creaturj, 
would preclude such an exhibition of weakness. Was it a 
look of reproach, or even reproof? We are inclined to think 
not. Most likely it was simply a look of ineffable love, tinctured
 with pain. That look may be safely termed the turning 
point in Peter's life. What had he done! Shown himself 
ashamed of the Lord whom he had sworn to defend and not 
forsake? The next few days must have been freighted with 
scrupulous self searching, with a minute review* of the last 
three years and a half of his extraordinary experiences. 

There is a lesson for us in the fact that Peter's failure was 
along the line of his strength. He was naturally courageous, 
and had boasted of it, and yet failed for lack of courage. 


The words of the Apostle Pa 


"When I am weak, then am 


I strong," imply that he who feels himself strong is really 
weak, as in Peter's case. Would it not be wise for us all to 
learn to guard our supposedly strong points of character, remembering
 that we have a wily foe? We are to realize our 
weakness, our vulnerableness at any point, except as we keep 
watch on every side and rely upon the great Captain of our 
salvation to assist us. 

John does not tell the whole of the story; he omits reference 
to Peter's cursing and swearing. His love for Peter evidently 
influenced him to omit that portion of the narrative not absolutely
 necessary to confirm the Lord's prediction. The account
 oi the cursing and swearing is given by Mark, whose 
Gospel record is supposed to have been indited by Peter himsell
. Mark being in a large measure Peter's amanuensis - 
Mark 14:66-72. 

DENIED JUSTICE AND JUDGMENT 

Without wishing to bear unduly upon Peter's, shortcoming 
in this connection, we cannot pass without calling attention 
to the strong contrast -which our Lord's course of extreme 
faithfulness exemplifies. Had our Lord possessed the slighter 
inclination to turn aside from his course of sacrifice, he could 
have found human justification in this failure of Peter's. He 
might have said to himself: Here is Peter, the oldest of th: 
apostles, the one among the three specially favored ones from 
whom might reasonably be expected the greatest fidelity 
Furthermore, these thi\<. were the most favored of the 
twelve ; the twelve had the most advantages of the whole 
Jewish nation; the Jewish nation was the most favored of 
all the nations of earth— if Peter would do a thing like that, 
what would the rest do under stress" But our Lord had 
made his contract not with Peter, not with the tweh e apostle-, 
not with the Jewish nation, but with Jehovah Ami he purposed
 to earn- out his covenant whether anyone got the benefit 
or not; that had no bearing on his own faithfulness. 

Jesus was examined by the hi^h priest. That functionary, 
however evil and murderously disposed at heart, felt bound 
to preserve at least the forms of justice, although from other 
parts of the record we know he and his associates among the 
priests and Pharisees had already determined that Jesus must 
be put to death, because his influence among the people was 
inimical to their own— because his teachings cast theirs 
into the shade and exposed their hollowness, bigotry, and 
hypocrisy. Our Lord answered the high priest's question 


334 


NOVKMBKH I, KJ19 


THE WATCH TOWER 


3o\5 


with these facts in view; refusing to make any specific explanations
, he merely referred to his teachings, appealing thus 
to his rights as a few. His answer was a perfectly proper 
and legal one; he had been arrested without just cause and 
the judge was now seeking to find a cause. Our Lord merely 
pointed out that the cause for the arrest must be shown to 
have been something which preceded the arrest. It is not 
legal to arrest a man and then get him to say something to lie 
used as a basis for his prosecution. 

PLEASED THE LORD TO BRUISE HIM 

There are -omc who, we fear, would tmd fault with our 
Lord for his, answer. They >com to think that he should 
have shown more deference to the orhcers of the law, etc. 
He should have been ingratiating in his efforts to cxplaiu 
everything and, it necessary, tell even more than he knew. 
But our Lord did not do this. Vet, even though he knew :t 
was a conspiracy against his life, Jesus was not discourteous 
to the Court but merely reminded him that it was part <>: 
the duties of the legal machinery to provide the indictment 
ahead of the arrest; the responsibility in no wise rested upon 
our Lord to furnish them with an indictment. When Jc-ureplied
, an officer struck him with the Mat of his hand. 

It is not necessary for us to -uppose that the officer who 
struck Jesus with the palm o\ his hand, and reproved him 
for supposedly improper language toward the chief priest, 
was intentionally unjust in the matter. Rather we ma\ suppose
 that, influenced by his desire to appear zealous in support 
of the high priest's "position and judgment, the occurence 
accentuated his mental unbalance as a fallen man and led him 
to imagine evil where none existed. This circumstance, however
, gives us the opportunity for discerning just what our 
Lord meant by his expression in the sermon on the mount : 
"Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek turn to him 
the other also". (Matthew 5:3*)) Our Lord did not literally 
turn the other cheek to the man and ask him to smite that 
also; nor did he even receive the smiting in silence. He was 
not willing that his good conduct and proper language be evil 
spoken of without at least a proper endeavor to correct the 
matter. Hence, he asked his smiter to point out wherein he 
had spoken evil, and suggested to him that if he could not 
point out the evil he should acknowledge his wrong in having 
improperly smitten for an evil which could not be pointed out. 

In the "light of this illustration the Lord's people are to 
understand the command, to turn the other cheek, to mean 
simply that they are not to resist evil with evil; rather, they 
are to receive more evil than to return it in kind. On the 
contrary, however, they are to resist evil with good; they are 
to expostulate with evildoers as the Master did, endeavoring 
with kindness and gentleness to have them see the right and 
the wrong of the questions in dispute. 

"HE FUT HIM TO GRIEF" 

It would appear that our Lord's trial by the Jews was 
rather formalistic. First, there was the initial hearing before 
Annas, the real high priest, hut who was too old to fulfill all 
the duties oi the office. He sent Jesus, bound, to Caiaphas, 
the acting high priest and the one having the Roman appointment
. This preliminary trial was probably between two and 
three o'clock in the morning, after the members of the Sanhedriu
 had been summoned from their homes. It was more 
in the nature of a fitting 'of the grand jury. It was illegal 
to trv a person at night; but at this session they merely determined
 what charges they would prefer against Jesus at_th" 
formal sitting at daybreak. Then came the trial before 
Caiaphas as the day broke, in mockery uf their own darkue-s 
of heart and mind to the real principles of justice. _ Je-u> \v,> 
accused of plasphcmy— the charge of all charges uirthest removed
 from the facts— and condunm'd to die. or rathu i\ to be 
worthv of death, fur the Tew- had evidently vin limited 
powers of carrying out the death sentence, without the cun-cut 
of the Roman government. 

This Caiaphas before whom our Lord had his second preliminary
 hearing and al*> his cci'li-i^tical trial, was the same 
Caiaphas who a short time betore had declared: l It is expedient
 for us that one man should die tor the people an 1 
that the whole nation perish not. And this spake he not ol 
himself; but being high priest that year, he prophesied that 
Tcsus should die for that nation; and not tor that nation only, 


but that also he should gather together in one the children of 
God that were scattered abroad/' — John 11:50-53. 

Here is an illustration of how a great truth may be seen 
from two opposite standpoints. The prophecy of Caiphas was 
strictly true, in strict accord with all the declarations of the 
Lord's Word, and was sent through one of the channels which 
the Lord had been in the habit of using (the high priest's 
office) ; yet the person occupying that office, being out of heart 
harmony with the Lord, was out of harmony also with the 
various features of God's plan, and he became an instigator 
and cooperator in an illegal work which, nevertheless, was 
working out in harmony with the divine foreknowledge and 
program. 

There is a lesson in this also for all the Lord's people in 
respect to every feature of God's truth. It is not sufficient 
that we sec certain facts; it is necessary also that we be in 
heart harmony with the Lord, else we might, like Caiaphas, 
aid in fulfilling the Lord's plan, but, taking the wrong position
, may be bringing ourselves, with others, under a curse 
while still cooperating in the fulfillment of the divine plan. 
Let all who are uf the light and who have received the truth, 
seek more and more to walk in the light and in the Master's 
footsteps, carefully avoiding the faults which we see illustrated
 in this lesson. 

OPPRESSED AND APFLICTED 

It was necessary or desirable for the ecclesiastical court to 
have the sanction of the civil power in the matter of Jesus' 
death, and now for the ratification by the Roman governor. 
What would they tell Pilate, the Roman appointee for Judca ? 
They realized that the charge of blasphemy would seem like 
child's prattle in his cars. Suppose someone did speak slightingly
 of Jehovah; were there not many other gods besides? 
This would have probably been his thought on such a question. 
So they conjured up a charge ot treason against Jesus. Pilate 
knew that this charge was false and he parried with the infuriated
 mob for some time. Wishing to be rid of the unpleasant
 piece of business, he took advantage of a technicality 
when he heard that Jesus was a Galilean, and sent him and 
his case over to Herod, tetrarch or ruler over Galilee, who 
happened to be in the city at that time. Herod had heard 
much of Jesus' power to work miracles and wished to see him 
perform, but Jesus would not do anything, or even answer 
King Herod's questions. To do so would have been to use 
a powerful weapon in self defense and he knew that his hour 
had come. Failing to have his curiosity satisfied, Herod 
caused Jesus to be mocked and arrayed in a gorgeous robe 
and returned to Pilate, doubtless with his compliments. However
, the deference thus shown to him by Pilate pleased Herod 
greatly and the two were political comrades from that day. 
Finally Pilate acceded to the clamorous demands of the multitude
 and gave the execution orders. 

It was nearly nine o'clock on Friday morning, the hour of 
the usual morning sacrifice, when a little procession filed 
through the Via Dolorosa (way of tears) northward through 
the gate that led to a knoll called in Latin, Calvary. There 
they crucified our Lord, even as the prophets had long ago 
foretold. But it is elsewhere explained that Jesus' life was 
not taken from him without his consent — "Xo man taketh it 
from me; I lay it down of myself". There on the cross h-- 
gave himself M a ransom for all, to be testified in due time". 

Around him were the scoffing and self-righteous church 
functionaries rejoicing in his approaching death. There were 
the Roman soldiers intent upon finishing the task; some were 
doubtless there simply b\ gaping wonderment; but there was 
one warm spot in that field of human chilliness. A tiny group 
of loved and loving ones was there: John, the ^three Marys. 
and Salome, probably the mother of John. Even the excruciating
 pain of crucifixion did not obscure in our Lord - 
mind the needs of others. He spoke to John in such a way 
that that youthful disciple understood it to be his Master^ 
wish for him to take care of Jehus' mother. Mary was in all 
probability a widowed woman at this time, and Jesus being 
her eldest son, had been naturally her support. Jesus, the 
tender, the faithful, though engaged in the most prodigious 
and far-reaching activity ever undertaken, did not overlook 
his smaller opportunities and obligations. While sacrificing 
himself he was careful not to sacrifice others. That they 
must do for themselves, if they saw it to be a privilege. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures dnd Studies by Traveling Brethren 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHEE W. A. BAKER 


Alhol, Ida 

Spokane, Wash. 
Orient, Wash. . 
Revere, Wash. . 
Palouse, Wash. 
Latah, Wash. . . 


Nov. 14 Colfax, Wash Nov. 22, 23 

" 15, 16 Dayton, Wash " 24, 25 

" 17, 18 Mesa, Wash " 27 

19 Yakima, Wash " 28 

20 EUensburg, Wash. . " 29 

21 Puyallup, Wash. ..." 30 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. H. BARBER 


Florala, Ala Nov 

Ponce de Leon, Fla. 

Marianna, Fla 

Altha, Fla 

Monticello, Fla. . . . 
Jacksonville, Fla. . . 


10 Arredondo, Fla Nov. 17, 18 

11 Williston, Fla " 19,20 

12 Lakeland, Fla " 21,22 

13 Tampa, Fla " 23, 24 

14 Zephyrhills, Fla. ... " 25,26 
16 St. Petersburg, Fla. . " 27,28 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. E. BARKER 


L)avid City, Neb. . . 
ColumbuB, Neb. . . 
Fremont, Neb. . . . 

Blair, Neb 

Ravenna, Neb. . . . 
Grand Island, Neb. 


. Nov. 


17 Kerney, Neb Nov. 24 

18 Brady Island, Neb... " 25 

19 North Platte, Neb.. " 26,27 

20 Sidney, Neb " 28,29 

21 Alliance, Neb " 30 

23 Arvada, Wyo Dec. 2,3 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BOHNET 


Conde, S. Dak.. . 
Miller, S. Dak. . 
White, S. Dak. . . 
Jasper, Minn. . . . 
Yankton, S. Dak. 
Superior, la. . . . 


.Nov. 


6 
, 9 
10, 11 
12, 13 
14, 15 
16, 17 


Estherville, la. 
Mason, City, la. 
Waterloo, la. . . 
Dubuque, la. , . 

Clinton, la 

Chicago, 111. . 


. .Nov. 18, 19 
20 
21,22 
23 
24, 25 
27-29 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. J. ESHLEMAN 


Opp, Ala 

Andalusia, Ala. 
Clayton, Ala. . 
Penaacola, Fla. 
Camden, Ala. . 
Selma, Ala. . . 


.Nov. 


6, 7 
8,9 
10, 11 
12, 13 
14, 15 
16, 17 


Hampden, Ala Nov. 18, 19 

Bay Minette, Ala. .. " 20,21 

Mobile, Ala " 22,23 

Deer Park, Ala " 24, 25 

Waynesboro, Miss. . . " 27, 28 
Silas, Miss " 29, 30 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. M. GRAHAM 


Waukegan, 111 Nov, 

Zion City, 111 

Racine, Wis 

Madison, Wis 

Boas, Wis 

Milwaukee, Wis. . . 


3 

4 
5 
6 
7 
9, 10 


Gratiot, Wis. 
Freeport, 111. 
Rockford, 111. 
Belvidere, 111. 
Marengo, 111. 
Elgin, 111. . . . 


. . Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. L. HERE 


Riverside, N. J . . . . 
Bndgeton, N. J. . . . 

Millville, N. J 

Vineland, N. J. ... 
Atlantic City, N. J. 
Pomona, N, J 


.Nov. 


10 Camden, N. J Nov. 

11 Wilmington, Del. ... " 

12 Baltimore, Md> ** 

13 Annapolis, Md. ... 

14 Galloway, Md. . . . 
16 Hagerstown, Md. . 


11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 


18 


19 

20 
21 
22, 23 
25 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER O. MAGNUS ON 


Medill, Mo 

Rutledge, Mo. . . 
St. Joseph, Mo. 
Atchison, Kan. 
Maryaville, Kan. 
Riley, Kan. . . . 


.Nov. 


12 

13, 14 

16 

17 

18, 19 

20, 21 


Olay Center, Kan.. .Nov. 22, 23 


Topeka, Kan. 
Overbrook, Kan. 
Pomona, Kan. . . 
Ottowa, Kan. . . 

Lawrence, Kan. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER S. MORTON 


Hayne, N. C 

Fayetteville, N. C. 

Olivia, N. C 

Raleigh, N. C 

Wendell, N. C 

Belma, N. C 


.Nov. 


Nov. 18, 19 Rocky Mount, N. C. 

20 Enfield, N. C " 

21 Scotland Neck, N. C. '* 
•• 22,23 Vanceboro, N. C... " 

24 Wilson, N. € Dec. 

25 Chapel Hill, N. C. . . ** 


24 
25 
26 
27 
28 


26 
27 
28 
30 
1 
2, 3 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. H. PICKERING 


Chandler, Okla Nov. 

Paden, Okla 

Edmond, Okla 

Oklahoma City, Okla. 
Red Rock, Okla. . . . 
Tonkawa, Okla 


18 

19 

20, 21 

22, 23 

24 

25,26 


Enid, Okla 

Watonga. Okla. 
Lawton, Okla. . 
Comanche. Okla. 
Marlow, Okla. . 
Chickasha. Okla. 


...Nov. 27 

. . . " 28 

. . . " 29, 30 
...Dec. 1,2 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER V. O. RICE 


b\. Smith, Ark. . . 

Dover, Ark 

Pine Hill, Ark. . 
Hector, Ark. . . . 
Appleton, Ark. . 
Hattieeville, Ark. 


.Nov. 18, 19 
. " 20 

.. " 21 

22 
23 
. " 24 


Little Rock. Ark. 
Havana, Ark. . .„ 
Ft. Smith, Ark. . 
Fayetteville, Ark. 
Springdale, Ark. . . . 
Siloam Springs, Ark. 


.Nov. 26 

.. " 27,28 
. . " 30 

. . Dec. 1, 2 
. . " 3,4 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER M. E. RIEMER 


Pratt, Kan 

Wichita. Kan. . . . 
Hatebinson, Kan 

Nekoma, Kan 

Friemd, Kan 

Garden City, Kan. 


.Oct. 


14 Syracuse, Kan Nov. 

16 Healy, Kan " 

17 Emporia, Kan " 

18 Olpe, Kan " 

20 Winfield, Kan 

21, 28 Arkansas City, Kan. 


5, 6 


22 
24 
25 
26 
27, 28 
29, 30 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 

Epping, N. H Nov. 10 Lawrence, Mass. .. 

Kittery, Me " 11 Lowell, Mass 

12 Beverly, Mass. . . . 

" 13 Melrose, Mass 

'* 14 Quincy, Mass 

" 15,16 Boston, Mass 


.Nov. 


Dover, N. H 
Kennebunk, Me. 
Portland, Me. . 
Haverhill, Mass 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. J. THORN 

Shreveport, La Nov. 17 Winnsboro, Tex. . . .Nov. 


Texarkana, Tex. 
Birthright, Tex. 
Greenville, Tex. 
Big Sandy, Tex. 
Dallas, Tex. . . . 


18 Paris, Tex. 

19 Sherman, Tex " 

20 Denison, Tex Dec. 

22,23 McKinney, Tex " 

25 Piano, Tex " 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 

Blaine, Me Nov. 8, 9 Harrisburg, Pa Nov. 

Portland, Me " 10 Lewistown, Pa 

Lynn, Mass '* 11 McClure. Pa. . . 1 ... 

" 12 Northumberland, Pa.. 

' ' 13 Williamsport, Pa. .. 

" 14 Gaines, Pa 


Worcester, Mass. 

Brooklyn, N. Y 

Lancaster, Pa 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER D. TOOLE 

Haxtum, Colo Nov. 13 Pueblo, Colo Nov. 


IT 
18 
19 
20 

21 
23 


26 

27,2ft 

29, 30 

1 

2 


16 

17 
18 
10 
20 
21 


Holyoke, Colo. 

Cheyenne, Wyo 

Laramie, Wyo 

Denver, Colo 

Colorado, Spgs., Colo. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER S. H. TOUTJTAN 

Aberdeen, Wash. . .Nov. 13, 14 Sultan, Wash. . 4 . . .Nov. 


14 
16 

17, IS 
19 

20, 21 


Trinidad, Colo. 
Florence, Colo, 

Basalt. Colo 

Silt, Colo 

Grand Junction, Colo. 


Tacoma, Wash. 
Seattle, Wash. . . 
Bremerton, Wash. 
Puyallup, Wash. . 
Everett, Wash. . , 


15, 16 Pt. Townsend, Wash. 

17 Burlington, Wash. . 

18 Sedro Woolley, Wash. 

19 Everson, Wash 

20, 23 Bellingham, Wash. . . 


22, 23- 
24, 25 
2» 
27 
20 
30 


21 

24 

25, 26 

27 

28 

29, 30 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 

Tamaqua, Pa Nov. 9 Pottsville, Pa Nov 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. W. BETTER 

Yonkers, N. Y Nov. 9 Tarrytown, N. Y...Nov 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER L. T. COHEN 

Bangor, Pa Nov. 9 Pen Argyl, Pa Nov 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER E. L. DOCKET 

Newark, N. J Nov. 9 Bayonne, N. J Nov 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. DONALD 

Reading, Pa Nov. 2 Waterbury, Conn. .Nov 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 


Watervliet, N. Y...Not. 


9 


Schenectady, N. Y..Nov. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER G. F. FISHER 

Washington, D. C. . Nov. 2 Baltimore, Md. .., 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. B. GO TJX 

New Brunswick, N. JNov. 9 Patchogue, N. Y. . . 


ADDRE8SES BY BROTHER A. L GO TJX 

Elmsford, N. Y Nov. 9 Bridgeport, Conn. . .Not 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Brooklyn, N. Y....[Nov. 9 Stamford, Conn. ...No* 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. F. HTJDGINGS 

Springfield, Mass. ..Nov. 9 Brooklyn, N. Y. ...Not 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER J. H. HOEVELER 

Glens Falls, N. Y...Nov. 9 Warrensburg, N. Y..Nov 


33 


Iff 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER A. H. MACMXLLAN 


Waltham, Mass. 


. Nov. 


Cincinnati, O. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
Providence, R. I.... Nov. 9 Washington, D. C. 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. £. MYERS 

Camden, N. J Nov. 9 Riverside, N. J. 


.Nov 


.Nov 


.Nuv 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Lancaster, Pa Nov. 9 Paterson, N. J. ... 


Nov. 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 
Washington. D. C. . .Nov. 9 Baltimore, Md Nov 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 

York, Pa Nov. 16 Harrisburg, Pa. ...Nov 

ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. A. WISE 

New Britain, Conn. . Nov. 16 Cromwell, Conn Not 


ADDRESSES BY BROTHER C. H. ZOOK 

Fall River, Maes. . .Nov. 16 Newport. R. I Nov 


23 

16 

16 
16 




-"■' ROCKOFAGES^y; 
Other foundation can ^ 
no man lay -4^ 
a,ransom;forall^ - 


■ & i« 


^^ 


.'•V^a.v" 


n$S 


pence; 


J7*"~ 


V'-' 


VOL. XL XOV£>fBBR 15 No. 22 

SEMI-MONTHLY 

A. D. 1919 — A.M. 6048 

CONTENTS 

Ransom Implies Restitution 330 

Salvation by Resurrection \\\ xa 

Times of Restitution ..WW 341 

None Other Xame Given .'!.'!."!! 342 

Isaiah's Rhapsody Xo. 1 343 

Threefold Ground for Comfort .' 344 

Prepare^ Ye the Way ' ' 345 

Jehovah's Glory Revealed 346 

Xurturers of the Flock \\\ 347 

The Empty Tomb; the Risen Lord 348 

A Gross hut Common Error 34S 

Break lasting with the Lord 349 

The Training of Peter and John 350 

Cleansed by the Blood 351 

"/ will stand upon mv watch, and will set my foot upon ihe 
Tower, and will watch 'to see what He wtil sax unto me, and 
w hat answer I ihall make to them that oppose me."—Hab. 2:2 


:)wt.b.ct.s. 




. tTpon the earth distress of nations with perplextty; the sea and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring; men's hearts failing them for fear and for looking 
%o the tilings coming upon the earth (society): for the powers of the heavens (ecclesiastlclsm) shall be shaken. When yeseetbeee things begin to > comet© P***j 

Vtmn know that the Kingdom of God is at hand. Look up. lift up your beads, rejoice, for your redemption drawetb nigh. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29: Luxe -ii:^-Ji 


THIS JOURNAL AND IT© 6ACRED MISSION 


THIS Journal Is one of the prime factors or Instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension/* now ttafttf' 
presented in all parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towkh Bible St Tract Sociiity, chartered A. D. 1881, "P»r the Pro* 
motion of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet In the Btudy of the Divine Word, 
bat also as a channel of communication through which they in*., ■', reached with announcements of the Society's Convention* and ol 
the coming of its traveling representatives styled "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
fery helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, via., Verb* Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minister of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons Is specially for the oldei 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This Journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated — 
Redemption through the precious blood of "tbe Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
til." (1 Pet. 1:19; 1 Tim. 2:6.) Building un on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:11-15; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all see what is the fellowship of the Mystery which . . . has been 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which In other Age» 
WB.B not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while It seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into folleef 
jnbjection to the will of God In Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures, It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
oath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude Is not dogmatical, but confident ; for we 
(now whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only In 
His service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
vrge oar readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

"That the Churoh is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship ;" that its construction has been In progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :16, 17 ; Eph. 2 :20-22 ; Gen. 
28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these 'living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 tbe Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for erm% 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world," "in due time,"— 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the Hope of the Churoh is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hl» 
glory as His joint-heir— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 ret. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop In herself every grace; 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1 :6 ; 20 :& 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom — 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Kedeemer and His glorifl«£ 
Church — when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3 : 19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHKT) BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL STREET, PITTSBURGH. PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Tower Edttortal Committee: 
This journal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these colums. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rut-herford. W. E. Van Ambcrgh, F. H. Robison, Geo. H. 
Fishbr. W. E. Page. ____ _ 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE il.OO IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

Ttmu to th« Lord's Poor as follows— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay for this 
Journal, will be supplied Fre* if they send a Postal Card each May stating 
their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anx 
ious, that all such be on our list contin ually and in touch with tire Studies, etc . 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS— Please remember that as 
a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal or for a 
oew subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are indicated within a 
month by change in date of expiration of the subscription on the Tower 

When requesting change of address, please give old address as well as 
new. This is very important, saving us much time and unnecessary correspondence
. 


ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA. 
UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3KD. 1S79. 


POSTOFFICE 


LOCAL CONVENTIONS AT THANKSGIVING SEASON 

Chicago, 111., X.ivemher 27-30. brother Rutherford and several 
pilgrim brethren \w\\ be present. Fvv further information address 
Entertainment Committee, 130.*) Masonic Temple. Chicago, 111. 

Grand Rapids, Mich.. No\ ember 27-;>0 Brother Rutherford hopes 
ro be present on the 2Sth. For further, information address S. C 
DeUroot, V>u Lyon Street, N. K., Grand Rapids, Mich. 

Cincinnati, O., November 29. 30. Address Victor Schmidt. 545 
\Ve«t 7th Street, Cincinnati, 0.. for information concerning this convention
. 

Toledo, 0., November 2 7-30. For further information address 
C. W. Smith, 1021 Varlaml Ave., Toledo. Ohio. 

St. Louis, Mo., November 27-30. J. B Bernoudy, 7033 Lindell Ave., 
can be addressed for further information regarding this convention. 


CONVENTIONS TO BE ADDRESSED BY BBOTHEE 
J. F. RUTB05RTORD 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 
Chicago, 111. 


. .Nov. 23 
.. 4 ' 30 


Grand Rapids, Mich... Nov. 28 
Cleveland, O Dec. 7 


BE BEREAN BIBLE LESSONS 

The October 15th issue erred in duplicating questions. 
tion is made on pg. 351 by forwarding questions two weeks. 


CorrecLectures
 and Studies by Traveling Brethren 

BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 

Scranton, Pa Nov, 23 Carbondale, Pa Not. 23 

BBOTHEE E. W. BETLER 

Valley Stream, N. Y. . .Nov. 30 Bayonne, N. J Dec 7 

BROTHER L. T. COHEN 

E. Stroudsburg, Pa.... Nov. 16 Hicksrille, N Y. ..Nov 30 

BROTHER E. L. DOCKET 

Kingston, N. Y Nov. 23 Newourgh, N. Y Nov. 23 

BROTHER A. DONALD 

New Britain. Conn Nov. 16 N. Bergen. N. J Nov. 30 

BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 

Patterson, N. J Nov. 16 Taunton, Mass .. . .Nov. 30 

BROTHER A. R. GO TJX 

Hicksville, N. Y Nov. 16 Newark, N. J Nov. 30 

BROTHER G. H. FISHER 

Pittsburgh, Pa Nov. 23 Columbus, O Nov. 30 

BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 

Stamford, Conn Nov. 16 Taunton, Mass Nov. 23 

BBOTHER J. H. HOEVELER 

Johnstown. N. Y Nov. 16 Philadelphia, Pa Nov. 23 

BBOTHER W. F. HTJDGTNGS 

Brooklyn, N. Y Nov. 16 Spring City, Pa Nov. 30 

BROTHER A. H. MACMILLAN 

AValtham, Mass Nov. 23 Cincinnati, O Nov 30 

BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 

Washington, D. €.... Nov. 16 Baltimore, Md Nov. 16 

BROTHER C. E. MYERS 

Bayonne, N J Nov. 16 Hartford, Conn Nov. 23 

BROTHER P. H, ROBISON 

Cromwell, Conn Nov. 16 Paterson, N. J Not. 23 

BROTHER H. A. SEKLEMIAN 

Granville, N. Y Nov. 16 Springfield, Mass Dec. 7 

BBOTHER W. E. VAN AMBTTRGH 

Taunton, Mass Nov. 16 Allentown, Pa Nov. 23 

BROTHER R. VAN HYNXNG 

Atlantic City, N. J.... Nov. 23 Pomerania, N. J Not. 23 

BROTHER O. A. WISE 

St. Joseph, Mo Nov, 23 Mnncie, Ind Not. 30 

BROTHER O. H. ZOOK 
Washington, D. Nov. 23 Baltimore Md Not. 23 



JCH T< 



AND HEI?ALD OF CHRIST? PRESENCE 


Voi» XL 


November 15, 1919 


RANSOM IMPLIES RESTITUTION 


No. n 


"There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, to 

be testified in due time"—i Timothy 2:5, 6. 

clearness what are the true doctrines of the Scriptures 
respecting these matters. 



UR text declares a great fact which 
Christian people generally ignore, if indeed
 they do not directly deny it. It is 
the fact that our Lord Jesus was a ransom
 price, the scope of which includes 
benefits broad enough to take in the entire 
family of Adam. Many people have been 
confused as to the real scope of the ran- 
■* som by various Scripture statements concerning
 the church. The Scriptures do speak of a 
special elect class, which is being gathered out of the 
world during this Gospel age and which is promised 
joint-heirship with Christ in his mediatorial kingdom. 
The Scriptures do also speak of the fact that the great 
mass of mankind at the present time and throughout 
the six thousand years of man's history has been 
"without God, and without hope in the world," because
 without a knowledge of "the only name given 
under heaven and amongst men whereby we may be 
saved". These facts have led many people to the erroneous
 conclusion that our Lord's death has not been 
and never will be a ransom price, or off-set price, for 
the cancellation of the sins of mankind in general. 

There are certain features to this kind of reasoning 
which are logical; for if the world in general has not 
received a blessing at the Lord's hands, it seems like 
a reasonable conclusion to say that Justice has not received
 a full ransom price for original sin. In seeming
 harmony with this thought is the fact that only a 
small proportion of humanity have been favored of the 
Lord with the opening of their eyes of understanding, 
and with the privilege, through faith, of coming back 
into harmony with their Creator. In seeming support 
for this fact also are the Scripture statements respecting
 the present "narrow way" and "strait gate", 
which "few" can find, and the many references to the 
elect as constituting only a little flock. 

Building upon these facts and failing to take into 
proper consideration the whole counsel of God, our 
forefathers of the dark ages and since have proceeded 
to give various explanations of what they suppose will 
happen to the remainder of mankind, the non-elect, 
those not favored by the Almighty with the knowledge 
of the only name efficacious for salvation. They built 
various false doctrines, such as the eternal torture of 
all save the church, or of long-lasting purgatorial 
sufferings for the great majority of human beings — 
according to whether the fathers were Protestant or 
Romanist. These "traditions of the elders" have had 
a nauseating effect upon intelligent minds. They contradict
 the Scriptural declaration that God is just, 
loving, wise, and powerful. What we need in order 
to correct the nausea, to refresh the heart, to inspire a 
love and zeal for the Lord and his Word, is to see with 


"TASTED DEATH FOB EVERY MAN" 

The Scriptures tell us that our Lord Jesus "by the 
grace of God tasted death for every man". (Hebrews 
2:9) They show conclusively that through his death 
he became a "propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins 
[the church's sins] ; and not for ours only, but also 
for the sins of the whole world". (1 John 2:2) But 
to appreciate these statements, to see how they can be 
and are true, it is necessary to know that the Scriptures
 nowhere declare that the present Gospel age is 
the only period of divine favor, the only period for 
the forgiveness of sins, the only period for reconciliation
 with God, the only period of opportunity for being
 taught of God and of obtaining his blessing and 
favor, lost through original sin in Eden. As soon as 
we grasp this great fact our eyes begin to open to 
other facts : 

(1) That prior to this Gospel age, during the 
Jewish age and previously, all the world, except that 
one little nation, were aliens, strangers, and foreigners 
from God and his promises, "without God and without 
hope in the world" (Ephesians 2:12); 

(2) That the Scriptures clearly indicate a "world 
to come", a future epoch, in connection with the 
affairs of this world, under new and better conditions 
than now prevail (Hebrews 2:5) ; 

(3) That that future epoch is called the "day of 
Christ", the "day of the Lord". It is indeed the 
Millennial day, the thousand years of Christ's reign for 
the very purpose of blessing and uplifting the world of 
mankind, for whose sins his death was the atonement 
price and who are to be healed by his stripes. 

(4) We find that every invitation and injunction 
of the Gospel age is with a view to the selection of an 
elect class, who shall be joint-heirs with Christ during 
that Messianic reign, to share with him in the great 
work of true and general human uplift. 

At this point many good people, laboring under a 
degree of blindness, caused by the smoke of the dark 
ages, feel disposed to believe and to insist that there 
can be no future probation. If we ask them why, they 
reply that the entire Scripture teaching contradicts 
the thought of a future hope, a hope beyond the tomb. 
To this we are obliged to reply, It is an error; the 
very reverse is true, as we shall show. We ask them 
for a single Scripture on their side of the subject. 
To their amazement they find none, but as a last resort
 quote from Ecclesiastes the words : "Where the 
tree falleth, there shall it be". (Ecclesiastes 11:3) A 
very slim text indeed to raise up as a barrier against 
the entire voice of the Scriptures, against all the de- 


339 


340 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh. Ta 


mands of reason and logic, and against the eternal 
welfare of the human race! 

The Scripture they quote is in full accord with what 
we claim ; namely, that as a tree when it is fallen is 
lifeless and powerless and cannot raise itself up — so •$ 
man in death, under the sentence and wage of original 
sin. The Scripture argument is that the whole race of 
Adam was thus dead, without life, without power to 
raise itself out of its fallen condition, without any 
claims upon eternal life or divine favor in any sense. 
But, as our head text declares, our Lord Jesus "gave 
himself a ransom for all", for Adam, the transgressor 
in particular, and for all of his race who share in his 
penalty, and the all redeemed is the same all which 
shall have the blessed opportunity for release from sinand
-death bondage. 

It is because man is in this helpless condition, dead, 
powerless to revivify himself, that God has gone to 
his relief through Christ and caused the great ransom 
price to be provided nearly nineteen centuries ago. 
Our text assures us that the ransom sacrifice finished 
at Calvary was on behalf of all mankind, and is, consequently
, to bring a blessing to all mankind. 

SALVATION BY RESTJKBECTION 

We are not arguing that all who have died have 
gone to heaven ; quite to the contrary. We adhere to 
the Bible teaching that "the dead know not anything" 
(Ecclesiastes 9:5) ; that a resurrection is necessary to 
any future living. We hold with the Scriptures that 
at the end of this age the first resurrection was to 
take place, the resurrection of the "blessed and holy", 
of those who have pleased God by both their faith and 
their obedience. These, the Scriptures tell us, shall be 
"kings and priests unto God and shall reign on the 
earth". (Revelation 5:10) The object of their reign 
will be to bring blessings of knowledge and opportunity
 to "every creature", to the "residue of men". 
These participators in the first resurrection are the 
spiritual "seed of Abraham", our Lord Jesus the head 
and his church, the members of his body. Thus the 
Apostle declares: "If ye be Christ's, then are ye 
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise". — 
Galatians 3:29. 

The promise to which Christ and the church are 
heirs is that they shall be God's instruments for the 
blessing, instruction and uplift of all the willing of the 
world of mankind. To be heirs of this promise made 
to Abraham (that in his seed should all the families 
of the earth be blessed), would be a meaningless farce 
and jest on the part of the Almighty had he not arranged
 for the purchase or ransom of all men and 
provided the time and means by which his blessings 
could accrue to the world. Thus we perceive that he 
has arranged a time for granting the world a trial for 
life, a trial respecting their willingness to abandon 
the ways of sin and death and to walk in the ways of 
righteousness under the enlightenment of the truth, 
which, we are assured, shall shine forth as the sun and 
whose beams shall heal humanity. (Malachi 4:2) 
The means for the blessing we see provided in Christ 
and in his bride, the elect church of this Gospel age; 
but the guarantee of the whole is fixed beyond peradventure
 in the fact that "Jesus Christ by the grace 
of God tasted death for every man"; here, as our 
first text says, he became the mediator between God 
and man by giving himself a ransom for all. 


The point we desire to emphasize here is that the 
giving of this ransom price and the acceptance of it 
by Justice implies divine intention for the blessing of 
all mankind, in full accord with the various testimonies 
of the Scripture. Why let a ransom be given for all 
if it were not God's intention that all should benefit by 
it? We hold that it is beyond dispute that the giving 
of the ransom for all, and God's acceptance of it in 
harmony with the divine promises, are the sure guarantee
 that ultimately a blessing must come to every 
member of Adam's race as a result. 

The fact that this knowledge has not reached all 
mankind in the past and is not reaching all mankind 
today, but, on the contrary only a small minority, and 
the fact that the knowledge of God's favor and an intelligent
 acceptance of it on faith and a reasonable 
obedience in harmony with that faith are the demands 
of the divine Word, require no proof. Proof could be 
given on almost every page of the Scriptures that faith 
and effort at obedience, in harmony with that faith, are 
necessary to salvation, but we will content ourselves 
with mentioning a few citations. 

The Apostle Paul says: "Faith cometh by hearing, 
and hearing by the word of God"; "How shall they believe
 on him whom they have not heard?" (Romans 
10:14-17) "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God." (Hebrews 11:6) "All that are in the grave 
shall hear his voice [that of the Son of Man] and 
shall come forth." (John 5:28, 29) "The knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the whole earth as the waters 
cover the great deep." (Isaiah 11:9) "The eyes of 
the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall 
be unstopped." (Isaiah 35:5) "They shall no longer 
teach every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord : 
for all shall know him, from the least of them unto 
the greatest of them, saith the Lord." — Jer. 31:34. 

TESTIFIED IN DUE TIME 

Our ground text is in full accord with all of these 
statements, when it says that our Lord Jesus gave himself
 a ransom for all to be testified "in due time". 
The present, then, is the due time for the church, the 
household of faith, to hear the voice of the Sou of 
God; for they who now hear, live, pass from death 
unto life, to newness of life, into the begetting or beginning
 of a new nature. Bye and bye, when the 
present class of called, elect ones shall have been 
glorified with their Lord, all the remainder of mankind
 shall hear, "all that are in the grave shall hear 
his voice," and come forth for the very purpose that 
they may hear, may understand, may appreciate, and 
may be assisted to obey the voice of him that speaketh 
from heaven, the great ransomer, who in that day will 
be the king over all the earth and will bind Satan 
and will put down every opposing influence, to the 
intent that all may come to a full appreciation of God 
and his righteous laws and to full obedience thereto. 

This is the Apostle Peter's argument in Acts 
^:22, 23: he points us to the fact that Moses was a 
type of Christ (Jesus the head and the church his 
body), and that this antitypical priest is being raised 
up by God from among Christ's brethren, raised up 
to the glory, honor, and immortality of the divine nature
 and to the power and authority of the kingdom. 
The intent of all this is that as the seed of Abraham 
this great Messiah shall bless all the families of the 
earth with knowledge and every opportunity for return
 to all that was lost in Adam in the shape of divine 


November 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


341 


favor. All of those who will refuse to hear or obey 
that great Prophet, Priest, and King during the 
Millennial age — what of them? The Apostle answers: 
"It shall come to pass that the soul that will not hear 
[or obey] that prophet shall be destroyed from 
amongst the people"; he shall be cut off in the second 
death, from which there will be no hope of recovery, 
no resurrection. 

TIMES OF RESTITUTION 

In full accord with this view is the Apostle Peter's 
statement respecting the blessings that are to come to 
mankind during the Millennial age, following our 
Lord's second advent and the glorification of his 
church to joint-heirship with him. The Apostle calls 
that period "times of refreshing from the presence of 
the Lord, when he shall send Jesus Christ/' at his second
 advent. The Apostle declares that in the meantime
 the heavens will receive or retain him "until the 
times of restitution of all things spoken by the mouth 
of all his holy prophets since the world began". Tn 
other words, he assures us that those restitution times, 
or years of uplifting mankind, will follow as a result 
of the Lord's second coming and the establishment of 
his kingdom in glory and in power. — Acts 3:19-21. 

That the times of restitution signify years of restitution
 we need not state; nor need we point out that 
the thousand years of Christ's reign are here referred 
to. The w r ord restitution is more or less familiar to 
everyone as signifying to put back or bring back 
something to an original or previous condition. The 
Apostle is speaking of humanity, and hence the suggestion
 is that the work of Christ and his church in 
glory during the Messianic reign will be to restore 
mankind to the condition and privileges and blessings 
and favors enjoyed before sin entered the world, before
 the curse passed upon all because of one man's 
disobedience. — Romans 5:12, 18. 

Evolutionists will have little sympathy with the 
Apostle's statement here, for, according to their erroneous
 theory restitution to an original condition 
would be the last thing for humanity to desire or 
hope for, or for God to promise as a blessing. But 
much more happiness is had if we do not consult 
evolutionists in this matter, but the Word of God, that 
liveth and abideth forever. In harmony with his 
promise we are to anticipate, therefore, that as the 
world of mankind has been in a falling and fallen 
condition for six thousand years, and that when the 
Lord's time shall come and times of restitution shall 
begin, so the present downward or fallen conditions 
will give place to upward conditions and to restitution 
activities for the general happifying of all mankind. 

BECAUSE "CHRIST DIED FOR OUR SINS" 

The Lord's ransom sacrifice finished at Calvary is 
the basis upon which God can be just in maintaining 
the integrity of the original sentence of death against 
sinners and yet be the justifier of those who believe on 
him through Jesus (Romans 3:26) and release them 
from the sentence of death which was justly upon 
them as the imperfect posterity of the fallen Adam and 
as those who are unworthy of life eternal. 

The more we look into this matter the more logical, 
reasonable, and satisfying we see the divine plan to 
be. The first man was perfect, made in the image of 
God, having the same character poise as God and, 
within his limited sphere, having the same appreciation 


of moral, intellectual, and social principles as God has. 
This first man sinned with deliberation and received 
as a penalty the death sentence. After waiting more 
than four thousand years God sent a redeemer in the 
person of his Son. Since man was not a spirit being 
but a human or earthly being, therefore, as the Apostle 
explains, Christ took not hold on the nature of angels 
but humbled himself and came to the human plane, 
lower than he had enjoyed, and became the "man 
Christ Jesus". But since his life was not derived 
from the polluted Adamic fountain, he did not bear 
the marks of imperfection which mar all the children 
of Adam. Though a human being, yet he was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners". 
Then, as the man Christ Jesus he gave himself a ransom
 for all, though the testimony or general knowledge
 concerning this fact was not to be known by all 
at once but only "in due time". It was a perfect man 
who had sinned and who had been condemned; therefore
 only a perfect man could be a ransom price or 
exactly corresponding price. The fact that all of 
Adam's children were condemned in him, or inherited 
his condemnation with the measure of life which he 
imparted to them through procreation, makes possible 
the fact that all may be redeemed by one man. — 1 
Corinthians 15 119, 22. 

The testimony of this great event has already been 
in the world for nineteen centuries and it has selected 
the very class which God foreknew and foretold — a 
little flock of footstep followers who are to be joint* 
heirs with their Redeemer and Lord. Next in order, 
then, will come the testimony to the remainder of mankind
, first, to those who will not have gone into the 
tomb, and secondly, to those who have already gone 
into the tomb but who will be awakened for the very 
purpose of receiving this testimony and being tested 
by it. In accord with this, the Apostle informs us 
that the church is "a kind of first fruits [unto God] 
of his creatures". The expression "firstfruits" implies
 an after-fruitage. — James 1 :i8. 

Here we notice the difference between the blessing 
God designed for the elect church being selected during
 this Gospel age, and the blessing he purposes for 
the obedient of the w r orld of mankind in general. The 
church's blessing is not restitution ; we do not see restitution
 work in the church. The restitution work 
waits for the restitution time, which begins with the 
establishment of God's kingdom. Believers of this 
present time indeed enjoy by faith such a reckoned 
righteousness as makes them acceptable sacrifices in 
the eyes of Jehovah, but they do not experience restitution
. They are reckoned as having their sins 
covered with the robe of Christ's righteousness, as being
 passed (in response to their faith and by virtue of 
the merit of Christ's ransom sacrifice on their behalf) 
from under the sentence of death in Adam to a share 
of life in Christ, receiving again the fellowship and 
communion with God lost by Adam through his disobedience
 in Eden. All of this in a sense serves as an 
equivalent to the restitution which is to come to the 
world in its due time. But the world will not get 
these things merely by faith; they will get them 
actually, gradually attaining to them more and more 
during the thousand years, until at its close all who 
shall have appreciated God's favors and obeyed the 
voice of the Great Prophet, Priest, and King will be 
actually perfect, as perfect as Adam was in every 


342 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittuwrgh, Pa. 


talent, quality, power, and capacity, but with increased
 capacity through increased knowledge gained 
through experience. 

HEAVENLY BEWABD FOB ELECT ONLY 

Not so the church of this Gospel age. She gets 
none of these restitution blessings actually. She 
merely has them by faith, and this for the special purpose
 of having them sacrificed under the direction of 
Jesus, the great High Priest. She is thus allowed to 
participate in the glories of his heavenly nature and his 
heavenly work The Gospel invitation to the church 
is to lay down her life, to exchange these earthly privileges
 and blessings, secured by the precious blood of 
Christ, for heavenly privileges offered her as an extraordinary
 reward for extraordinary obedience; even 
as the Master said: "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame
 and am set down with my Father in his throne". 
— Revelation 3:21. 

Glory, honor, and immortality, the divine nature, 
will be the great reward bestowed upon the church at 
her great change from present earthly conditions to 
heavenly conditions, far beyond anything possible for 
the natural man to appreciate, and which even the 
saints can see but obscurely, as through an imperP 
mirror. This great change is to come to the faithiui 
bride by her participation in the first resurrection, the 
resurrection to spiritual perfection, and is the great 
hope and ambition set before us. It is for this that 
we are exhorted to lay aside every weight and every 
besetting sin and to run with patience the race set before
 us, sacrificing earthly things and treasures that 
we may have this better treasure, this pearl of great 
price, this share in the kingdom of our dear Redeemer. 

HOLY PBOPHETS FORETOLD THIS 

The Apostle declares that these "times of restitution
" that are coming were spoken of "by the mouth 
of all his holy prophets since the world began". 
Suffice it now that we take the Apostle's word, calling 
to mind the various statements and promises of the 
Lord and of the prophets, pointing out these glorious 
good things for the world of mankind, that are delayed
 only until the completion of the elect church. 
The prophets spoke of the restoration of Israel to divine
 favor, of how their blind eyes shall be opened, 
how they shall see in very truth that he whom they 
pierced is Messiah indeed, who gave his life for their 
ransom. It is clearly pointed out in the ninth, tenth, 
and eleventh chapters of Romans that not only the falling
 away of Israel was foretold by the prophets, but 
also their regathering, their restoration to divine 
favor. But this, the Apostle shows us, will be after 
the completion of the Gospel church, spiritual Israel. 
Again he informs us that "they [the Jews] shall obtain
 mercy through your mercy". The glorified 
church, with Christ at her head as the great King, is 


to dispense the mercies of God to the Jew first, and 
also to "all the families of the earth". 

Let us hold fast to the doctrines of Christ as set 
forth in his own teachings, that he "came to seek and 
to save that which was lost" (Luke 19 :io) ; that he beheld
 mankind as a treasure in a field and bought the 
whole field that he might develop the treasure. Let 
us note that the same Gospel is set forth also in all 
the declarations of the apostles and of "all the holy 
prophets since the world began". While the doctrines 
of men would be inclined to lead us away from God, 
to make us think of the Almighty as unjust and cruel, 
heartless, loveless, and powerless, the doctrines of 
the Scriptures open the blind eyes and give us the 
power to see the King in his beauty, the glorious 
majesty of the God of love, the God of wisdom, the 
God of justice, and the God of power. They give us 
to see, as explained by the prophet, that as the heavens 
are higher than the earth, so are God's ways higher 
than man's ways and God's plans than man's plans. 

From this standpoint of greater enlightenment respecting
 the divine character, we shall have greater 
desire to serve and please him, esteeming it a great 
privilege to lay down our very lives in his service, accounting
 all things as but loss and dross for the exrp
 1 lency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, 
that we might know him intimately and be found in 
him, as his members, and be made sharers in his resurrection
, the first resurrection. — Philippians 3:8-11. 

"NONE OTHEB NAME GIVEN" 

All those who have died outside of Christ, outside 
of membership in his true church, are safe in the care 
of him who died for all. They are safe in that they 
are guaranteed full opportunity for life everlasting under
 the most favorable conditions. They are not safe 
in the sense of having salvation forced upon them. 
God will not torture even his enemies to all eternity, 
as once we feared, but now find to be unscriptural. 
Let us see that while the Scriptures teach that the 
worst that can befall any of his enemies will be "everlasting
 destruction" without hope of a future life, 
there is a grand hope taught for the ignorant, for 
those who now know little or nothing of God's purposes
. All such shall be saved from their ignorance 
and be brought to an accurate knowledge of the truth, 
that they may be saved, in God's due time. — 1 Tim. 2 14. 

Let us recognize the truth of the Master's words 
and build a proper faith in accordance with its statement
: "He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath 
not the Son shall not see life" eternal (John 3:36), 
because salvation is by knowledge and not by ignorance
, "through faith" in the precious blood, and not 
in ignorance of it. Salvation comes by a resurrection 
and by the Messianic kingdom in which the church of 
this Gospel age is invited to share with her Redeemer 
as his bride and joint-heir to accomplish the blessing 
and happification of all who will then prove willing 
and obedient. 


LET THERE BE LIGHT 


Let there be light. From out the obscure darkness, here 

below 
I long to know thy present perfect will, and then to see 
Thy full completed purposes in me. 
Supplv the want that fills my longing heart; 
Show" me the part that I should work for thee : And with 

my might 
I'll serve thee as I may. Let there be light. 


I see it now: The first gray shafts of morn are breaking 

through — 
Tis joy to find thy boundless love for me and all mankind. 
And as the shadows flee, with morning light 
Give me a spirit broken, heart contrite — a zeal to show 
Thy praise with keen delight. Prepare the way 
Unto that glorious day— to clear undimmed light. 



ISAIAH'S RHAPSODY NO. 1 

'Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God." — Isaiah 40:1 
~£ T..,;~U ;. ,.„:~,^ {+. FRAGMENTARY THREEFO 


HE prophecy of Isaiah is unique from 
several standpoints. One thing which 
makes it of special interest to the Lord's 
people is the fact that it is more frequently 
quoted by our Lord and the apostles than 
all of the other prophecies combined. 
The generally exalted character of the 
prophet's language and the clearness of 
vision granted him as a seer is another 
item of deep interest. And, thirdly, the physical 
structure of the prophecy is such as to demand special
 attention, because of the elaborate division and 
subdivision of its subject matter. 

We offer a brief outline of the prophecy which confirms
 this remark. When divisions and subdivisions 
are indicated, it does not mean that these are made 
arbitrarily, but that the subject matter itself is divided, 
a fact which is easily demonstrated by anyone who 
cares to take the trouble to examine into it. It will 
be noted that the third division contains by far the 
major portion of the book and that the third subdivision
 of that division contains probably a half of 
the prophecy, viewed as to bulk. This third subdivision
 is specially Messianic in its character and begins
 with the fortieth chapter. At this time we offer 
some comments on the first eleven verses of the 
fortieth chapter. But first is inserted the general outline
 of the book : 

Division I : Chapter 1, which acts as a preface for the 
whole work; contains a brief outline of the subject 
matter to be discussed. 

Division II : Chapters 2 to 27, dealing, historically, 
with the testing of King Ahaz. 
Subdivision 1, Chapters 2 to 12 
Subdivision 2, Chapters 13 to 23 
Subdivision 3, Chapters 24 to 27 
Song 1, Chapter 25 
Song 2, Chapter 26 
Song 3, Chapter 27 

Division III: Chapters 28 to 66. dealing, in so far as 
history is involved, with the testing of King Hezekiah. 
Subdivision 1, Chapters 28 to 35 
Subdivision 2, Chapters 36 to 3D 
Subdivision 3, Chapters 40 to 66, Messianic : 
Portion 1, Chapters 40-48 : Treating on the Messiah 
(here called "the servant of the Lord") in his 
evangelistic activities, or in the work of heralding 
the good tidings of Messiah's oncoming kingdom — 
the work of this Gospel a^e. 
Section 1, Chapters 40 to 42. 
Section 2, Chapters 43 to 45. 
Section 3, Chapters 40 to 4s. 

Portion 2, Chapters 41) to 5? : Dealing with Messiah 
in his official capacity in the Millennial age. 
Section 1, Chapters 49-52 :12, as Prophet. 
Section 2, Chapters 52 :13 to 54, as Priest. 
Section 3, Chapters 55 to 57, as King. 
Kingly work No. 1, Chapter 55. 
Kindly work No. 2, Chapter 50 :S. 
Kingly work No. 3, Chapter 50 ;9 to 57. 

Portion 3, Chapters 58 to 66: Dealing with the 
Messiah in his paternal relationship toward mankind
 during the Millennium. 
Section 1, Chapters 5S to GO. 
Section 2, Chapters 01 to 04. 

First work, Chapters 61, 02. 
Second work. Chapters 03. 
Third work, Chapter 64. 
Section 3, Chapters 65, 66. 


FRAGMENTARY THREEFOLD INTERPRETATION 

These elaborate divisions and subdivisions can 
hardly have been by accident. They were doubtless 
intended of the Lord, under whose influence or power 
Isaiah was directed to speak and write. (2 Peter 
1 :2i) This three- fold system of its structure suggests 
to us the possibility of a three-fold application of the 
prophet's utterances; but no effort should be made to 
strain any passage. On examination we do find that 
there are many passages of the prophecy which have 
an application (1) to fleshly Israel in connection with 
the Babylonian captivity, either oncoming or experienced
; (2) to fleshly Israel after the time of her long 
period of disfavor; (3) to spiritual Israel, especially 
after the time of her captivity in antitypical Babylon. 
There are other passages w T hich are plainly applicable 
to two of these classes. Still other parts of the 
prophecy seem to apply only to spiritual Israel, while 
occasionally are found remarks apparently intended 
only for natural Israel. 

The fortieth chapter is one freighted with special 
interest, because parts of it stretch over a long period 
of time — from about the time of the Babylonian captivity
 to the present day. Isaiah's prophecy was delivered
 about 150 years prior to the captivity, and this 
fact must be borne in mind in thinking of any of its 
historical aspects. 

In these first eleven verses of the fortieth chapter 
we have three pictures of Jehovah given to us: first, 
he is depicted as a Comforter after protracted suffering
; second, he is represented as being the True One, 
whose word abides though all else fail ; third, as the 
Shepherd who leads his people with paternal care. 
The first two verses announce comfort. The following
 nine verses contain three voices, or messages, each 
composed of three verses. 

The chapter opens with the familiar words: "Comfort
 ye, comfort ye my people, saith your God". 
Three imperatives or commands are given: (1) 
"Comfort ye"; (2) "speak ye"; (3) "cry". It will be 
noted also that the thing to be cried, or proclaimed, 
is three-fold in its nature: (1) "that her warfare is 
accomplished"; (2) "that her iniquity is pardoned"; 
(3) "that she hath received of the Lord's hand double 
for all her sins". Our King James version gives this 
last clause, "for she hath received," but the grammatical
 structure in all three cases is the same, and the 
rendering should be the same in each instance. 

ONLY HEART CLASS COMFORTED 

The Hebrew word here translated "comfortably" is 
rendered in the margin "to the heart of". God's message
 of comfort did come to the heart of Jerusalem 
as soon as the seventy years of Jerusalem's captivity 
had expired. The great mass of Jews who had been 
carried away captive into Babylon had become very 
comfortably situated there. They doubtless had social 
and commercial ties which they did not care to break. 
The homes, friends, and pleasant associations seemed 
very real and desirable to them ; whereas Jerusalem 
seemed distant and as a thing belonging to the pastDoubtless
 they argued that a return to rebuild the 
temple and city of Jerusalem and to rehabilitate Judea 
was foolish, impractical, visionary. But about 50,000 
souls so much appreciated the promises which God had 
given them through the prophets, were so keen in discerning
 the fact that those promises were associated 


343 


344 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PITTSBURGH, Pa 


with Jerusalem, that they wert willing to forego any 
temporal advantages which might accrue from their 
remaining in Babylon and to return and undertake 
the hardships and physical disadvantages of entrance 
into a ruined and devastated country. 

This was the heart class of the Jews—here represented
 by the word Jerusalem. Without that "remnant
" the Jewish race would have been lost to history. 
Their hearts burned at the prospect of participation in 
the blessings God had promised them. This message 
of comfort did not come to the majority of the Jews, 
for the simple reason that they had no need for it! 
Whoever tries to comfort those' who are already comfortable
 is wasting his time and energy. 

Furthermore, this message of comfort has come to 
God's fleshly people Israel after their 1845-year period 
of divine disfavor and of spiritual blindness. Here 
too it is only the heart class, the Zionists, who have 
been comforted by these words of cheer from 
Jehovah's prophet. Here too the majority of Jews 
have been too comfortably situated to be in need of 
prophetic comfort. The Zionist movement started 
with the humbler Jews who needed the very encouragement
 contained in these verses. The Lord 
provided them with it. They have been cheered, encouraged
, and strengthened thereby. 

Likewise there has been a heart class of spiritual 
Israel who have been cheered and comforted by the 
Lord's message, especially since the time of spiritual 
Israel's captivity, ending in the year 1799. 

THKEEFOLD GROUND FOR COMFORT 

The causes or grounds for comfort are then stated 
in threefold manner. The word cry here means to 
make public by proclamation. It has no connection 
whatever with the word weep. The thing to be proclaimed
 was, first, the fact that "her warfare is accomplished
". The Hebrew word here rendered warfare
 is one which applies not to the actual hostilities 
but to the period of time during which warfare is 
active. Literally it means "period of conscription". 
It refers, therefore, to time; and as respects the 
fleshly Israelites at Babylon it meant seventy years 
were expired. When that time was over, a knowledge 
of the fact that the desolation was to be seventy years 
(as foretold by Moses) would constitute a great comfort
 to them. Likewise, the knowledge of the fact 
that fleshly Israel's period of dispersion was to equal 
their period of national favor (viz., 1845 years) 
would be a cause for comfort to God's fleshly people 
at this end of the age. It has proven true. The Lord 
through his servant has explained to the Jews the 
meaning of the "double" mentioned by three of the 
Old Testament prophets. And when spiritual Israel 
found herself at the end of the 1260 years of Papal 
supremacy she could be and has been comforted by 
that knowledge. 

The second cause for comfort lies in the words "that 
her iniquity is pardoned". God in his wisdom saw 
that the seventy years of national humiliation suffered 
by the Jewish people would be a sufficient off-set on 
the books of divine justice to atone for the tendency 
which they had manifested for many centuries to go 
into idolatry, or to worship other gods than Jehovah. 
Evidently God's wisdom calculated with accuracy on 
this point; for ever since the time of the captivity the 
Jews, as a people, have displayed no tendency whatever
 to lose sight of the fact that Jehovah is one God. 
A conviction as to the oneness of God constitutes the 
whole of the average Jew's religion. Everything else 
in matters theological seems like speculation to him. 
The third basis for comfort we find in the last 
clause of the second verse: "for she hath received of 
the Lord's hand double for all her 5ins". On first 
reading this seems to indicate that some persons are 
to be punished twice as much as they deserve. But we 
know that Jehovah would never inflict unjust punishment
. He cannot deny himself. The word double 
here really has the significance of counterpart, or 
equivalent portion. There may be counterparts in 
value or counterparts in time. One hand may be said 
to be a counterpart of the other. With fleshly Israel 
at the time of the captivity the seventy years were 
doubtless deemed to be a counterpart in value for their 
national carelessness of centuries. Fleshly Israel has 
also experienced another counterpart, not only in value 
but also in time. God gave them special privileges as 
a nation and singled them out from other nations to 
be recipients of his favor for 1845 years. W T e find 
also, as a counterpart to this period, that there have 
been 1845 years of national disfavor, beginning with 
our Lord's declaration to the Jews that their house 
was left unto them desolate (in the year A. D. 33) and 
lasting until the year 1878, when divine favor began 
to be manifested again to fleshly Israel in the first 
notably favorable international legislation, which was 
enacted at the Congress of Berlin that year. 

VOICE IN THE WILDERNESS 

We now come to the first of the three voices mentioned
 in the subsequent nine verses: "The voice of 
him that crieth in the wilderness". In the poetic and 
symbolic books of the Bible, especially of the Old 
Testament, the word voice does not refer to the literal 
sound produced by the vocal organs of the body, but 
to the message conveyed by the voice. In prophetic 
writings, naturally, the word applies to messages from 
God. It will be remembered that some nine years ago 
the Society published papers in Yiddish, which conveyed
 the message of comfort contained in this very 
chapter. Suggestions from prominent Zionists as to a 
name for the paper brought out the fact that the Yiddish
 equivalent of "the voice" would be understood at 
once by all Jews to designate some special message 
from Jehovah. Subsequent experience proved the 
suggestions of those Jewish gentlemen to be correct. 

We are, then, about to listen to the message of him 
that proclaimeth in the wilderness. There can be no 
doubt that these words found a literal fulfillment in 
John the Baptist. (Matthew 3:3) But inasmuch as he 
himself was a figure of the church, a composite body, 
it seems reasonable to give the words a wider scope 
than could be done if they applied solely to John as an 
individual. In Scripture symbology the earth represents
 human society, organized and established and 
understood to have a degree of stability. But even in 
the earth there are varying degrees of fertility, of 
prominence, and various other differences and distinctions
. Part of the earth's surface is made up of 
desert or, in Scriptural language, wilderness. From 
God's standpoint the earth, or human society, is now 
one vast wilderness. It is dry and devoid of those refreshing
 experiences and happifying companionships 
which would have been man's portion had sin not 
entered and selfishness not reigned. Human beings 


November 15, 1919 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


345 


come in contact with each other, but there is very little 
true social intercourse. Especially is the earth dry 
and barren in respect to its companionship with 
Jehovah, the Creator. 

The same prophet informs us that this desert state 
of humanity is attributable to the influence of Satan 
as the god of this world. He "maketh the world a 
wilderness". (Isaiah 14:17) This wilderness condition
 is not always to prevail for "the whole earth 
[shall finally be] full of his glory". — Isaiah 6:3; see 
also Isaiah 51:3; 32:2; Deuteronomy 32:10. 

"PREPARE YE THE WAY" 

In this wilderness or desert condition of human 
society God's message has gone forth, especially 
throughout this Gospel age, proclaiming the fact that a 
certain preparatory work is necessary to be accomplished
 before the grander scope of the Abrahamic 
promise can be fulfilled. (Acts 15:14-17) "Prepare 
ye the way of the Lord, make straight in the desert a 
highway for our God." The "way" and "highway" 
are both mentioned here, as is also true in the thirtyfifth
 chapter of this same prophecy. There the prophet 
says : "And an highway shall be there, and a way, and 
it shall be called the way of holiness; the unclean shall 
not pass over it; but it shall be for those". In ancient 
times highways were government roads, carefully built, 
but to be used only on strictly official business, for the 
use of imperial couriers, movement of troops in war 
time, etc. There were also the much-traveled caravan 
roads, referred to by the prophet under the ordinary 
term way. Both thoughts are evidently intended to be 
combined in the promise concerning the highway, for 
after mentioning both the highway and the way he 
says: "and it shall be called the way of holiness". 

What is the purpose of a road? It is simply a 
means or agency to enable one to arrive at a desired 
destination. Then, what is the means or agency to be 
employed by Jehovah in enabling mankind to arrive 
back at the desired destination of paradise restored? 
Is it not the church, the Messiah class in glory, Christ 
the head and the church his body? And is not this 
highway class being prepared throughout this Gospel 
age? And is not this church class in, though not 
integral parts of, the barren and wilderness state of 
human society? 

Surely any class which is to be used by Jehovah for 
such an exalted purpose as joint-heirship with Christ 
is in need of extensive preparatory experiences before 
being made "meet for the inheritance of the saints in 
light". Those who are called to this exalted position 
are not more noble of character than others. Indeed 
the Apostle's remarks in 1 Corinthians 1 \2y, 28 seem 
plainly to correspond with our own observation to 
the effect that the Lord's people are less wonderfully 
endowed than perhaps the average of mankind. The 
Apostle further explains that God's purpose in choosing
 the mean things of the world is that the glory shall 
redound to him, where it belongs. 

Before we shall be prepared for that glorious position
 we need to be straightened out in our heads. 
Crooked or distorted conceptions of God's character 
will have to be replaced by at least fairly accurate appreciation
 of the beauty and balance which inheres in 
God's being. We must learn to think of God and to 
deal with him not as though he were merely wisdom, 
or justice, or love, or power, singly; but we must come 
to considerable appreciation of the fact that all of 


these characteristics work in harmony and produce 
symmetry in God and in all creatures made in his 
image. In order to straighten us out while we are still 
in this desert condition God has given us the precepts 
of his Word. But in order to impress these lessons 
on our minds he supplements the precepts with practical
 experiences which demonstrate to us the necessity 
and desirability of perfect balance in character. 

When all the church is instructed and when the last 
one has graduated, having been found faithful even 
unto death and having been glorified with his Lord 
and Head, then shall be inaugurated the stupendous 
changes in earth's society which are mentioned in the 
fourth and fifth verses. 

GREAT SOCIAL CHANGES 

After God has finished dealing with the church, and 
when the merit of Christ's ransom sacrifice has been 
applied for the benefit of all mankind, when the new 
government is established with a view to blessing all 
the families of the earth, then "^very valley shall be 
exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made 
low". Retaining the figure of the earth, as representing
 human society, we observe that some portions of 
the earth are relatively- submerged. They are valleys 
and low places. These would picture the submerged 
portions of humanity, those \vho live below a reasonable
 and fair average of happiness. It is a fact that 
probably two-thirds of the present inhabitants of the 
earth live much below what we would term a reasonable
 average of comfort and blessing. The vast populations
 of China, of India, parts of Africa, and other 
places experience great difficulty in keeping alive 
physically, not to mention exercising their powers of 
mind in realms wnich are enjoyed by most of European
 and American peoples. These submerged valley 
classes of humanity are to be exalted; not exalted unduly
, nor to their injury, but raised from the position 
which they now occupy to a fair average opportunity 
for life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. The 
most benevolent economists that have ever lived never 
had so grand and comprehensive a view of blessing for 
the masses as is here intimated in these few words. 

But the other side of this question is also worthy of 
special note, "Every mountain and hill shall be made 
low." As we look back over human history, we see 
that certain limited classes of mankind have stood out 
very prominently in earth's affairs. They have occupied
 prominent positions in respect to their fellowmen
. They have stood out in human society very 
much as the mountain peaks and hills stand out. 
These shall be made low. We are not to understand 
that anyone will be humiliated unduly or unjustly, but 
rather that, in comparison with the balance of mankind
, they shall occupy a lower position than they do at 
present. Evidently God never intended one human 
being to worship another and some very fallible human
 beings have demanded and received considerable 
worship. It will not be respecting the opportunities 
for attaining perfection of mind, of body, of environment
, etc., that they will be debased, but merely in 
respect to this undue and inappropriate homage 
rendered by the humbler masses of mankind toward 
a limited dominating class. It shall be terminated, to 
the blessing and satisfaction of all 

The straightening out of heads, of minds, which is 
going on now in the church under the Lord's direction
 will be carried on in the Millennial age in har- 


346 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, P/i 


mony with the same principles now revealed to the 
church. Not only will the crooked conceptions of 
God be dispensed with in the minds of the people but 
also all crooked or perverse dealings and conduct shall 
be finally banished from the earth. Moreover, the 
rough places shall be made plain. Whoever now attempts
 to walk in the way of holiness finds many difficulties
. It is a narrow way and purposely stiewn 
with many things intended to discourage those not 
possessed of sufficient faith and love for the Lord to 
enable them to fulfill the Father's demands in such 
manner as to be worthy of the glorious reward 
promised to the church. But then the stones and 
stumbling blocks of ignorance and superstition shall 
be gathered out of the way. When the government 
shall be upon Christ's shoulders and he shall be the 
Prince of Peace righteousness shall become popular 
and unrighteousness visited with summary chastisement
 and correction. 

JEHOVAH'S GLORY REVEALED 

The glorious result of all this grand leveling process 
in human society, of all this making of the crooked 
things straight, of all this smoothing of the rough 
places for mankind, will be that God's glory, God's 
beauty and poise of character, shall be revealed to the 
minds and hearts of the now troubled, but then happy, 
residue of mankind. All flesh shall see that glory together
. By the end of the thousand years of Messiah's 
beneficent reign no more ignorance will remain concerning
 God's true character. The last vestige of that 
darkness which now covers the earth will have been 
dispelled by the glorious light of the Millennial day. 
"All shall know him, from the least of them unto the 
greatest of them." — Jeremiah 31 131, 34. 

"For the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it." While 
these few clauses foregoing contain promises of 
blessing first for the church and then for all mankind, 
fulfilling, in fact, the desire of all nations, though the 
things promised are so great as to stagger the imagination
, we have God's assurance that he will carry them 
out He signs his own name and endorses all that 
the prophet has uttered. This, like the signature on 
the check of a reliable business man, whose assets are 
practically inexhaustible, makes all that is written 
above it thoroughly dependable. All omnipotence is 
pledged to the fulfillment of that which he has purposed
 through Christ Jesus. 

We now look at the second voice or message. As 
the first message calls strongly upon our faith and constitutes
 something of a test to it, so the second message 
constitutes a test to hope. Throughout this Gospel age 
those who have read this wonderful prophecy of divine 
blessings have doubtless looked upon them as desirable
. The question would naturally arise in our 
minds: How long until these blessings are inaugurated
? It has now been 2600 and more years since 
the Lord gave these promises; are they ever to be fulfilled
? This second message seems to be given with 
a view to revealing to us the fact that the Father knew 
the time would seem long. 

The illustration is here given us of grass and flowers 
of the field. In the springtime they grow up and no 
special attention or account is taken of them. The 
hot spring wind* blows over them and they are 
withered. If the spring wind spares them, then in a 
few months they wither and die in the ordinary course 


of nature. Such would seem to be the case with humanity
. Generation after generation would rise up r 
wither, and die, to be replaced in turn by other generations
. To the casual observer it would seem as 
though God paid no more attention to humanity or 
their eternal interests than he does to the grass and 
flowers of the field. But as a double reassurance of 
the fulfillment of the things above promised Jehovah 
again affixes his name, or endorses his own check — 
"the word of our God shall stand forever," irrespective
 of the obstacles, real or imagined. 

CALL AND MESSAGE TO ZION 

Then comes the third voice or message, addressed, 
apparently, to the church class during the harvest 
period of this Gospel age : "O Zion, that bringest good 
tidings, get thee up into the high mountain". The 
four words in our English text, "that bringest good 
tidings," are all one word in Hebrew, which word 
means both evangelizer and evangelized. This description
 would fit no other class but the church, for 
she is evangelized by the Gospel and becomes an 
evangelizer or proclaimer of the Gospel to others. 
Three things are suggested to her: (1) "get thee up 
into the high mountain"; (2) "lift up thy voice"; (3) 
and a triple headed command, (a) "lift it up", (b) 
"fear not", (c) "say". Then the thing to be proclaimed
 is a three-word message: "Behold your God!" 

Zion, or the church class, is first to get up into the 
high mountain. As mountain in one of the foregoing 
verses refers to dominating classes, so here the mountain
, kingdom, or dominating class over mankind 
throughout the Millennial age will be the glorified 
Christ, head and body. During this harvest period 
those members of the church whose trial time was 
finished prior to 1878 got up into the mountain condition
 in a very real sense of that word, for they experienced
 the first resurrection to glory, honor, and 
immortality. But those this side the vail have been 
granted a clearer, sharper and more exalted understanding
 of what the kingdom class is, what the kingdom
 glories are, and the stipulation for membership 
therein, than has ever been granted the church before 
this time. With this vantage and with the exalted 
vision vouchsafed her from this high point of understanding
, she has been able, under the Lord's direction, 
to respond to the other commands given. Just as 
though one, desiring to address a large concourse of 
people, might go part way up the slope of a hillside, 
so the Lord's people during the last forty or fifty years 
have been enabled to see human affairs with a clearness
 not excelled, or even approached, by the wisest 
of the world. This clearness has been due merely to 
the fact that God's due time had arrived for the 
further unfolding of his Word. 

Very much the same picture is given us in Isaiah 
$2:y. There the church class is represented as being 
upon the mountain side and bringing good tidings, 
publishing peace, bringing good tidings of good things 
to come, and publishing salvation for the world. 
Never in all the history of the world has there been 
such a vast publishing work concerning the oncoming 
blessings of Messiah's kingdom as in the last fifty 
years. 


*What is here railed "the breath of the Lord" has reference to 
the Sirorro wind, whirh still arises in Asia Minor and is so hot as to 
destroy fresh herbage. 


November 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


347 


"BEHOLD YOUR GOD" 

But these blessings are not to be enjoyed selfishly by 
the church; for the next clause says that she is to lift 
up her voice with strength — she is to proclaim the 
message with energy. Who can doubt that this has 
been done? Then the exhortation is repeated, as 
though something had intervened to cause Zion to 
fear and to be abashed at her own temerity in thus addressing
 the nations of the earth: "Lift it up, be not 
afraid; say unto the cities of Judah [the denominations
 of Christendom] — Behold your God !" 

This is the Lord's message to Christendom: that 
the Lord has come and that he is about to take unto 
himself his great power and reign; that the unrest 
and disturbance now in the earth are but preliminary 
to the dissolution of man's puny works, and preparatory
 to the establishment of the reign of righteousness
, justice, love and truth. Those who share in 
the promulgation of this message "esteem the words 
of his mouth more than [their] necessary food". 
This message to nominal Zion by the true Zion is also 
mentioned in the picture given us in Isaiah 52:7: 
"that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!" 

These three last words of the ninth verse, "behold 
your God," constitute the pivot of the whole prophecy 
of Isaiah. After that the character of the book is 
more pronouncedly Messianic; as the fulfillment of 
these words constitutes the pivotal point in all human 
experience — first the initial parousia, then the apokalupsis
, or revealment, of Christ in earth's affairs. 

"Behold, the Lord God will come with strength, his 
arm ruling for him ; behold, his reward is with him, 
and his work before him." God has already manifested
 his wisdom toward mankind, though yet unappreciated
 by them ; likewise, he has already manifested
 his justice, in the arrangement established with 
fleshly Israel; he has also shown the world his love 
in his kindness toward us, the church, through Christ 
Jesus; but thus far God has not given any special 
revelation of his power. This is the characteristic 
most easily recognized by a sin-cursed and perverted 
race. And in harmony with the statement of this 
verse our Master tells us that "they shall see the Son 
of Man coming in the clouds of heaven with power 
and great glory". (Matthew 24:30) Christ Jesus, as 
the arm or powerful instrumentality of Jehovah, shall 
rule for God and accomplish all that the Father wishes 
to have done as to the blessing of mankind. Our 
Lord's reward will be with him for all those whose 
trial time has gone before — for the ancient worthies, 
for the great company, and for the little flock. But 
his work, his real work, to which the gathering of the 
church is but a subsidiary item, is the saving of "that 
which was lost". The great work of the Millennial 
age, "the restitution of all things spoken by the mouth 
of all the holy prophets since the world began" shall 
be accomplished. 

SHEEP NOT OF THIS FOLD 

During that time Christ Jesus shall deal with his 
"other sheep", which are not of this (Gospel-agechurch
) fold. There will be a three-fold work accomplished
 by Messiah in the next age: (1) "He 
shall feed his flock like a shepherd"; (2) "He shall 
gather the lambs with his arm"; (3) and "shall gently 
lead those that are with young". The care and solicitude
 manifested by the oriental shepherd is a matter 
well known even by people who have never visited 


that part of the world. Messiah shall feed his hungry 
flock of the Millennial age as a shepherd feeds his 
flock. The shepherd does not attempt to feed the 
sheep forcibly ; all he does is to lead the sheep to where 
the green pastures are. If the sheep is hungry he will 
avail himself of the privileges offered. If he is not 
hungry, he will not eat, and it would be folly to try to 
force him. The more we have of the Lord's spirit, 
the wiser will we be in these respects. We will not attempt
 to force divine favors upon anyone. All that 
we should desire to do is to call their attention to 
God's gracious provisions and to his goodness. If our 
auditors are hungry for the truth we will need to use 
no force or compulsion. If divine goodness and 
mercy are not attractive to a person, then no influence 
or eloquence of ours could be expected to be availing. 
The Master said that the sheep of the next age 
would hear his voice and be blessed by him. (John 
10:16) Many of those who will be brought forth from 
the tomb will have very weak characters. They will 
lack the strength and sturdiness manifested by many 
others, even among imperfect beings. Possibly they 
will have been born and have lived their previous span 
of life under conditions where they were pampered 
and which did not minister to the development of 
strength and fibre of character. Such weak ones 
shall be given every assistance necessary to enable 
them to obtain the blessings God designs them to have. 
As the shepherd sometimes carries the weak little 
lambs, not as a permanent arrangement but merely to 
enable them to keep up with a fair average of progress, 
so Christ will tenderly deal with all the needs of humanity
, with the end in view of full development and 
strength on their part 

NTJRTtTREBS OF THE FLOCK 

"Those that are with young" are, of course, the ewes 
of the flock, those directly intrusted with the imparting
 of elemental nourishment to the lambs. Such 
would seem to correspond with the position to be occupied
 by the ancient worthies in the Millennial kingdom
. The ancient worthies will be gently led in that 
they will have an advantageous standing during the 
whole thousand years. First, they will have the advantage
 of a better or prior resurrection, evidently 
coming forth from the tomb in perfection of body. 
(Hebrews 11:35) Then they will have the advantage 
of not being directly under Jehovah's imperial law, but 
under the martial law of Christ, under which only that 
degree of obedience which can be rendered by any individual
 will be required. It is true that the ancient 
worthies will have perfect bodies, but they will be inexperienced
 in the handling of them. Furthermore, 
they will find themselves in very trying circumstances. 
Part of the inheritance of the perfect man is to have a 
perfect environment; whereas the ancient worthies 
will be surrounded on every hand by imperfect beings 
and a measurably imperfect earth. The slightest departure
 from the lines of perfect conduct on the part 
of a creature directly subject to divine law would mean 
his death. The ancient worthies will have all the advantages
 to character of sacrificial work during the 
thousand years of human restoration and be exposed 
to very little of the dangers which would surround 
them, were it not for the new law covenant and its 
Mediator. These advantages will work together in 
such a way as to enable the ancient worthies to impart 
nourishment to the undeveloped masses of mankind. 


THE EMPTY TOMB; THE RISEN LORD 

— — December 21. — John 20:1-10; 21:15-19. — — 

the necessity for indubitable proofs of our lord's resurrection" — "put to death in flesh, made alive in spirit" — 
various accounts of the resurrection harmonized — our lories skillful method of reproof of the apostle peter — 
the primary qualification for eldership in the church of christ thus set forth. 

"He is risen, even as he said. 11 — Matthew 28:2. 



OT only was it necessary thai Christ should rise 
from the dead and become alive forevcrmorc 
in order to accomplish the great work planned 
of God, foretold in the prophets, and secured 
by our Lord's own sacrifice, but it was necessary
 also that indubitable proofs of his resurrection
 should be given to his disciples, for 
themselves and for us through them. The 
necessity for this lay in the fact that in the 
divine plan this Gospel age v\as marked out to 
be a faith age, for the ^election of a special 
little flock able, like father Abraham, to walk by faith and 
not by Mght. But faith, in order to be faith and not mere 
cndnlity, must needs have some rca-onable foundation upon 
which to build its superstructure; and it \va> to provide this 
foundation for faith that our Lord remained with his followers
 for forty days after his resurrection, before ascending 
to the Father. As the Evangelist declares : "He showed himself
 alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being 
seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining
 to the kingdom of God-" — Acts 1 13. 

The disciples realized that great events were transpiring, 
though how great and momentous was their character they 
but slightly comprehended. They knew that their hopes as 
respects an earthly kingdom, and their Master as an earthly 
lord, had failed. They had vague, indefinite hope that all he 
had said to them would in some manner have a fulfillment; 
but how or when or where w r as beyond their conception. 
They knew not that a change of dispensation was occurring; 
that the rejection of Israel after the flesh, and the calling of 
a new Israel after the spirit, was commenced; and that they 
themselves were among the first thus privileged to pass from 
the relationship of servants of God to that of sons. — John 
1:12. 

As yet they knew nothing about spiritual things, not having 
been begotten of the holy Spirit to sonship and to the knowledge
 of things to come. Jesus not yet having been glorified, 
their begetting of the holy Spirit was impossible until after 
his sacrifice for sins had been presented in the Most Holy 
and accepted of the Father. They knew not that the new 
kingdom was to be a spiritual one; and that Christ Jesus, its 
Head, must pass from fleshly conditions to spiritual conditions
 in this resurrection, even as he had foretold, saying, 
"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God". They 
had much to learn ; but they had a greater teacher and, as 
we see, his arrangements for their instruction were especially 
adapted to their conditions as natural men, to give them such 
foundation of knowledge and experience as would subsequently
 be helpful to them when they should be begotten of 
the holy Spirit at Pentecost. 

A GROSS BUT COMMON ERROR 

The Apostle Peter informs us thar Christ was "put to death 
in flesh and quickened [made alive] in spirit". His words 
being true, those who declare that our Lord arose from the 
dead a fleshly being at the time of his ascension are grossly 
in error. Indeed, it is evident that they have misconceived 
the entire subject of the atonement; for if our Lord as the 
man Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom, he could not be 
restored to manhood in a resurrection without annulling the 
ransom — taking back the price he had laid down for our sins. 
The Scriptural thought is that a* a man had sinned and had 
been sentenced to death, it was necessary that the Redeemer 
should become a man and should give hi? manhood as the 
ransom price for Adam and his race; and the Scriptural 
declaration is not that this ransom price was taken back, but 
that God raised our Lord from the dead a new creature of 
a new nature — not in flesh, not in human nature, but in spirit, 
a spirit being. — 1 Peter 3:18. 

The Apostle Paul agrees with Peter's testimony that Jesus 
was quickened in spirit, saying that Jesus was "declared to 
be the Son of God zvith poiver, according to the spirit of holiness
, by the resurrection from the dead". (Romans 1:4) 
Again, the same Apostle, describing the first resurrection, 
says in 1 Corinthians 15 :42-45 : "Thus also is the resurrection 
of the dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption
 ; it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown 
in weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown a natural [animal
] body, it is raised a spiritual body". Elsewhere the 
Apostle declares that the church's highest ambition is to be 
a partaker in this first resurrection, which he denominates 
"his resurrection*', the Christ resurrection, the resurrection 
to spirit conditions, which came first to our Lord Jesus, and 
in which all of his body, his bride, are to have a share. — 
Philippians 3:10; Revelation 20:6. 

There can be no question that in this description of the first 
resurrection the Apostle means us to understand his words 
just as they read. Whoever interpolates and adds to the 
'Word 01" God, and declares that it was sown a natural (animal
*) body and raised a natural (animal) body, and subsequently
 changed to a spiritual body, wrests the Scriptures to 
his own injury, to the darkening of his own understanding 
of the divine plan. In the same connection the Apostle declares
 that "the body which thou sowest is not quickened", 
but that in the resurrection "God giveth it a body as it ha^h 
pleased him, to every seed his own body" — in the resurrection, 
not after it. (1 Corinthians 15:35-38) If the church belongs 
to the spiritual seed, to which is to be given the spirit body 
in the resurrection, then unquestionably the Lord Jesus, the 
Head of the church, belongs to the same spiritual seed, and 
accordingly God gave him a spirit body in his resurrection. 
Likewise, in a succeeding verse the Apostle declares that at 
his resurrection our Lord became the second Adam. Then, 
contrasting this second Adam with the first, he says: "The 
first man Adam was made a living soul [an animal or earthly 
bring] ; the last Adam was made a quickening [life-giving] 
spirit [being]". — I Corinthians 15:38-45. 

PROOFS OF THE RESURRECTION NECESSARY 

The lessons to be learned by our Lord's immediate followers
 would necessarily be more difficult to them than to us; 
for we have been begotten of the holy Spirit, and are thereby 
enabled to appreciate spiritual things. To meet the exigency 
it was necessary that our Lord, the spirit being, be present 
with them for forty days, invisible, as spirit beings always 
are invisible to men, unless through the operation of a miracle. 
It was necessary for the disciples to know of his resurrection 
in order that they should have faith in his message, and act 
accordingly, as he desired. Yet, had he appeared to them in 
the glory of his spirit being, opening their eyes to see the 
supernatural splendor as he showed himself in vision to John 
on the isle of Patmos, his face as lightning, lii<= arms and his 
feet shining like molten brass in the furnace, the effect would 
have been to terrorize them. Their natural minds would have 
been unable to link such manifestations with their Lord, recently
 crucified. Neither would he have had opportunity 
under such conditions to give them instructions; for they 
would not have received these by reason of terror. 

It was necessary, therefore, that our Lord, a spirit being, 
manifest himself, as in the long past he had manifested himself
 to Abraham and Sarah, and as angels under divine commission
 had done on sundry occasions — as a man. (Genesis 
18 :i) He must lead their minds step by step, and their 
thoughts link by link, from the cross and the tomb to an 
appreciation of his present exaltation as a spirit being, respecting
 which he himself explained to them, contrasting it 
with his previous condition. (Matthew 28:18) This leading 
of their mind 5 ; must be such as would gradually force upon 
them the conviction that he was changed, that he was no 
Ionacr a man. and no longer subject to human conditions, as 
before his death. Having this thought in mind, we shall 
have no difficulty whatever in seeing how our Lord inculcated 
thc^e instructions during the forty days in his interviews with 
his followers. 

THE VARIOUS ACCOUNTS HARMONIZED 

To harmonize the several accounts of our Lord's resurrection
 we must suppose that the women charged with the work 
of embalming our Lord's body lived in different parts of the 
rity, and did not all arrive at the tomb at the same hour. 
Mary Magdalene arrived first; and finding the tomb empty, 
she hastened and first found Peter and afterward John, both 
of whom at once ran to the sepulcher. Mary herself probably 
returned more slowly to the same place, arriving there after 
they and the other women had gone. She had been weeping. 
Then she stooped down in order to look through the low door- 


348 


November 15, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


349 


way, as though to reassure herself that the tomb was empty. 
There she saw for the first time two angels in white, who 
inquired respecting her sorrow. The angels had doubtless 
been there when she was there before; but she had not seen 
them, because of their choosing not to "appear". Indeed, the 
Scriptures assure us, saying, "Are they not all ministering 
spirits, sent forth to minister to those who shall be heirs of 
salvation?" Again, 'The angel of the Lord encampcth round 
about them that fear him, and delivereth them:'— Hebrews 
1 :i4I Psalm 34:7. 

Doubtless holy angels had in charge not only our Lord's 
body, but also the interests of his bereaved followers; and 
now, and on other occasions some of these appeared. They 
appeared because they could not be seen without appearing 
except by a miracle. They appeared as young men, although 
they were not men but a::gels; not flesh, but spirit beings, 
assuming fleshly bodies for a time, in order that they might 
render the service necessary. In Luke 24.4 these same 
angels appearing as men are said to have been clothed in 
shining garment*. m> that they might not be understood to 
be men, but might at once be recognized as heavenly messenger
^ On the contrary, when our risen Lord as a quicken* 
jng spirit similarly "appeared" in the flesh, he did not appear 
in shining garments, but in ordinary apparel, assumed for the 
purpose, and in order that he might have the better opportunity
 for giving the instructions which his followers needed. 

OTJR LORD'S APPEARANCE AS A GARDENER 

The words of the angels to Mary would be calculated to 
assuage her grief; for they manifested no grief, and by their 
question implied that she had no ground for it. At this 
juncture something attracted Mary's attention; and on turning
 around she discovered another person near her, evidently 
in ordinary garments, whom she presumed to be a servant of 
Joseph of Arimathea, the owner of the garden — his gardener. 
She considered herself a trespasser to some extent; and 
assuming that our Lord's body was no longer wanted in the 
rich man's tomb, she inquired where he had been taken, that 
she might take the proper steps to care for his reinterment 

Then Jesus (for it was he who had "appeared" in the form 
of a gardener) spoke her name. At once she recognized the 
voice; and crying, "Master, Teacher!" she fell at his feet, 
grasping them as though fearful that somehow, if she let 
go, she might never again get the opportunity of touching his 
blessed person. Our Lord's words, "Touch me not," would 
more properly be translated, 'Cling not to me; for I have 
not yet ascended to my Father. I will be here a while yet, 
before I ascend. But your great opportunity for clinging to 
me and trusting in me will be after I have presented to the 
Father, and he has accepted, the great atonement for sins 
which I have just accomplished at Calvary.' Mary's touch 
could do our Lord no harm; for others touched him subsequently
, as the record shows. But our Lord would lead 
Mary's mind away from a mere clinging in the flesh to the 
higher relationship and intimacy of heart and of spirit which 
now would be possible, not only for her, but for all his followers
, not only then but ever since. 

Our Lord gave Mary a message, a service to perform; and 
so it is with all who love the Lord and seek him. They are 
not merely to enjoy him selfishly, but are given a commission 
in his service for the brethren. This seems as true today as 
ever. And by the way, this is the second instance in which 
our Lord ever addressed hi? disciples as brethren, with all 
that the word implies of fellowship and of all being the 
children of one Father. (Matthew 12:48) Now he emphasized
 this relationship by referring to the Father as his Father 
and their Father, his God and their God. How close this 
brings our Lord to us in fellowship and relationship, not by 
pulling him down, but by realizing him as highly exalted, far 
above angels, principalities and powers, and every name that 
is named! It lifts us up; and by faith it enables us to consider
 ourselves, as the Lord considers us, "brethren," prospective
 joint-heirs with him, who shall bye and bye be like 
him, our Elder Brother, sharing through his grace and assistance
 in his resurrection, and participating as joint-heirs in his 
kingdom— "if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be 
also glorified together". — Romans 8:17. 

OtTR LORD'S FIFTH MANIFE STATION 

We now come to our Lord's fifth manifestation of himself 
after his resurrection. Some would say the seventh, not 
counting, as we do, that our Lord's manifestation to Mary 
was the same referred to in Matthew as his appearance to 


"the women", and that his showing himself to Peter was in 
the walk to Emmaus. All of these manifestations, whether 
we count them four or six, occurred within the first eight 
days after our Lord's resurrection—on the two first days— 
and were in or near Jerusalem. What we designate the fifth 
appearance was in another part of the country altogether, in 
Galilee, and was probably at least two weeks later. No 'account
 is given of the doings of the apostles in the interimbut
 we can surmise that they probably waited in Jerusalem 
over the third and possibly over the fourth Sunday' after the 
resurrection, and were disappointed that our Lord made no 
iurther manifestation. They then remembered, perhaps the 
message which Jesus sent them by Mary, that he would meet 
them in Galilee. 

Having no further business in Jerusalem, and their Master 
having thus disappeared, "changed," so that although they believed
 him to be no longer dead, he was invisible to them 
except as he would appear for a few moments and talk to 
them and then disappear indefinitelv, thev were at a loss uh'it 
to do^and decided to return to their home countrv'on the 
boa or Galilee. More than this, as active men in the prime 
ot hie they must be doing. Several of them had been fishermen
. t Jesus had called them from their nets to be "fishers of 
men ; and they had left all to follow him. But now they 
could no longer follow- Everything was changed when he 
was changed, as far as they could perceive. They could no 
longer carry on the work; for what could they preach > How 
could they tell others of their hopes in a king who had been 
crucified, and whom, although he was risen, they could no 
onger see or point out to others? They had not yet received 
their new commission, nor were they quite ready for it 
. J ? .If, ^cresting for us to note that while our Lord was 
invisible to the disciples they were visible to him; that al 
of their plans, arrangements and doings were fully known to 
him; and that he was ready to take advantage of every cir^ 
cumstance and to make all things work together for their 
good. Thus by miraculous power exercised in some manner 
unknown to us he hindered fish from going into their netl 
that night. Not knowing the true situation, they were no 
doubt greatly disappointed, grieved, vexed, at their noor 
success and perhaps classed it as a part of the failure and 
tribulation which had in some respects followed them ever 
since they had espoused the cause of Jesus, And there is a 
lesson here for each and all of our Lord's people today We 
do not know what is for our highest welfare. Sometimes 
hose things which we crave and desire to grasp, considering 
them to be good might really be to our disadvantage 
Blessed are they who by faith are able to pierce the gloom 
of every trial and difficulty and perplexitv, and to realize 
that the Lord knoweth them that are his", and that he is 
causing all things to work together for their highest good 
bo it was with the apostles. Their disappointment became 
a channel of blessed instruction. 

In the dawn of the morning Jesus appeared to them as a 
man, standing on the seashore. He called out to them to 
inquire whether they had any fish, as though he would purchase
. They replied that they had toiled all night, but had 
caught nothing. The stranger then suggested that they cast 
the net on the other side of the ship. So humbled were they 
by their disappointment that they did not stop to argue the 
question and to declare that they were experienced fishermen 
and knew their business- They merely concluded that as 
they had been lifting and casting the net all night thev might 
just as well do it again, and thus demonstrate to the stranger 
that^ there were no fish in that vicinity. But, behold! immediately
 the net filled with great fish, so that these seven 
strong men were unable to draw it. and were obliged to drag 
it to the shore. 

BREAKFASTING WITH THE RISEN LORD 

Immediately the disciples grasped the thought that the 
stranger was Jesus, and none of them more quickly than the 
loving John. Devoted, impulsive Peter, whose heart still 
burned as he remembered our Lord's words, and perhaps as 
he recalled his own weaknesses in connection with our Lord's 
last night of earth-life, could not wait for the boat to take 
him ashore, but swam, apparently fearing lest the Master 
should disappear again before he would have another opportunity
 to converse with him. When the disciples reached the 
shore, they found, not only Jesus, but a fire and fish thereon 
already cooked. Here they had the lesson that under our 
Lord's care and supervision they could be either successful 
or unsuccessful in the fishing business; and that he had th« 


360 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PlUTSBURGH, PA. 


power, not only to give them fish in the ordinary way, but 
to provide cooked fish miraculously if it better served his 
purpose so to do. 

They breakfasted with Jesus; for they knew him, not by 
any marks of nails, but by the miracle which he had performed
. We read rather peculiarly: "Xone of them durst 
ask him, knowing it was the Lord". The conversation while 
they breakfasted is not recorded, the Evangelist coming 
directly to the important words which our Lord addressed 
to Peter, the senior and leader of this new fish-business 
partnership. Our Lord addressed Peter, not as he had been 
accustomed to do, but by his old name, "Simon, son of Jona," 
possibly as an intimation to Peter that during^ the last few 
days he had not manifested the rocklike qualities implied in 
his surname, and was now inclined to leave the work for the 
church and engage in secular business. 

The inquiry was most pointed. "Lovest thou me more than 
these?"— boats, nets, fishing tackle, etc. 'You started outto 
be my disciple; and now I ask you the question, In which 
place is your heart — with me in the service of the kingdom, 
or in the" fish business?' Peter's answer was prompt: "Lord, 
thou knowest that I love thee" Jesus then responded: "Feed 
my lambs," 'my little ones, instead of longer following the 
fish business'- "Then Jesus said the same thing the second 
time; and Peter made the same replv. Our Lord then 
answered: "Take care of my sheep" — 'give your attention, 
care, thought, to them rather than to these fishing implements, 
boats, etc' The third time Jesus asked Peter almost the 
same question, though using a different verb. Peter was 
grieved with this. It seemed to imply doubt on our Lord's 
part; and perhaps it reminded him the third time that he had 
denied his Lord three times, and that now the Master was 


requiring him three times to confess his love. It touched a 
very tender spot in Peter's heart and experiences; and we 
may be sure that it was not done by our Lord, even in this 
delicate manner, with a view merely to pain Peter, but with 
a view to his blessing, his profit. Peter's confession this time 
was still stronger: "Lord, thou knowest that I love thee" 
Jesus said to him: "Feed my sheep". With this third confession
 our Lord restored him fully as a bishop or shepherd. 

HOW LOVE FOR THE LORD IS MANIFESTED 

It is worthy of notice that our Lord's words on these 
three occasions were not exactly the same, although the 
Common Version so represents them. In the New Testament 
Greek two words are translated love, agapao and phileo. 
When our Lord said "West" in the first two inquiries, he 
used the former word, which signifies love in its strongest, 
purest and most disinterested form ; but in his third inquiry 
he used the other form, which signifies attachment, duty-love, 
the obligatory love such as relatives bear toward each other 
even when the other, deeper love is lacking. Peter in all of 
his answers uses the latter form of the word, thus asseverating
 his personal attachment and devotion to our Lord; but 
in view of recent experiences he refrained from claiming the 
highest love, for which our Lord inquired- This humility 
was an excellent sign, showing that Peter had learned *\ 
needed lesson and had ceased to boast, but rather feared his 
own weakness. Our Lord's use the third time of the word 
indicating duty-love grieved Peter especially because by 
changing the word the Master implied, 'Are you sure that 
you have even the duty-love, Peter?' This discrimination 
between these two words is borne out by other uses of them 
in the New Testament. 


THE TRAINING OF PETER AND JOHN 

December 28. — I John i :i-o. 


CONFESSION AND FORGIVENESS — NECESSITY OF REPENTANCE, OF PAITH IN THE ATONEMENT AND OF INDIVIDUAL ACCEPTANCE OF 
CHRIST AS OUR PERSONAL SAVIOR — MISTAKEN VIEWS OF SO-CALLED PERFECTIONISTS — HOW WE MAY KNOW WHETHER WE ARE 
WALKING IN THE LICHT — WHY IT IS IMPOSSIBLE FOR US TO AVOID SHORT-COMINCS AND FAULTS — CLEANSED BY THE BLOOD. 

"Ye shall be my witnesses." — Acts 1 :8. 


HE Apostle John's epistle is not addressed to 
unbelievers, unjustified persons, sinners in the 
ordinary sense of the word. On the contrary 
he is addressing the justified and sanctified in 
Christ Jesus; and he classes himself with these, 
using the plural pronoun "we". The frequent 
mistake of applying this and similar passages 
to sinners in general has been injurious in two 
particulars : 

(1) It has been injurious to the unregenerate 

in that it has given some the impression that 

there is no difference between the church and the world ; and 
that all alike have access to God in prayer and for the forgiveness
 of daily trespasses. It has thus hindered some from 
realizing the necessity of faith in the atonement, and from 
definitely entering into co\enant relationship with the Lord 
under the terms of the Grace Covenant. (Psalm 50:5) On 
the contrary all should be clearly informed of the fact th.it 
repentance and a particular, positive acceptance of Christ is 
their personal Savior are absolutely necessary before they can 
be "accepted in the tteloved", and treated as "sons of God" 
and enjoy the privilege* of this relationship — prayer, fellowprovidential
 oversight of 


th^ir 
dailv 


ship with God, divine care or 

affairs and interests, and the favor of forgiveness of 

trespasses through the merit of the great High Priest. 

(2) This oversight has had an injurious effect upon some 
Christians, who have gone to the extreme of claiming that 
they can never commit sin after their past sins have been 
graciously forgiven by the Lord and after they have entered 
into covenant relationship with him. Hence we have the 
very wrong views and teachings of so-called "perfectionists" 
who claim, not merely that they are rcckoncdlx perfect now, 
but that they are actually perfect in all their thoughts, words 
and deeds, deceiving themselves and laying themselves liable 
to many grievous errors, as the Apostle declares in this connection
.— Verses 8, 10. 

The Apostle's object in writing this epistle he clearly states, 
saying, "These things write we unto you, that your joy may 
be full". It is a noteworthy fact that the vast majority of 
Christians never experience the fullness of joy, peace and 


blessing that they might possess. Too many are content with 
simply diluted first principles of the doctrine of Christ; and, 
as the Apostle Paul declares, such are merely "babes" in 
Christ. (Hebrews 5:12-6:3) Of course they have a blessing
 in any relationship to the Lord, but they have not the 
fullness of joy which would be theirs if they progressed in 
grace and in knowledge "to the full stature of a man in 
Christ". The object of the Apostle's writing them was to 
stir up the pure minds of believers to an appreciation and 
enjoyment of their privileges, that thereby they might grow 
and develop. 

GROWTH OF FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD 

The Apostle John follows the example of our Lord Jesus 
in symbolizing truth and righteousness as Light, and sin and 
every evil way as so much of opposing Darkness. God 
himself thus considered would be the very perfection of 
lierht. "In him is no darkness," no sin, no imperfection. 
With this thought before the mind the Apostle points out 
that any growth of fellowship with God to which we ■ lay 
aspire must be along the lines of truth, goodness, purity: and 
that it would be sin for us to say to others or to imagine in 
our own hearts that we are walking with God and having 
fellowship with him. if our course in life is a dark, a sinful 
one. Such are merely deceiving themselves and others. They 
are not deceiving God; and they are not getting the blessings 
of those who do "walk in the light". 

Moreover, to the extent that we walk in the light and : n 
harmony and fellowship with God, we shall find ourselves in 
fellowship with all others who arc likeminded. So then, if 
we do not "love the brethren, whom we have seen," so as to 
be able to have fellowship and spiritual pleasure with them, 
it would be an indication that we are not wholly in harmony 
and fellowship with God. But who are the "brethren"? Our 
Lord tells us that not all who profess his name are true or 
full brethren. He says : "Not everyone that saith unto me, 
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven [be recognized
 as his brethren and joint-heirs] ; but he that doeth the 
will of my Father which is in heaven". We thus see that it 
is by our deeds and not merely by our professions that we 


NOVKMBKR 15. I9I<J 


THE WATCH TOWER 


*51 


are accepted of our Lord, who again says: "Who are my 
brethren?. . . .Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which 
is in heaven, the same is my brother-"— Matthew 7:21; 12:50. 
So then we are not to anticipate "fellowship" with all who 
merely name the name of Christ as a proof of their fellowship
 with the Father. We are to anticipate this true fellowship
 with those who are earnestly seeking to do the Father's 
will, to serve his cause, and to exemplify the instructions of 
his Word in their deeds as well as in their professions. Between
 all such there must he, whether hidden or open, a bond 
of fellowship and union. That bond is the one faith and the 
one baptism into the one Lord. 

CLEANSED BY THE BLOOD 

But while this fellowship between us and our Lord and all 
who have his spirit is based upon our walking in the light, 
our following in his footsteps to the extent of our ability, 
nevertheless it does not imply absolute freedom from the 
imperfection of sin, although under the Gospel age arrangement
 nothing is charged up to us as sin except in proportion 
as it has been wilfully done. Nevertheless because of the 
manifold temptations and the weaknesses of our flesh, the 
result of inherited predisposition toward sin, it is impossible 
for us to avoid shortcomings and faults. These may be 
properly termed sins, as in this lesson ; for "sin is a transgression
 of the law", however unintentional. But during this 
Gospel age the divine arrangement on behalf of the Lord's 
people is that these unintentional faults and short-comings 
need not be charged up against us as sins, but instead may 
be cleansed away upon our application to the great High 
Priest, through the merit of the precious blood. Thus it is 
that the blood of Jesus Christ our Lord cleanseth us from all 
sin, keeps us clean from sin, if realizing our imperfections 
we continually make application for forgiveness.- — Romans 
7:i7~20. 

Further on in this epistle the Apostle uses the word "sin" 
in a different sense from the above, saying (3:6-9), "Whosoever
 abidcth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath 

not seen him nor Teven] known him He that committeth 

sin is of the devil. .. .Whosoever is begotten of God doth 
not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot 
sin because he is begotten of God." Again he says (5:18): 
"We know that whosoever is begotten of God sinneth not; 
but he that is begotten of God keepcth himself, and the wicked 
one toucheth him not". 

In these passages the Apostle uses the word "sin" in its 
full or absolute sense, meaning wilful sin, deliberate sin, intentional
 sin, sins that are not merely shortcomings and 
faults, due largely or wholly to the imperfections of the flesh, 
inherited from our ancestors. No one, the Apostle assures 
us, who has been begotten of the spirit of the Lord, the spirit 
of holiness and truth, could have any sympathy with sin so 
as to engage therein wilfully, knowingly and intentionally. 
All who so love sin and wilfully do it, and approve of it after 


they have a knowledge of the truth, are children of darkness 
who love darkness and who thus show that they have the 
spirit or disposition of Satan.— Romans 6:12-16. 

THE PEOPER COURSE OT FAITH AND CONDUCT 

Let us return to the consideration of the other use of the 
word "sin'' as found in today's lesson, applying the term to 
the faults and imperfections against which God's people are 
zealously striving, which they are seeking to stamp out of 
their mortal bodies, and against which they are continually 
fighting a good fight and coming off conquerors and more 
than conquerors, through him who loved us and bought us 
with his precious blood. The Apostle intimates that there 
is danger that some will go to the extreme of denying that 
they have any faults, and thus deceive themselves and get 
into a snare of the adversary. 

It may be asked, 'What difference can it make, if they are 
seeking to live godly, whether they claim to live perfectly 
or admit that they are imperfect and apply continually for 
cleansing through the precious blood?' We reply that it 
makes a great difference. Only as we confess our sins can 
they be forgiven. Consequently those who deny that they 
have any imperfections, faults, sins, have a great load of 
these uncancelled, unforgiven, charged up against them; and 
because of this they would be accounted unworthy to be taken 
further along in the path of light, under the lead of the holy 
Spirit, into the heights and depths and lengths and breadths 
of the love and the wisdom of God, revealed in his Word as 
meat in due season for the household of faith. Thus we see 
that there is but one proper course of faith and conduct in 
which we may have a complete fellowship with the Lord. 
Those who take any other course are making God a liar; 
and he will not fellowship with them, but will leave them to 
the darkness of their own way. Can we wonder then that 
so many are in darkness and lack evidences of fellowship with 
God, when we see how few confess their faults and seek to 
overcome them and to be cleansed in the only way of divine 
appointment? 

These things are not written to cultivate in us the thought 
that we may sin with impunity, and be overtaken with faults 
through carelessness and inattention to the divine Word, and 
then go to the Lord for forgiveness. Quite to the contrary, 
these assurances of divine favor and willingness to forgive 
are designed to have upon our hearts a mellowing influence 
which will make us all the more careful to avoid sin and to 
maintain fellowship with him who is the perfection of light 
and holiness. "These things are written that we sin not", 
that we become not boastful of self, self-righteous, self-justified
, and thus abominable in the Lord's sight; but that, fleeing 
from our weaknesses and imperfections, we may lay hold 
upon the grace of God in Christ for their forgiveness and 
for grace and strength increasingly to fight a good fight 
against sin. 

MARGOLIS' TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT: 

Recent Hebrew translation (cloth) 1.50 

WEYMOUTH'S TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT, 

pocket size (leather) 2.50 

WEYMOUTH'S TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

pocket size (cloth) 1.35 

WEYMOUTH'S TRANSLATION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 

larger (cloth) 2.00 

BIBLE TALKS TN SIMPLE LANGUAGE: Bible Stories in 
simple, but n«t childish lan?ua<;e; 624 pa^es. 2">0 Illustrations
: eioth sides, leather bad; and corners, gilt eiK'es 1 50 

YOUNG'S ANALYTICAL CONCORDANCE (cloth) 6.50 

STRONG'S EXHAUSTIVE CONCORDANCE (buckram) . 650 

BAGSTER POCKET CONCORDANCE (leather) 1.25 

SMITH'S BIBLE DICTIONARY 1.25 

INTERNATIONAL BIBLE DICTIONARY 2 25 


CHARTS (blue prints, soft cloth) : 

Plan of the A^res, 5 ft. $2.00 ; 3 ft 2.75 

Chronology of the Bible, 8 ft 2.75 

Tabernacle of the Wilderness, 8 ft 2.75 

CHARTS (on stiff cloth): 

Ezekiel's Temple, •> ft., colored *■ 2.00 

Revelation, 6 ft. L blue print 2.00 

Scripture Text Postcar Is, per dozen 15 

Binders for the WATCH TOWER spring back, (hold 1 yr.) . . .80 

CROSS AND CROWN PINS (-old with red enamel): 

*&", No- 1 (l^'iy). S'J- - f^nU. each 1.50 

14". No. 3 (-en"'), No 4 dad; ), each 1 25 

Vow Bookmarks ^i!kL each 05 

Booklets (on HeU. Our Lord'* Return. Spiritism. Tabernacle 
Shadows, Three Chart Tall.s. Battle in Ecclesiastical 
Heavens), also Berean Quest 1. r; Booklets on each volume 
of SCRIPTURE STUDIES, each 15 

MOTTO CARDS f spiritual texts suitable for hanging on wall): 

Packet MA (asserted) 50 

Packet MB (assorte 1 ) .... I- 00 

Packet MC (aborted) 150 

Packet MD (assorted) 2.00 

1919 YEAR MOTTOES: See ann< uncement in Dec. 1st Tower. 

THE WATCH TOWER. 16 pa-es, Uwiee monthly) per year.. 1.00 
Bound Watch Tower Reprints, seven volumes, covering 40 

years (cloth), per set 14.00 

THE GOLDEN AGE, 32 pages, (every other week) per year. . . 1.50 

OTHEB BIBLE STUDY HELPS FOB WHICH WE ACT MERELY 

AS PURCHASING AGENTS 
LEETER'S TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT: 

Standard Translation used by English-reading Hebrewa 

(cloth, each, postpaid 3-00 


I. B. S. A. BE REAN BI BLE STUDIES 

QUESTIONS FROM 

MANUAL ON SERIES SIXTH 

"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

Study XIII— "Parental Obligations of the New 

Creation'* 

WNk of Dec. 7 Q. 15-22 Wook of Dec. 21 Q. 30-39 

Weak of Doc. 14 Q. 23-29 Week of Doc. 28 Q. 40-4€ 

Qeosrivn MaauaU m Vol. VI, Stedie* ia tba ScriotWM, 11c each, M*t»*ia. 


BIBLES AND BIBLE STUDY HELPS 


The rapidly and continuously rising costs of production in all kinds of printed matter again necessitate the advance of our price* 
about twenty-five percent. To our subscribers we need hardly ret«rate that none of the Society's activities are conducted for profit, 
but that all of our publications are issued at very low prices, intenled to cover only actual cost. It will be noted that the prices ar« 
about one hundred percent more than they were five years ago. But it is a fact that many supplies indispensable to the printing trade 
have increased in price from two hundred to seven hundred percent. Several of the items ^sted on this page, either our own or handled 
by us, we have been actually selling below cost for some months. The prices mentioned below are retail; wholesale prices in lota of 
fifty volumes or more can be secured on application; rates to colporteurs by application to the Society's colporteur department. 

The fluctuating rates of exchange at this time make it unadvisable to attempt giving prices in other than local terms. Friends 
can either deal with our foreign branches or apply for postal money orders in the values mentioned below. 

Watch Tower Biblk & Tract Socikty, 1^4- Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y.„ U. S. A. 
FOREIGN AGENCIES: British Branch: 34 Craven Terrace, Lancalter Gate, London W. 2; Australasian Branch: 495 Collins St Mel 
bourne, Australia, South African Branch: 123 Plein St., Cape Town. South Africa 


I. B. S. A. BIBLES form The leather bound and fine India paper editions formerly 

These Bibles are specially published for the use of the International lssued are P erma «ently out of stock. 
Bible Students ami become more and more indispensable as familiarity SERIES I, "The Divine Plan of the Ages" giving outline of the 

with their use is gained The text is the familiar Common Version; divine plan revealed in the Bible relating to man's redemption and 

their excellence, therefore, lies chiefly in the extraordinary helps, restitution: 350 pages, plus indexes and appendixes 75c Masamost
 of which are not found in any other Bible on earth. In each zine edition 1,5c. Also procurable in Arabic Armenian Dano-Norof
 the nve editions listed below there are 542 pages of our own helps, wegian, French, German, Greek, Hollandish Hungarian Ifilian Polpeculiarly
 valuable to Bible Students at this time in the world's ish, Roumanian, Slovak, Spanish Swedish' and Ukrainian- regular 

history. Besides the special helps, mentioned above and elaborated cloth style, price uniform with English. ' ' ° 

below, three of the editions contain Bagster's Bible Students helps, ^ 

including an alphabetical list of proper names, and Baxter's Con- MARIES II, The Time is at Hand,** treats of the manner and 

cordaiue and Maps — a Total of 186 pages. time of the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible Testimony 

I B. S. A Bibles are all printed with great care on thin rice " n thls subject: 360 pages, 75c. Obtainable in Dano-Norwegian. 

paper, commonly called India paper. We not only supply these imnish - German. Polish, and Swedish. 

Bibles at cost price, but because of large quantities ordered at a SFRIES IIT "Thv tt:injrrinm n An . A »» „„.. •* v - , • . 

time, we are enabled to secure a cost price far lower than any other mark events connectel S?h ■ -?h ? ' .^aiders prophecies which 

Bibles of the same quality and size anywhere on the market. So £ , he e \^ u ^ [°IZ the eatahliihtiiT^f t^ 6 v"n ' lh ? * 0T f c » u ™ 

well do these five special editions cover the average requirements ° so , a ^ a Yn S a char)trr on th» r«, pL ™m If™. kl ? sdom; . lt 

of Bible Students that we make no effort to carry others in stock. eorroborat on Sfrer^ **£ ' sh " wm 5 v lU 

The 542 pages of Berean Bible Teachers' Manual mentioned .1.0 in Sn^ 
above comprise the following items: ' " Cima "> ruiwu > » ua ^weaisn. 

Part I. WATCH TOWER COMMENTARY: Textual comments, luUo^o! Ve^V^ 

from Genesis to Revelation, with references to THE WATCH TOWER, h e human nanac^f offered L % \ m fii L , * ro ^J" » nd } h ** »" of 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and others of our publications. by ^^'00^ , ! va b , eleS8 /° V**} , th ? * m P redlcted 

showing the page where the text is more fully discussed and elabor- Lord's ^r a 'nrolc, o M, tK P6 '' " ™? ? xte ° d ^ re 7 atl * e -°? 0ur 

•ted. The terse, pithy comments are often sufficient to shed the de- l" 656 ?ajres 85c A ,?ftn! W.S' %** °' Ze « h "« h * 4: 

sired light on an obscure text but if fuller information is needed, ^ n ^d 1^^° Als ° ,n ^""Norwegian, Finnish, Greek, Gerit
 is easy to turn to the completer treatise cited. 481 pages. ' 

Part II, INSTRUCTORS' GUIDE TEXTS: This is a topical ar- : m ^f^}f? ^:Jll h \^ tonem ^ nt Betwe « n <*<"* and Man," treats an all 

rangement of Bible subjects specially convenient for those who have ^J£* I ! 2 1 the ^ eater .around which all the features of 

opportunity for teaching others the divine plan of the ages. Its t ;I ! n g ^l e J Q e ,I° ?' „ . 8 n? tc deserves lhe most careful '-^sideraTarious
 topics are arranged under distinct headings and the texts f„" Jfn m ™ e Christians: 618 P»ges, 85c. Procurable 

appearing upon the subjects are collated. It is in condensed form, 1IKew ^e in Dano-Norwegian, Finnish, German, Greek, and Swedish. 
consisting of 18 pages, solid matter. SERIES VI, "The New Creation/' deals with the creative week 

Part III, BEREAN TOPICAL INDEX: This index is alphabeti- (Genesis 1, 2), and with the church, God's new creation. It excally
 arranged and presents a large variety of subjects, showing ref- amines the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations, 

erences to the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, and others of bur f° d hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of 

publications treating the subjects. This feature covers 38 pages. the body of Christ : 730 pages, 85c. Supplied also in Dano-NorPart
 IV, DIFFICULT TEXTS EXPLAINED and SPURIOUS PAS- wegian ' Flnn1 ^ German, and Swedish. 
SAGES NOTED: Specially difficult texts are listed and references No foreign editions in the pocket size, 

given showing where they are treated in. our publications. Following 

this is a full list of various interpolations and passages of the Scrip- DAILY HEAVENLY MANNA 

tnres not in the oldest Greek MS. 13 pages. 

This book combines the features of a daily Bible text, with printed 

DESCRIPTION AND PRICES comments thereon, with a birthday and autograph record of one'* 

friends. Its value increases in proportion to the number of autoSmaller
 size, Minion type, like this: graphs secured. It is printed on bond paper, every alternate leaf 

. ,. . - being blank ruled: dark blue cloth, gold embossed, 5"x6H\ English* 

H Behold, my servants shall stag tot Dano-Norwegian, German, Polish, and Swedish 75c Genuine purple 

joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow Morocco, gold edges, English, Dano-Norwegian, German Polish, and 

Swedish, $2.00. ' 

No. 1918: price $3.00, postage prepaid. It is small and light; Vest Pocket Edition, 2Vx5V 4 ", green cloth, English only 65c 

size 4% x6?i". Vest Pocket, black leather, gold stamped, English only, 90c. 
It has red under gold edges, divinity circuit (i. e„ flexible, overhanging
 cover), "French" seal binding— in reality good sheepskin. THE EMPHATIC DIAGLOTT 
No. 1919: price $3.50, postage prepaid. The same Bible; the T t,;<, ™„ „.,„„,, , , ....,, , 

same every way except the addition of Bagster's Helps CONCORD- k ♦»!? c ? * ♦ ^l WOrk hafJ ? eei \ Published in large quantities 

ANCE, etc., making this book a trifle thicker. ' ^^^ linn' 3 Society - . B * f ?, re . w « ! p, "S h " ed lh £ c ?Py"ght it was sold at 

w« laoft. „■ A ** -n . ■ , „«. . > . * 500 P er c °Py m half father binding. Probably no edition of the 

No. 1928. price $4.o0 postage prepaid This is the same book ex- New Testament has done more to enable non-Greek-reading students 

actly as .No. 1918, except that it has genuine Morocco binding, leather to grasp the meaning of the original text. Besides the Greek text 

t _ there is an interlinear word-for-word translation under each line, and 

Larger size, Ionic type, self-pronouncing, like this: also an arranged translation in a separate column. It is built on the 

9(\ T-hrvni* TO ilt npHnrni th^ trnth Griesbach rescension, with footnotes showing variations in the Alex- 

* t-/ u ^tpertorni tne trtlta andrmn and Vatican No. 1209 texts— two of the oldest MSS. It i» 

to Jacob, and the mercy to A Dra- printed on thin paper, in good "French" seal binding, flush covers, 

red under gold edges, $2.50 
No. 1939: price $4.00, postage prepaid. This book has the same 
binding and contents as No. 1919, but having the coarser print, is a CREATION DRAMA SCENARIOS 

little larger book. Size, 5% w x7%'\ 

No. 1959: price $5.50, postage prepaid. This is the same book as f . Z^^J'IJ^ f^ ^^""/L^ Photo-Drama of CrwNo
. 1939, except that it has an excellent Morocco binding, is calf i\ on * re . 8U P£ he ?. * n l A W0 bindings and three styles, red cloth (re4 

lined and silk sewed e'Jges), in English, Armenian, Dano-Norwegian, Finnish, German, 

Greek, Italian, Polish, Slovak, Spanish, Russian, and Swedish, 85c; 

The sale of these Bibles is not restricted to WATCH TOWER De Luxe Maroon cloth, embossed in four colors, gold edges, English 

subscribers. Remit with order. We can secure such prices only by onlv, $1.25; paper bound edition in English, Armenian, Dano-Norpaying
 apot cash and must sell on the same terms. Anyone ordering wegian, Finnish, German, Greek, Italian, Polish, Slovak, Russian, and 

patent index on any of these Bibles should so state and should Swedish, 35o 
add 50c to the price MISCELLANEOUS ITEMS 

STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES „ , n . , . t . , , A . 

Hymns of Dawn, with music, (green cloth) $ .45 

These STUDIES are recommended to students as veritable Bible Hymns of Dawn, with music, (black keratol cloth) 75 

keys, discussing topically every vital doctrine of the Bible More Hymns of Dawn, without music, pocket size, (flexible) 15 

than eleven million copies are in circulation, in nineteen languages. Angelophone Hymnals, with music, (cloth) 10 

Prices are net postpaid, and barely cover cost of production and Angelophone Hymnals, with muBic, (paper) 05 

handling. Two sizes are issued (in English only) : the regular Ma- Poems of Dawn (keratol) 70 

roon cloth, gold stamped edition on dull finish paper (size 5"x7%"), Poems of Dawn (leather) 1.00 

and the Maroon cloth pocket edition on thin paper (size 4"x 6%") ; Pastor Russell's Sermons, bound (green cloth) 65 

both sizes are printed from the same plates, the difference being in Bible Students' Manual (keratol) T l.OO 

the margins; both sizes are provided with an appendix of catechistic Bible Students' Manual (leather) 1.80 

questions for convenient class use. Prices for both editions are uni- (Concluded on preceding page) 

ABOVE PRICES EFFECTIVE NOVEMBER 15, 1919 




r^s 


Views from The Watch Tower 355 

All Gentiles in Distress 355 

Voices from Jewry 356 

Churchianity's Sincerity Questioned 356 

Trend toward Islam 357 

Anglican-Non-Confonnist Agreements 358 

Treasures in Heaven 359 

Fame — Good Name 360 

Power and Influence 361 

Friends 362 

The Joys of Life 363 

Tests Essential 363 

A Word in Explanation 364 

Questions and Answers 365 

Peter Preaches at Pentecost 366 

r "I will stand -upon my watch, and will set my foot upon the 
Tower, and will uatch to see what He wtll say unto me, and 
what answey I shall make to them that oppose me."— Had. 2.1. 


S^^ 


'£;;,-.- 


W.tB.CT.S. 



Upon the earth distress of nations with perplexity; the se* and the waves (the restless, discontented) roaring ; men's hi^arta falling them for fear and for looting 
lo the things coming upon the earth (society): for the powers of the heavenfl (ecclestasticism) a hail be Bhanen. When ye see these things begin i to oome to pass, 

Umd 4bow that the Kingdom of God is at hand. Look up, lift up your heads, rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; LtUe 21:25-31 


THIS JOURNAL. AND ITS SACRED MISSION 


THIS Journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension,** DOw" befog 
presented in ail parts of the civilized world by the Watch Towbr Bible & Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1881, "For the Pro- 
■lotion of Christian Knowledge." It not only serves as a class room where Bible Students may meet in the study of the Divine Word, 
but also as a channel of communication through which they may jc reached with announcements of the Society's Conventions and of 
the coming of its traveling representatives styied "Pilgrims," and refreshed with reports of its Conventions. 

Our "Bert*aii Lesbuns" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and 
eery helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Yerbi Dei Minister (V.D.M.), which, 
translated into English, is Minuter of the Divine Word. Our treatment of the International S. S. Lessons is specially for the oldei 
Bible Students and Teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This .Journal stands (irmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated— 
Redemption through the precious blood of "the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a Runaam'ia. corresponding price, a substitute] for 
til." (1 Pet. 1:11); 1 Tim. 2 :G. ) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Cor. 3 .11-15 ; 2 Pet 
1:5-11) of the Word of God, its further mission is to — "Make all See what is the fellowship of ttu* Mystery which . . . has been 
hid in God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of God" — "which in other Age* 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed." — Eph. 3 :5-9, 10. 

It stand*; free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest 
objection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It Is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
oath spoken — according to the Divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not dogmatical, but confident; for we 
tnow whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in 
3is service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear In its columns must be according to our judgment of 
His good pleasure, the teaching of His Word, for the upbuilding of His people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but 
orge our readers to prove all its utterances by the Infallible Word to which reference is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEA RLY TEACH 

That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God" — peculiarly "His workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout
 the Gospel Age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of His Temple, through which, 
when finished, God's blessing shall come "to all people," and they find access to Him. — 1 Cor. 3 :16, 17 : Eph. 2 :20-22 ■ Gen. 
28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing of eonsecrated believers in Christ's Atonement for sin, progresses; and when the 
last of these "living stones," "Elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the First Resurrection ; and the Temple shall be filled with His glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout
 the Millennium. — Rev. 15 :5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies In the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace ot God, tasted death tor ever* 
man," "a Ransom for all," and will be "the true Light which llghteth every man that cometh into the world" "in due time"— 
Heb. 2 :9 ; John 1 :9 ; 1 Tim. 2 :5, 6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see Him as He is," be "partaker of the Divine nature," and share Hii 
glory as His joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace) 
to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next Age. — Eph. 4 :12 ; Matt. 24 :14 ; Rev. 1:6; 20 :& 

that the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— 
the Restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Cedeemer and His glorified 
Church— when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3 :19-23 ; Isa. 35. 


PUBLISHED BY 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

119 FEDERAL STREET, PITTSBURGH, PA., U. S. A. 

The Watch Tower Editorial Committee: 
This ournal is published under the supervision of an Editorial Committee 
at least three of whom have read and approved as truth each and every 
article appearing in these colums. The names of the Editorial Committee 
are: J. F. Rut-herford, W. E. Van Ambi-rgh, F. H, RoBrsoN, Geo. H. 
Fisher, W . E. Page. 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE $I.OO IN ADVANCE. 
SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED 

T«rm* to th« Lord's Poor a* follow*— All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay for this 
Journal, will be supplied Fr*« if they send a Postal Card each May stating 
their case and requesting its continuance. We are not only willing, but anx 
ions, that all such be on our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc 

NOTICE TO ALL TOWER SUBSCRIBERS— Please remember that as 
a rule we no longer send a card of acknowledgment for a renewal or for a 
new subscription. Receipt and entry of renewal are indicated within a 
month by change in date of expiration of the subscription on the Tower 
wrapper. 

When requesting change of address, please give old address as well as 
new. This is very important, saving us much time and unnecessary correspondence
. 

SNTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT PITTSBURGH, PA., POSTOFFICE 
UNDER THE ACT OF MARCH 3RD, 1879. 

NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING OF THE SHAREHOLDERS OF 
THE WATCH TOWEB BIBLE AND TBACT SOCIETY 

Notice is hereby given that the annual meeting of the 
shareholders of the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society 
will be held at Carnegie Hall (Ohio Street, Northside), City 
of Pittsburgh, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, on the 3rd 
day of January, 1920, at 10 o'clock in the forenoon, for the 
purpose of electing directors and officers for the ensuing 
year, and for the transaction of such other business as may 
properly come before said meeting. 

W. E. Van Amburch Secretary 


GERMAN WATCH TOWEB TRANSLATIONS 
As is the case with other foreign-language editions of The 
Watch Tower, it has been found best to handle the German 
translation through a separate office. Accordingly, after a 
period of suspension, the German Watch Tower is procurable
 for $1.00 per year — sixteen pages, twice monthly. English 
readers will doubtless perform a service by calling this fact 
to the attention of German reading friends. Address: Deh 
Wachtturm, 95 Hicks St., Brooklyn, N. Y., to which point 
all German subscriptions, remittances, etc., should be sent. 

SOUTHERN GENERAL CONVENTION 

For some time the friends in the central Southern states 
have been anxious to hold a General Convention. After 
canvassing the situation carefully, Charlotte, N. C, has been 
selected. The Convention will continue for four days, beginning
 on Christmas day and ending Sunday, December 28th. 
Brother Rutherford will be present and several other Pilgrims
, including some of the released brethren, Charlotte 
is quite central to a large territory in the middle South. A 
good hall has been secured and hotel and boarding accomodations
 are easily obtained at reasonable rates. We hope 
that a large number of the friends will find it convenient .0 
be present at this Convention. Address communications to 
Mrs. James H. Ingram, 11 Statesville Ave., Charlotte, N. C 

LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

There will be a local Convention at Norfolk, Va., December 
20, 21. Brother Rutherford will address the friends Sunday 
morning and the public Sunday afternoon. Other speakers 
of ability will be present also. Please communicate with Mr. 
G. M. Kitzmiller, 114 W. 26th St., Norfolk, Va. 

A local Convention will be held at Everett, Wash., January 
1-4. Two or more Pilgrim brethren will serve at this Convention
 and no doubt a goodly number of friends from the 
Puget Sound territory will attend. 


PILGRIM SERVICE FOR COLORED FRIENDS 

We have had many requests from the colored brethren 
from various parts of the country requesting Pilgrim service. 
In order to arrange for such service in an orderly way as 
we do for the white brethren, we request that all colored 
classes write us, answering as many of the questions found 
in the May 1st Tower relative to Pilgrim work as^ possible. 
Also we would like to hear from those who are interested 
and who could entertain Pilgrims and arrange for meetings 
even though they do not have organized classes. Please 
address all communications to the Watch Tower Bible & 
Tract Society, c/o Pilgrim Department 


BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 
After the close of the hymn the Bethel family listens 
to the reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord", then joins in 
prayer. At the breakfast table the Manna text is considered
. Hymns for January follow: (1) 238; (2) 191; (3) 
323 (4) 136; (5) 134; (6) 8; (7) 130; (8) 95; <9) 6; 
(10) 322; (11) 195; (12) 267; (13) 194; (14) 13; (15) 
166; (16) 298; (17) 209; (18) 277; (19) 296; (20) 112; 
(21) 279; (22) 163; (23) 180; (24) 145; (25) 186; (26) 
146; (27) 198; (28) 160; (29) 89; (30) 69; (31) 114. 




Vol. xl 


r Ch 

ANH HEl?ALD OF CHRIST^ PRESENCE 

December 1, 1919 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 

"All kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him." — Revelation 1:7. 


No. 83 



EVER in its history has the human race 
faced more numerous or more weighty 
problems than it does today. Unrest and 
antagonism prevail in all sections of the 
world, producing and forcing to the front 
a maze of intricate problems and questions
, social, moral and religious, agricultural
, commercial and political, individual, 
racial and national, local, continental and 
universal. We dare not hope that naught but sunshine 
awaits us, for the peoples of the earth are already in 
the dark cloud which for a time will obscure the rays 
of the Sun of Righteousness as it is about to break in 
the dawn of the golden age, the Millennial dawn of 
man's day of blessing, peace and happiness. 

Our Lord gave us the parable of the rich man and 
Lazarus to illustrate the removal of his favor from the 
Jewish nation and its bestowal on the thereto unfavored
 Gentile peoples. The Jews, who were rich in 
advantage every way (Romans 3:1), spurned the 
Messiah at his first advent and were, therefore, cut off 
from the special advantages which had been theirs — 
they died to its privileges and entered into the torments 
of their 1845-year counterpart or "double" (Isaiah 
40:2), the period of the dispersion. The beggar died 
too; many of the Gentiles entered into a covenant to 
be dead with Christ (Ephesians 3:2); they were 
carried by the apostles, as the Lord's messengers or 
angels, into Abraham's bosom, the place of divine 
favor. For more than eighteen centuries a "great 
gulf" was fixed between Jew and Gentile, especially 
nominally Christian Gentiles. 

But, as has often been explained in these columns, 
this state of affairs was not tc proceed indefinitely. 
Fleshly Israel's period of punishment and blindness 
was to last only "until the fulness of the Gentiles be 
come in". (Romans 11 125) Then Israel was to be recovered
 from his blindness. Divine favor on the Zionist
 movement can be seen by all who have faith in 
God's Word. The fact that it is meeting with opposition
 frcm powerful Gentile politicians may be looked 
upon as additional confirmation of the fact that it has 
divine approval, now that the time of God's disfavor 
upon Jewry has passed. 

AJLL GENTILES IN DISTRESS 

The Gentile nations who have had the opportunity 
afforded by the Gospel and who have had the responsibilities
 of earthly dominion, are now in process of 
humiliation, for the Gentile Times were ended August 
1914, 2520 years after the complete overthrow of 
Zedekiah, the last authorized Jewish king, and the 
complete razing of the city of Jerusalem at the beginning
 of its seventy years desolation. Both Old and 
New Testaments speak of this time of unparalleled 
trouble (Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21), which would 
fall particularly upon Christendom and only upon 


Jewry in the measure that they would abandon Jewish 
hopes and prospects for the Gentile lot. The increasing
 manifestations of divine favor toward the Jew and 
the withering schemes of Christendom will, after 
a while, doubtless work in such a way as to excite the 
united envy and ire of all European powers against 
the incipient Israelitish kingdom. 

Then will come Jacob's trouble, as spoken of by the 
Prophet Jeremiah : "Wherefore do I see every man 
with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and 
all faces are turned into paleness ? Alas ! for that day 
is great, so that none is like it : it is even the time of 
Jacob's trouble". But, by divine intervention, "be 
shall be saved out of it". — Jeremiah 30 :6, 7. 

Thus while some humiliation will come to the Jew 
in the next few years, and while it will be harder than 
anything which he has experienced (according to the 
above statement) it will not be so long, nor the result 
so disastrous to hope as now held as the trouble already
 upon Christendom. "Oh, for a few days of real 
sanity," cries Secretary Franklin K. Lane, of the Department
 of the Interior, and he voices the feelings of 
a very large part of the American people and of 
Christendom generally. Meanwhile, preparations go 
on for the re-establishment of Palestine. Dr. Weizmann
, London head of the Zionist Commission, is 
quoted in the London Daily Chronicle (England) as 
saying: "Millions of Jews are waiting, staff in hand, 
until the opportunity comes for them to travel to their 
fatherland". Further the same paper says : 

"Discussing the practical possibilities with which the Zionist 
colonies will csme face to face, Dr. Weizmann said that 
although Palestine is not much bigger than Wales it has an 
extraordinary variety of climates. He summarized the 
principal areas as follows : — 

"Coast: May be compared to the Riviera. Will yield 
everything the Riviera yields. 

"Vast plain to the south. Barley-growing country. 

"Jordan valley : Sub-tropical. Cotton, tobacco, and bananas 
may be grown here. 

"Valley of Esdraelon: One of the most beautiful spots in 
the East. Intensive cultivation will be started here, with 
Egypt in view as a big market for vegetables. 

"Hills : Tc be afforested. Pines, cypress, etc., would also 
shelter agricultural lands. 

"Dead Sea: A source of minerals, particularly potash, a 
necessity of scientific agricultural development." 

JEHOVAH'S PLANS EVEB OPPOSED 

Getting some glimpse of the stupendousness of the 
Jewish question, big politicians of the world, like 
Pharoah of old, have begun to rue their bargain to 
help Zionism. The dapper and aspiring young prince 
of Arabia, Emir Feisal, is being used as a catspaw to 
put forth certain counter claims against the establishment
 of a Jewish state. The big politicians have 
passed the word on to the newspapers that items favorable
 to the Zionist cause are materia non grata; as a 


355 


S56 


THE WATCH TOWER 


PnrrsiviLGH, Pa. 


result, there is a notable dearth of such items in the 
last few weeks, sharply in contrast to their plentifulness
 three, or even two, months ago. 

It is doubtless humiliating to the Jews to have an 
Arabian, a child of Ishmael, given preference over the 
legitimate Jewish claims. But this temporary humiliation
 will not hurt any true Zionist. At most, it will 
slough off the worldly wise, half-hearted ones of the 
Jewish race who have been identified with the movement
 partly with one eye on the prominence attendant 
on their positions. 

In the New York Herald October 5, was published 
an anti-Zionist article, a few paragraphs of which we 
quote. Evidently it was designed to discourage Jews 
in their hopes and to drop the impression that the 
establishment of a Jewish state in Palestine was just a 
childish dream and that now the real masters of the 
world have found that Jehovah was quite mistaken, or 
if not mistaken at least premature, in promising such a 
thing at this time. Of course it is generally understood
 that Jehovah will step aside and defer to the superior
 insight of these noble gentlemen who have so 
unselfishly demonstrated their power and willingness 
to bless and happify mankind during the past five 
years. Here are the words: 

"The hopes of the Hebrew idealists throughout the werld 
for the creation of a Jewish nation in Palestine of some six 
or seven million people cannot be made a reality for the 
present and probably will not be realized for several generations
. This is the opinion of the delegates to the Peace Conference
 and careful investigation into the question completely 
bears out this view. There arc even some persons familiar 
with the Zionist movement who say the dream will never 
come true." . . 

"The conference now takes the view that the Zionist question
 involves Emir Feisal's claim for an outlet to the sea. 
Existing schemes provide for giving to the kingdom of the 
Hedjaz the Mecca Railway to Aleppo, but no seaboard to the 
west of the railroad, which is part of the French claims. 
Soath of the territory included in the French claims stretches 
from Palestine all the way to Egypt. Feisal, who has been in 
London for the last two weeks, has told Zionists that he 
doesn't object to Jews in Palestine as long as they don t 
attempt to assume governmental powers. 

"However, the ambitions of the Zionists, as explained by 
their representatives in Paris, include plans for the future 
Upbuilding of an autonomous Jewish state in Palestine. This, 
in the opinion of experts, would bar the kingdom of the 
Hedjaz from an outlet to the sea all along the Palestine coast 

"Either the French must give the Hedjaz one of their ports 
or a corridor must be cut through Palestine by the Zionists 
or the British, who will be the best mandatary. 

"This in a general way is the political situation which stands 
as a definite hindrance to an independent Jewish state, for 
both English and French are anxious to give^ the Hedjaz 
what it wants and they will not let the Zionists' plans staad 
in their way." 

VOICES FBOM JEWRY 

Another interesting fact and one in all probability 
not wholly disconnected with the foregoing is the apportionment
 by the Anglican Church of America of 
one million dollars toward the conversion of the Jew. 
This fact is touched upon by a prominent Boston 
Hebrew in a contribution to the Boston Post of September
 30, two paragraphs of which we quote : 

"The determined efforts of the Episcopalian church to 
Christianize the Jews, appropriating $1,000,000 for that purpose
 at its recent convention, will be met by the Jews the 
world over and also by enlightened and truly Christian 
Christians with mingled feelings of ridicule and sadness." 

'Throughout the length and breadth of the country the 
immense crowds of worshippers taxing the capacities of the 
temples, synagogues, and halls at the New Year services of 
the past week are sufficient evidences of such false accusatioas
. The work of Christianizing the Jews under the false 
pretense and guise of Americanism is a flagrant abuse of 
Americanism. The Jew needs no lessons in Americamisnx" 

Some of the Jewish voices are particularly clear in 
describing the world situation as it exists now. Rabbi 
Joseph Krauskopf of New York is quoted in a published
 address as follows : 

"The peace conference met, deliberated, and adjourned. 
But instead of establishing peace on earth, they but planted 
seeds of other and fiercer wars, instead oi linking the nations 
of the earth into an indissoluble bond of brotherhood, they 
permitted greed and selfishness and hatred to force them 
wider apart." 

"What more saddening than to contrast the declaration 
which Lloyd George made before the parliament of England 
shortly before the commencement of the war: 'As the Lord 
liveth, England does not seek a yard of territory. We are 
in this war from motives of purest chivalry, to defend the 
weak.' What more saddening than to contrast such words 
as these with the pocketing as its spoils of that very war, of 
several hundred thousand square miles of land by that 
country?" 

Rabbi Harrison, of St. Louis, uttered many significant
 words in a recent discourse as published in the 
St. Louis Globe Democrat, of October 18; among 
them: 

"We are sleeping on a volcano. America, with all its pride 
of freedom and opportunity is not exempt from the grave 
dangers that threaten the old World." 

There seems to be a general movement of disillusionment
 as a result of the war. From very many quarters 
the opinion is expressed that Christianity's influence 
has been negligible, both in the great war and in the 
still more perplexing days following. Rev. William 
Austin Smith, editor of The Churchman, is reported 
by Current Opinion for October as follows : 

"I think it heartless, unchristian, and indecent for clergy 
and philosophers to glow over the spiritual benefits of a war 
that laid seven million boys in their graves, starved and 
maimed from twenty to thirty million human beings, and 
bathed the world in hate and darkness. I eannot share the 
easy enthusiasm of these gentlemen. I see in this war a 
tragedy pathetic beyond words or tears. The church would 
do well to leave war in the unpretentious category where 
General Sherman placed it." 

CHTJECHIANITT'S SINCE E ITT QUESTIONED 

Practically the same position is taken by Rev. 
George Willis Cooke in an article entitled "Effect of 
the Great War on Religion" in the Chicago Unity : 

"Christianity has betrayed itself body and soul. The attitude
 of the churches in this country, and in even greater 
degree in the other countries, has not been such as to inspire 
faith in their sincerity. To a very large extent they have 
abandoned Christianity for patriotism. They have been committed
 to a brutal, revengeful, and savage lust for war and 
all the worst that war demands. Love, forgiveness, mercifulness
, have in large degree been cast aside and condemned 
as standing in the way of true patriotism. The most cruel, 
heartless, and revengeful demands made in behalf of war 
have come from Christian pulpits on both sides. Any suggestion
 of sympathy toward enemies or any hint of forgiveness
 to seventy times seven, as was once taught, has been 
severely condemned. It has been declared to be not only 
unpatriotic but unchristian. All the milder, humane and 
humanitarian features of Christianity have been cast aside 
as unworthy and no longer in harmony with the demands 
of the time. 

"Those persons and sects who have tried to live up to what 
they regarded as Christian teaching in the way of non-resistance
, forgiveness and regard for the rights of all peoples, 
have been persecuted and imprisoned, perhaps driven from 
their homes with great loss. The humanitarianism which 
Christianity is supposed to represent has been abolished as 
an evil and as the worst heresy. Men who hold themselves 
to be Christians, who uphold the creeds of the churches, and 


DSCSMMR I, 19S9 


THE WATCH TOWER 


357 


who find in Christianity the foundation facts of ethical life, 
have sent their fellow Christians to prison for even so many 
as twenty years and because they wished to live consistent 
Christians.... .They have punished the non-guilty with the 
jruilty, the victims of war with those who have been its causing
 agents. Such ruthless contempt of all Christian principles 
as they have shown in their hatreds, in their utter disregard 
of anything approaching a forgiving attitude, would have 
been impossible to believe until we have seen it with our own 
eyes. .... What conclusions must we reach other than that 
Christianity has betrayed itself body and soul? It has been 
both powerless to prevent war and to bring it to a conclusion 
in a spirit of humanitarian regard to the rights of millions 
of people." 

When such strong voices as these are heard by men 
looked upon as entirely "orthodox", the wonder to 
many disinterested people is why The Finished 
Mystery was and still is suppressed. Rev. Frederick 
E. Taylor, speaking in the First Baptist Church at 
Indianapolis, substantiates the findings of the foregoing
 speakers when he said, as reported in the Indianapolis
 Star, of October 7 : 

"The church ef today faces the storm that includes all 
classes of men." 

The Chicago American for October 2, adds editorially
 : 

'There seems to be but one conclusion: that the average 
man has ceased to be interested in religion sufficiently to 

pay anything to hear it expounded or discussed It is a 

notable fact that comparatively few men go to church. They 
indorse the attendance of the feminine portion of the family 
and think it a good idea for the children, but as for themselves
 — they have 'important business' elsewhere." 

Some even of the Anglican Church see more clearly 
than others. The New York Evening World, for 
October 16, publishes a dispatch from London which 
indicates the liking of the Right Rev. Charles Gore, 
Bishop of Oxford, for plain speaking: 

"The Bishop said it is not only that those who positively 
hold the Christian faith are in the minority, but there is a 
widespread revolt against the principles of Christian morality. 
Except in the vaguest sense Britain cannot be called a 
Christian country." 

" The choice before us now', he said, 'is between hell and 
Utopia." 

The marvel is not that Britain — or any of the other 
nations — is not in any real sense a Christian nation 
but the marvel is that it would be openly spoken of by 
a bishop of the Anglican Church. The Bishop of 
Winchester seems to be of the same opinion. A dispatch
 published in the Memphis News Scimitar, of 
October 13, quotes the latter bishop as follows: 

TBEND TOWAED ISLAM 

"The lack of distinctive Christianity is remarked by all. 
What is still more unexpected is the large measure of agreement
 among the witnesses on the prevalence of a Moslem 
atmosphere to an extent that might suggest that England is 
turning to Islam. It took the form of a fatalism common 
to Eastern religions, but it has a distinguishing Moslem character
 in its conception of salvation by death on the field of 
battle. Further evidence of Moslem influences is attributed 
to the extraordinary increase of bigamous marriages which 
is now coming to light in the courts. Christian ministers are 
alarmed by these conditions because everyone agrees that 
when England's five million soldiers are reabsorbed into the 
population their influence in social, political and religious 
matters will predominate," 

Affairs for Churchianity do not seem to be looking 
up much better in Japan. The New York Herald 
publishes the following item of information: 

"Christianity is not making much progress in Japan, according
 to figures just made public by the conference of 


Federated Missions, which this year is celebrating the sixtieth 
anniversary of the launching of systematic Protestant missionary
 work. These figures show that of the 50-odd millions 
in Japan proper there are only a few more than 250,000 
members of all Christian churches, including the Roman 
Catholic Church, which has had missions here for centuries, 
and the Greek Catholic Church, the coming of whose missionaries
 preceded that of the Protestants." 

Protestantism in Ohio is not faring much better, if 
we are to believe the news dispatch in the Cincinnati 
Times Star, of September 26: 

"In all parts of Ohio Protestantism is on the decline, and 
in the rural districts there is but one minister of any denomination
 for every 1,000 persons, according to the report 
made by B. F. Lamb, State rural supervisor, to the Interchurch
 World Movement of North America." 

The Chicago Daily News, of September 9, has such 
a zest for facts that it publishes the following item : 

"Despite all the Sunday schools, young people's societies, 
clubs, guilds, parish houses and the rest, the churches ought 
to recognize that they have never gained the interest and 
enthusiasm of eight out of ten of the generation just coming 
to maturity. As far as vital motivations go, these fellows 
are not Christians at all, but merely more or less decent 
young pagans." 

According to a survey made by the International 
World Movement of the Churches, there are only eight 
persons in every one thousand in the state of Massachusetts
 who know the Lord's prayer or the ten commandments
. In New York the proportion is large of 
those who never heard of these two things. Of those 
who know them few would dispute the fact that they 
are known perfunctorily. The Taylorville Daily 
Courier (Illinois) says that preachers are quitting their 
churches in that section of the state and that "M. E. 
ministers there are quitting the church like rats leaving 
a sinkuig ship, all due to the H. C. of L. and poor pay 
in the soul-saving work". Under the system of a paid 
ministry as it has long been established in Christendom
 no one can blame the preachers for leaving their 
pulpits to take up more remunerative work. They 
have financial obligations to meet and must meet them. 

ECCLESIASTICO- FINANCIAL COMBINATION PEABED 

The Philadelphia Public Ledger published a review 
of an article by Rev. G. W. McPherson which was 
originally issued in the August number of The Presbyterian
. Dr. McPherson feared that a Protestant 
church trust was under way and that an effort was 
on foot to control the United States in ecclesiastical 
matters by the wealth of a few individuals. The review
 says in part: 

"Doctor McPherson charges that 'a combination of rich 
men who control $22,500,000,000', most of whom are New 
Yorkers, are seeking to bring the Protestant churches together
, first under a federation and then into organic union, 
to 'make themselves the religious masters of Protestantism'. 

"He says the promoters of this 'church trust' seek to use 
the pulpit of America 'to protect political and social schemes', 
and charges that the same men are using their wealth to 
control, as far as possible, the universities and colleges of the 
nation." 

The Greek Catholic Church is in a fair way to become
 more unpopular than ever in Russia. The Philadelphia
 Evening Bulletin, of October 15, publishes an 
article on the exposure of certain long standing frauds 
in the one time state church there. Part of the article 
says : 

"The relics of the Russian saints are being opened in the 
monasteries of Soviet Russia in the presence of large popular 
assemblies. The people are shown that what they considered 


368 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


to be the non-decomposable remains of their saints are really 
imitations of human bodies." 

"The archbishop of Voronezh, who was present at the examination
, admitted that 'it is, of course, very sad to look at 
such a thing"." 

Some churchmen, however, seem still to have their 
heads in the clouds and to be unable to see things as 
they are. Rev. Dr. Louis G. Wood, Episcopalian, is 
reported in the Chicago Evening American, of October 
20, as saying: 

"Never has there been such a tribute to Christianity as 
during the world war." 

This worthy gentleman has company in the Rev. 
W. H. Wray Boyle, who is reported by the Denver 
Rocky Mountain News thus : 

"The great outstanding fact in the life of today is the lordship
 of Jesus, the Christ, over the hearts and minds of men." 

If present day conditions in the world are a sample 
of the effect of the lordship of Jesus over the hearts 
and minds of men we wonder what it would be like 
with Satan as the god of this world? 

ANGLICAN-NON-COOTOKMIST AGREEMENTS 

The long cherished hope that non-conformist 
ministers would submit to Anglican ordination seems 
to be in process of fulfillment, at least in England. 
The British Weekly (London), for October 16, publishes
 the following regarding the mutual approaches 
by the Wesleyan Methodists and their mother church : 

"The sche-ne of reunion arrived at after two years' conference
 with the Wesleyans was that after January, 1921, 
there should be no ordinations in either church which were 
not considered valid by the other. There would be a bishop 
with the Presbytery at the laying on of hands ; and at the 
end of forty years there would be no Wesleyan minister who 
would not have been ordained by a bishop of the Church of 
England." 

A similar movement is on foot in this country, as 
reported by the Binghamton Press, October 15: 

"Leaders in the Episcopal and the Congregational churches 
have agreed on a series of 'proposals for an approach toward 
unity', the principal feature of which is that ordained clergymen
 of the Congregational, Presbyterian, Methodist, Baptist, 
and other sects shall receive, in addition to their present ordination
 in their own churches, Episcopal ordination at the 
hands of an Episcopal bishop and yet remain ministers in 
good and regular standing with their original denomination." 

Among the dry, arid, and dismal reports from Congress
 there is an occasional illuminating speck. Here 
is one as reported in the New York Sun for October 
30, regarding some repartee between Senator Sherman 
and Senator Thomas : 

" The sessions of the Senate are opened daily/ suggested 
Senator Thomas (Col.), 'with an invocation by the chaplain 
of the divine blessing. If any benefits have been apparent 
in our proceedings I have been unable to observe them'." 

Spiritism stays in the foreground. The Church of 


England is considerably worked up over the matter. 
At a recent congress of the Church of England a warm 
dispute over spiritism occurred, some dignitaries taking
 one side and some the other. The Rev. J, A. 
Magee, the last speaker, said: 

"Sir Arthur Conan Doyle is moving from city to city 
ministering to a popular craze. I challenge Sir Arthur to 
deny spiritualism is perilous to the mental, moral, and 
physical health. Every second or third young laiy one meets 
now imagines herself a modern St Theresa," 

Mr. Jerome K. Jerome, a prominent British author, 
has crossed swords with Sir Conan Doyle on the subject
 of spiritism. The* Literary Digest quotes him in 
the following words: 

"Where is this * new religion'? What does spiritualism 
preach? Or is it content with the world as it is? I take the 
last five years. Has spiritualism done anything — is it doing 
anything — to help man to be less brutal, less hypocritical, 
less greedy? Has it done anything — is it doing anything — to 
lessen the appalling wickedness that is threatening, like some 
foul weed, to poison the whole earth? For five years savagery 
and cruelty have been preached to us from pulpit and from 
press. Our children are being taught it at their mothers' 
knees. Vengeance and hatred are the new virtues. Christ, 
amid roars of laughter, is mocked in our parliaments." 

BUND LEADERS OF THE BLIND 

The Rev. Charles Stelzle, a prominent social service 
worker of the Presbyterian Church in this country is 
recorded in the Nashville American, September 24, as 
making the following remarks on spiritism : 

"If we weren't so dull and stupid, we might see and hear 
and feel the spirits all about us. 

"If our eyes were opened, we might, as did that young man 
of old — told about in the Bible — see hosts of angels ready to 
fight our battles." 

"Death in this world is painless and it is made easier 
because of the presence of friends who greet us when we 
step 'over the line'. 

"The spirit body takes nourishment and is refreshed, although
 there is nothing like 'world-weariness* beyond earth. 

"We retain our personalities in the hereafte?, and recognize 
one another. 

"We shall be employed at useful tasks according to our 
personal abilities and desires. 

"There are no class distinctions, but there is a natural 
grouping of those of similar tastes. 

"There is no marriage or 'giving in marriage' but those 
who truly loved in this world are closely associated in the next 

"Whatever may have been the methods of securing this 
information, there is pretty good Scriptural basis for all of it" 

It would be a matter for sorrow if Rev. Stelzle was 
merely himself confused as to the disastrous nature 
of spiritism. But it becomes indeed a tragedy when 
he teaches others all of the pagan folklore which has 
been current for the last three or four thousand years 
and teaches it as though it were in some manner substantiated
 by the Bible and as though the Bible applied
 such statements to mankind in general. 


EXILE ENDED 


Take down the Harp Divine, 
Sweep o'er its many strings : 

They call to Zion, Rise and shine! 
Thy God salvation brings. 


No more an exile roam; 

Accept thy liberty; 
God calls His faithful people Home, 

Sets error's captives free. 


TREASURES IN HEAVEN 

"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and 

steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where 

thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also/' 

Matthew 6:19-21. 



REASURES are things of great value laid 
up for future use. Primarily they are of 
two kinds, earthly and heavenly. The 
natural man seeks earthly treasures alone. 
To him the treasures of heaven are unknown
, and testimony relating to such 
treasures is foolishness in his opinion. 
The child of God, begotten to the 

heavenly nature, seeks heavenly treasures. 

The extent of his seeking is measured by the depth of 
his consecration, his appreciation of things heavenly 
and his zeal for the cause that leads one to the heavenly 
inheritance. 

The new creature, however, is in an earthen vessel 
and surrounded by earthly environment. The new 
creature is tempted as earthly creatures are tempted. 
"There hath no temptation taken you but such as is 
common to man: but God is faithful, who will not 
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able ; but 
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, 
that ye may be able to bear it." (1 Corinthians 10:13) 
In other words, the temptation that is common to the 
human race comes to the one who is a Christian, but 
God always provides a way for him to escape so long 
as he trusts in the Lord. 

The Master's words as contained in the text were 
evidently intended as an admonition to those who are 
undergoing a test of faith. Is it not true that the 
tests coming to the Christian are more marked today 
than in the days gone by? And should we not expect
 it to be so ? 

With a zeal befitting the house of sons, many of his 
dear children up to the time which marked the end 
of the forty-year harvest period had almost exhausted 
their earthly savings and lost practically all their 
earthly influence and earthly friends. Since that time 
some of his saints may have been tempted to lay hold 
on some of the comforts and some of the pleasures of 
earth. There may have been a temptation to lay up 
some earthly treasure against a stormy day. If so, 
then might we not with profit at this time compare 
the treasures possible to be laid up on earth with those 
which God has made it possible for us to lay up in 
heaven? These words of the Master are without 
value to us now unless by comparison we appreciate 
the result of laying up treasures in heaven. 

EABTHLT TBEASTJBES 

Earthly treasures may be designated as wealth, 
fame, power and influence, houses and lands, home and 
family, friends, and life's joys. Human experience 
has demonstrated that all of these are but transitory, 
and he who possesses them all has not that which 
brings lasting satisfaction. Wealth accumulated by 
long and laborious effort may vanish like snow in a 
summer's sun. If one rises to the very topmost rung 
of the ladder of fame, another day may find that man 
the object of bitter reproach and defamation. Because
 of riches and fame a man's power and influence 
for a season may seem almost boundless, but suddenly 
the storms of adversity set in and his power and influence
 are scattered to the four winds. Long years of 
labor and sacrifice may make a man the possessor of 
houses and lands, but these in the time of bankruptcy 
vanish away, leaving only memories of sorrow. How 
many young men, or women, have started along the 


pathway of life with a friend in whom the most implicit
 confidence was reposed, only to find that friend 
unfaithful. Frugality, patient toil and honest endeavor
 may result in building a beautiful and luxurious
 home, presided over and graced by a lovable wife 
and mother and enlivened and made joyful by sweettempered
 and obedient children; but in a brief space 
that joy must end. The members of that household 
are separated, or disease lays a withering hand upon 
them, decay and death follow; and where joy once 
reigned, now sorrow and death do inhabit. 

Against the evil day no man has power to lay up 
earthly treasure that is secure and steadfast. He can 
build no earthly bulwark that is invulnerable to human 
adversaries. 

Call to mind the sorrow that now fills the earth ; the 
great havoc that war has wrought amongst the peaceful
 and one time happy homes. In Europe the conditions
 are such that human words are inadequate for 
description. Wealth, houses, homes, friends — all 
gone ! In Mexico there lived a man who by industry 
and acumen amassed a fortune of more than two hundred
 million dollars. With his interesting family he 
lived in peace and luxury. The revolution came and 
stripped him of everything, some of his family were 
cruelly murdered and he, with the remaining members, 
fled penniless to America for refuge. 

Within a year after the beginning of the great European
 war it was the writer's privilege to address the 
public at a certain city in Canada. The next day a 
gentleman of refinement and polish called and said: 
"My life has been spent in a business capacity with 
one of the largest firms of Canada; for years I have 
held a responsible position at a good salary. I have 
labored hard and lived economically. I built a home 
and supported my family well. All the money I could 
get together, aside from the necessities, I put in property
, carrying upon it a heavy mortgage. I am 
growing old and thought now I could retire in comfort. 
The great war came, the business of our house went 
bad, I lost my position. The values in property have 
shrunk until I am completely bankrupt, my entire life's 
savings are gone, my hair is white and I can no more 
obtain a position with any other firm. For several 
days I have been desperate ; I purchased a revolver intending
 to take my life; I saw the announcement of a 
lecture at the opera house ; I went there and heard the 
lecture and for the first time learned of God's wonderful
 plan. It has made a change in my life; I now 
have new hopes and new aspirations." This man's 
earthly treasures were vanishing and there he began to 
see the value of laying up treasures in heaven. 

BLESSED PORTION 

In this hour of great controversy in the world; at 
this time of terrible shaking of things heavenly and 
earthly, how blessed is the portion of the man or 
woman who has been and is yet laying up treasures 
in heaven! If for any reason, however, we find a 
temptation to turn aside for a time to the laying up 
of earthly treasure at the cost of the heavenly; if we 
fear we may be brought to earthly woe because of a 
failure to lay up earthly treasure against a greater 
evil day, let us remember the admonition of the inspired
 Apostle: "Let not your turn of mind be toward
 money making, but be content with such things 


359 


360 


THE WATCH TOWER 


P1TT31URGH, Pa. 


as ye have ; for he hath said, I will never leave thee 
nor forsake thee". — Hebrews 13:5. 

If inclined to become discouraged because earthly 
treasure is gone, including good name, fame and reputation
 among men, as well as earthly friends, call to 
mind the joy that filled your heart when first you 
knew the Lord. To such the Apostle says: "Call to 
remembrance the former days, in which, after ye 
were illuminated, ye endured a great fight of afflictions
 ; partly, whilst ye were made a gazingstock both 
by reproaches and afflictions; and partly, whilst ye 
became companions of them that were so used. For 
ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully
 the spoiling of your goods, knowing in yourselves
 that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring
 substance." — Hebrews 10:32-34. 

It is not unusual for one to count among his earthly 
treasures his earthly friends, who seemingly take a 
delight in being loyal to him; and later, when he 
comes to a knowledge of the truth and fully consecrates
 himself to do the Father's will these earthly 
friends forsake him. For a time he may feel depressed
 because of the seeming loss, but when he 
realizes that he has come into Christ and finds all 
who are in Christ of one mind and one spirit, he 
realizes that he has found far greater friends all in 
one. Beautifully has the poet expressed it: 

"Stripped of each earthly friend, 

I find them all in One; 
And peace and joy which never end 

Abound in Christ alone." 

HEAVENLY TREASURE 

To the end that we may be strengthened in faith 
and experience greater joy, let us again and again 
call to mind the enduring treasures in heaven, which 
the Lord has provided for those who love and serve 
him faithfully. 

Born in sin and shapen in iniquity, all the earthly 
treasure one could amass would not bring life and 
lasting happiness. But the follower of the Master 
is invited to come and learn of God and Christ, in 
whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
, and whom to know means life everlasting and 
happiness forever. His mind illuminated with the 
holy Spirit, the Christian is permitted to get a 
glknpse of some of the gracious provisions made for 
him. He learns of Christ that "though he was rich, 
yet for our sakes he became poor, that we through 
his poverty might be rich" ; that Christ Jesus, the holy 
One, by the grace of God, laid aside all of his riches 
and suffered an ignominious death that we might be 
brought to God. He opened the heavenly way and 
made it possible for the Christian to lay up heavenly 
treasures, and the Father invites him to come and lay 
them up. Life, the dearest thing to any sane creature, 
is now set before him and with joyful expectancy 
he looks forward to the time when the springs of 
life may be revealed to him in its fulness. 

COMPARISON 

While it is true that at the end of the Millennial 
reign of Christ every being upon earth will be satisfied
 with his portion, yet it is for the Bride of Christ 
to have blessings in the superlative degree. She will 
possess the inexhaustible treasures of heaven. It 
seems pleasing to our heavenly Father that we keep 
those heavenly treasures before our minds and that 
we keep our affections set upon them. 


In this text Jesus Christ draws the comparison between
 the treasures of the present order and the 
treasures of heaven, inviting us to lay up those 
treasures which cannot be destroyed by moth or canker 
worm and which thieves cannot steal and carry away. 
Men of earth by their accumulated wealth attempt to 
control governments and for a time succeed, but then 
utterly fail. To the called, tried and faithful Jesus 
said: "I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my Father 
hath appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink 
at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging
 the twelve tribes of Israel". — Luke 22:29, 3°- 

Knowing that because of their imperfection, fears 
and doubts would from time to time come into the 
mind of the consecrated, for the purpose of allaying 
such fears and encouraging them Jesus lovingly said: 
"Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good 
pleasure to give you the kingdom". — Luke 12:32. 

What will be the extent of the wealth of those who 
possess that kingdom? St. Paul, concerning the 
head of that kingdom says: "God. . . hath appointed 
[him] heir of all things". (Hebrews 1 12) And to 
those who prove faithful to the end he says: You 
are "heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ" 
(Romans 8:16, 17); you shall share with him in all 
the glories and honors of his boundless riches. 

The same Apostle, after reviewing some of the 
wonders of God's arrangement, exclaimed: "O the 
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God!" — Romans 11:33. 

The saints will be rich also in that they will have 
an intrinsic value. Rare gems are always possessed 
by those who are wealthy. Among his rich possessions 
the Lord refers to the members of the body thus: 
"They shall be mine, saith the Lord of hosts, in that 
day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them, 
as a man spareth his own son that serveth him". — 
Malachi 3:17. 

FAME— GOOD NAME 

He who attains to the point of fame must be one 
who has a good name. In all the ages to come the 
most famous among all (Jehovah alone excepted) 
will be the Lord Jesus Christ. His name is above all 
others and at his name every knee shall bow, both 
in heaven and in earth, and every tongue shall confess
 that he is the greater Deliverer, to the glory of 
God. 

The Bride will have the likeness of the Bridegroom 
and will share in his fame and good name. St. John 
says: "It doth not yet appear what we shall be: but 
we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like 
him; for we shall see him as he is". (1 John 3:2) 
With authority the Apostle Paul adds : "As we have 
borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the 
image of the heavenly". — 1 Corinthians 15:49. 

Inseparably linked together will be the fame of the 
Head and the members. Her fame and good name 
will be among the hosts of heaven, because God will 
exhibit her as a monument of his power and love. 
Concerning this, the prophet of the Lord has said: 
"For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for 
Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness 
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof
 as a lamp that burnetii. And the Gentiles shall 
see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and 
thou shalt be called by a new name, which the mouth 
of the Lord shall name. Thou shalt also be a crown 


DZCE1HER I, I9I9 


THE WATCH TOWER 


361 


of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem 
in the hand of thy God."— Isaiah 62 11-3. 

The fame of those who have laid up the heavenly 
treasures will be among the peoples of earth, who shall 
know of their glory and sing their praises. "Of Zion 
it shall be said, This and that man was born in her:. . 
The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, 
that this man was born there." (Psalm 87:5, 6) "I 
will make thy name to be remembered in all generations
 : therefore shall the people praise thee for ever 
and ever." — Psalm 45:17. 

POWEK AtfD INFLUENCE 

Unlimited power and influence possessed by a holy 
and righteous one and exercised in a righteous cause 
must result beneficially toward all who desire to be 
benefited. Man in his present tate of unrighteousness
 and imperfection as a rule uses for selfish purposes
 whatever power or influence he is able to exercise
. With a joyful expectancy the saints of the 
most high God may look forward to one of their 
heavenly treasures as power and influence to be 
possessed without limitation, and which will be used 
unselfishly and in a righteous cause. They will 
possess this heavenly treasure by virtue of being a 
part of the Christ, whose Head, subsequent to his 
resurrection, said: "All power is given unto me in 
heaven and in earth". — Matthew 28:18. 

Viewing from afar off the influence for good 
possessed and exercised by the Christ, the prophet of 
the Lord wrote: "There was given him dominion, 
and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, 
and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an 
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and 
his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed". 
(Daniel 7:14) Because of his loving-kindness, we 
may be sure that this power will always be exercised 
for good; but we are doubly assured when we read 
that "with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and 
reprove with equity for the meek of the earth : and he 
shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and 
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. 
And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and 
faithfulness the girdle of his reins." — Isaiah 11 :4, 5. 

That the Lord will share this power and influence 
with his bride, and that this is one of the heavenly 
treasures his followers are privileged to lay up while 
fighting the good fight of faith, we are assured by 
the Master himself: "To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcome
, and am set down with my Father in his throne;" 
and "to him will I give power over the nations". — 
Revelation 3 :2i ; 2 :26. 

For many centuries past mankind has suffered and 
continues to groan and travail in pain, waiting until 
the possessors of heavenly treasure manifest divine 
power and influence. Great will be the treasure 
possessed by the Christ, Head and body, in administering
 blessings to the groaning creation, for which 
purpose the new creation is brought into existence. 
"I the Lord have called thee in righteousness, and 
will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee 
for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles
 ; to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners 
from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of 
the prison house." — Isaiah 42:6, 7. 

HOUSES 

Men of earth who possess marry houses are proud 


of them and call them after their own names. They 
treasure these up, but in one hour they may be swept 
away by shot and shell, or destroyed in a devastating 
fire. Among the lasting treasures laid up and which 
will be possessed by the overcoming saints will be 
the heavenly mansions. "In my Father's house are 
many mansions: if it were not so, I would have told 
you. I go to prepare a place for you." — John 14:2. 

That Christ and his glorified bride will possess a 
special habitation in heaven there can be no doubt. 
It would seem unreasonable that the Christ would 
dwell in a condition to be beheld at all times by all 
other creatures. But the dignity and the sweet relationship
 existing between the Bridegroom and bride 
in the light of this Scripture clearly indicates that 
they will have a separate place of abiding. That 
glorious mansion is presided over by the Lord Jesus. 
He is the head of the house. It was planned by the 
Father before the foundation of the world and is the 
dwelling place for which the saints have yearned all 
along their weary journey. Beautifully has the 
Psalmist expressed their heart's desire: "One thing 
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that 
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of 
my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire
 in his temple". — Psalm 27:4. 

HOME AlTD FAMILY 

God instituted in the earth home and family, and 
made these sacred ^o the heart of man. To the good 
man or woman or child the sweetest spot on earth is 
home, be it ever so humble. Nevertheless, he who 
lays up this, an earthly home, as his treasure ; who sets 
his affections thereon to the neglect of the heavenly, 
finds in time that this, like all other earthly treasures, 
must pass away. But he who lays up the heavenly 
treasure of home and family will be happy for evermore
. That heavenly family will be composed of 
Christ Jesus, the head, and 144 000 glorious members 
of the household, who shall be like their Lord. In 
the palace of the King, she shall be all glorious and be 
attended by a company of spirit beings, who themselves
 have been washed, purified and made white by 
the merit of the heavenly Lord. Over all this glorious
 household will be God, the Father, who will have 
special delight in the members of that happy family. 
What a wonderful family that will be! Before the 
foundation of the world God ordained it to his own 
praise and glory. 

That home will be an everlasting habitation. No 
parting of loved ones will be known there; no heartaches
, nor the thought of such. It will be the joy and 
delight of Jehovah; "for the Lord hath chosen Zion; 
he hath desired it for his habitation. This is my rest 
forever; here will I dwell; for I have desired it." 
(Psalm 132:13, 14) Its perfection and beauty is unexcelled
 among all the wonders of God's creation, and 
through it Jehovah will shine forth to the blessing of 
others of his creatures. "Out of Zion, the perfection 
of beauty, God hath shined." (Psalm 50:2) "The 
Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings
 of Jacob." — Psalm 87 :2. 

While earthly creatures will never behold with the 
natural eye the glory, beauty and sweetness of that 
home, yet they will have a knowledge of it and will 
rejoice. "Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole 
earth, is mount Zion." — Psalm 48:2. 

The Christian may have some difficulty in leaving 


362 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Pittsburgh, Pa. 


behind and in sacrificing his earthly treasure and good 
things. He will have many trials and tribulations 
while laying up his heavenly treasures, but "forgetting 
those things which are behind" and looking to the 
treasures before and faithfully pressing on, he can 
joyfully sing: Soon I may enter into my heavenly 
home, not 'made with hands, eternal in the heavens, 
there to be forever a member of the happy family of 
God. And as he faithfully lays up his heavenly treasures
, by faith he can more fully realize the sweet 
words of the Psalmist: "In thy presence is fulness of 
joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore
". — Psalm 16:11. 

The Prophet Ezekiel in poetic phrase presents a 
mental vision of the glories of that heavenly habitation
, which constitutes a part of the heavenly treasures 
laid up by the Christian. He describes the priestly 
members of that home, the little flock, as the sweet 
singers of Israel, who will sing praises to Jehovah, 
magnifying his name and his goodness before all the 
members of the heavenly throng and for the blessings 
that flow out from him through the Christ to the 
millions of earth. In the sacred precincts of that 
heavenly habitation the priests will have their feasts 
of love and will rejoice with unspeakable joy as they 
mark the billions of earth's population offering themselves
 in consecration and progressing over the highway
 of holiness, back to perfection, to the glory of 
the great Creator. 

FBIENDS 

The word friend possesses a depth of sweetness 
found in few other words. Jesus used the word to 
emphasize love. It is, in fact, an expression of love 
in action. Earthly friendship often proves to be a 
delusion and a snare. In the world, a noble person 
prizes a true friend above other earthly possessions. 
Jonathan and David were examples of true and loyal 
friendship, but such friendship is a very rare thing 
among men. It is not infrequent that a person reposes
 absolute confidence in another as a friend only 
to suffer bitter disappointment and keen sorrow. He 
who manifests friendship and loyalty toward you 
while you are on the crest of the wave of prosperity, 
but who abandons you when you are beaten by the 
storms of adversity is not a true friend ; in fact, is not 
a friend at all. He who avows true friendship when 
you are honored by others and then betrays or denies 
you when you are suffering persecution and ignominy 
for righteousness' sake cannot be classed in any sense 
as a friend. Friendship is an expression of true 
loyalty. A friend, therefore, is not one who loves 
you sometimes, but one who loves incessantly. "A 
friend loveth at all times." — Proverbs 17:17. 

While in the world, dealing with the things unstable
, we found no satisfying portion. We wandered 
about in a wilderness in a solitary way, hungering 
and thirsting for righteousness and* finding it not. Our 
soul fainted within us. Then we cried unto the Lord 
and Jehovah gently and lovingly drew us to his beloved
 Son. We learned that Jesus, because of his 
love, had died for us that we might have life and have 
it more abundantly, and that we might enjoy the 
blessings incident to life. We heard his words: 
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay 
down his life for his friends. Ye are my friends, if 
ye do whatsoever I command you." (John 15:13, 14) 
When we gave our hearts to the Lord and he graciously
 received us, when we were justified and begotten
 to the heavenly inheritance, there came that 
peace of mind which passeth all human understanding
. Then were our hearts filled with joy and our 
tongues could not refrain from singing: 

"I've found a friend; O! such a friend 1 

He loved me ere I knew him; 
He drew me with the cords of love, 

And thus he bound me to him." 

Then for the first time we began to learn the meaning
 of heavenly treasure; and responding to the Lord's 
invitation to lay up such treasure, we began by his 
grace so to do. As we pressed along the narrow way, 
beset by many adverse conditions and fiery trials, we 
learned that such conditions and experiences are precedent
 to receiving the heavenly treasure and that our 
beloved friend Christ Jesus trod alone that way before
 us and is now our sympathetic elder Brother, 
daily and hourly sustaining those who are his true 
friends; and so we continue our song: 

"And 'round my heart still closely twine 
Those ties which naught can sever, 

For I am his and he is mine, 
Forever and forever." 

The friendship of Jesus is priceless. Who may 
have such a one for a friend? "He that loveth with 
a pure heart and hath grace on his lips will have the 
king for his friend."— Proverbs 22:11, Leeser. 

The sweetness of friendship between the Lord's 
children is often marred by misunderstanding. In 
fact, much of the suffering among the brethren is due 
to their misunderstanding of each other. This is due 
to the imperfection of each one, and so long as we 
magnify the imperfections of our brethren our relationship
 will not be as sweet as it might be. But the 
one who possesses the pure heart condition of real 
friendship will seek to hide such defects, in response 
to the Apostle's admonition : "Above all things have 
fervent [overspreading] love among yourselves, because
 love hides a multitude of defects". (1 Peter 
4:8, Diaglott) When all the imperfections have passed 
away and we are clothed upon with that glorious body, 
then there will be no more misunderstanding; then 
each will love the other perfectly and will enjoy forever
 the precious heavenly treasure of a true, lasting 
and loyal friendship. 

Some of the Lord's dear saints have known each 
other better and understood each other more fully as 
they have journeyed the narrow way, and nothing has 
drawn their hearts so closely together and enabled 
them to understand so fully their respective traits of 
character as passing through the same kind of fiery 
trials together. This is made manifest in that wonderful
 epistle which St. Paul wrote to the Philippians. 
Where brethren have been in the same fiery trial and 
have stood side by side with each other and have seen 
manifested the true Christlike disposition, it has bound 
together their hearts in true and lasting friendship, 
seemingly as nothing else can do. We can well 
imagine that this spiritual friendship, begun this sicje 
the vail, will be specially sweet when perfected in the 
beauty of holiness and enjoyed in our heavenly home. 
There it will yield a sweet fragrance to the eternal 
praise of our King and heavenly Father. 

Every one who loves the Lord and his creation loves 
the beauty of the flowers. Seemingly, in the heavenly 
kingdom, there will be nothing that will so much take 
the place of the sweet fragrance the flowers give forth 
in the earth as the friendship that will exist between 
the members of that royal family. Especially sweet 


December i, 1919 


TEE WATCH TOWER 


363 


will that friendship be that was begun here and 
cherished among the brethren ; and when transplanted 
into the heavenly soil and atmosphere it will bloom and 
blossom in unspeakable beauty and fragrance. 

What a wonderful heavenly treasure that will be! 
That true and loyal friendship between the members 
of the heavenly household will be a manifestation of 
nobility of character that will call forth the approving 
smile of our heavenly Father, guaranteeing to each 
member of the royal priesthood that they shall ever 
possess the treasure of confidential friendship with 
Jehovah and our Lord. Such will be one of the rewards
 of faithfulness ; and because of such loyalty, in 
the ages to come God will show forth the exceeding 
riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through 
Christ Jesus, our Lord. 

Having in mind this glorious heavenly treasure, let 
us seek to lay it up ; and to do so while traveling the 
remainder of the journey we will learn to manifest a 
true, loyal friendship that is known only to those 
whose inheritance is in the heavenly kingdom. 

THE JOYS OF LEPE 

The greatest desire of every sane creature is for life 
everlasting in a state of happiness. Men of earth will 
gladly sacrifice all their earthly treasure for a little extension
 of human life. What, then, would not men do 
in order to possess life everlasting, attended with endless
 joy! Turning our eyes heavenward, let us see 
there another great treasure which God has provided 
and holds in reservation for those who love him supremely
. It is life divine, life inherent, an endless, 
indestructible life. And the one who possesses that 
treasure will be like unto the Lcrd Jesus and dwell 
with him forever. This seems too wonderful for us, 
but we know it is true because our Father has told 
us so in his Word. "According as his divine power 
hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life 
and godliness, through the knowledge of him that hath 
called us to glory and virtue : whereby are given unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises: that by 
these ye might be partakers of the divine nature." (2 
Peter 1 13, 4) These precious divine promises are our 
daily food and drink, sustaining us while we strive to 
lay up the heavenly treasures. Our true and precious 
Friend to us says: "Whosoever drinketh of the water 
that I shall give him shall never thirst ; but the water 
that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water 
springing up into everlasting life". — John 4:14. 

THEMSELVES DECEIVED AND DECEIVING OTHERS 

The clergy have told and still tell the people that 
any one who joins a denominational church and thereafter
 lives a reasonably decent life is laying up 
heavenly treasures and is certain to inherit these 
treasures at the time of death. Many of them have 
even gone so far as to say that one who dies upon the 
battlefield, whether or not such an one has made any 
pretense of faith in Christ, goes directly to heaven. 
Of course their theory is wholly unsupported by the 
Scriptures. Their conclusions on this point are just as 
unreasonable as their doctrine that all the wicked are 
tormented eternally in hell by fireproof devils. We 
are glad that the Lord has graciously provided that 
every one, whether a nominal church member or not, 
shall have one fair and impartial trial for life. All 
the dead dying outside of Christ, including those who 
had no knowledge of him and of Jehovah's plan, must 
be raised from the dead and given a knowledge of 
God's gracious arrangement and an opportunity to accept
 and receive restitution blessings. 

One of the rewards granted to the members of the 
Christ will be the privilege of lifting up and blessing 
the human race. The ones, however, who are addressed
 by the Master and by him admonished to lay 
up heavenly treasures are only those who have believed
 on the Lord Jesus Christ during the age of 
sacrifice and who have then made a full and unreserved
 consecration to do Jehovah's will and who then 
diligently strive to carry out that covenant by sacrifice 
even unto death. Such are called to a heavenly calling
, to membership in the body of Christ. Their hope 
for such a place is based upon the exceeding great 
and precious promises given by Jehovah. To lay up 
heavenly treasures now, such members conform themselves
 to the will of God; and his will is ascertained 
by a careful study of the divine plan. "And every 
man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even 
as he [the Lord] is pure." (1 John 3:3) To such 
the Master said : "Be ye perfect even as your Father 
in heaven is perfect". (Matthew 5:48) This means 
character perfection like the Lord. Such a character 
is not developed in a day, nor a week, nor a month, 
but it is the result of patient and faithful endeavor to 
conform oneself to the fixed rules that the Lord lays 
down governing the new creation. 

God foreknew and provided for the development of 
this new creation before the foundation of the world, 
and "whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate 
to be conformed to the image of his Son". (Romans 
8:29) It means, then, that those who would lay up 
heavenly treasures must be the footstep followers of 
Jesus, joyfully doing the Father's will — those who set 
their affections on things above and not on things of 
the earth and then run with patience the race set before
 them. These are they who give all diligence to 
make their calling and election sure. 

TESTS ESSENTIAL 

To lay up heavenly treasure requires labor, faith, 
knowledge, fortitude, self-control, patience, brotherlykindness
 and love. It is expected that these fruits of 
character-development will increase as the Christian 
journeys toward his heavenly home. The testing 
time, however, must come, when each one according 
to the Lord's gracious arrangement must be put to the 
test to determine whether or not he has been diligent 
in laying up the heavenly treasure. Hence we are not 
to be surprised when the tests come, but rather should 
expect them and be prepared for them. "Blessed is 
the man that endureth temptation [testing — a putting 
to proof] ; for when he is tried [tested, and withstands
 the test] he shall receive the crown of life 
which the Lord hath promised to them that love him." 
(James 1:12) It is the overcoming Christian who 
fights the good fight of faith to the end, manifesting 
loyalty to the Lord, to his brethern and to the cause of 
righteousness, that is promised the inheritance of this 
heavenly treasure. It is to such that the Captain of 
our salvation addresses himself: "Be thou faithful 
unto death and I will give thee a crown of life". — 
Revelation 2:10. 

It is true that the Christian while laying up this 
heavenly treasure must endure sufferings, deprivations
, trials and tests ; but these are hardly worth comparing
 with the glories that are to follow. St. Paul 
was a man of more than ordinary attainments from 
an earthly standpoint, yet all of these he sacrificed. 
He was a Christian who suffered more than the ordi- 


364 


THE WATCH TOWER 


t*lTTS«tJ*OH, Pa,. 


nary Christian docs for the cause of righteousness; 
and yet he said : "I reckon that the sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with the 
glory which shall be revealed in as". (Romans 8:18) 
"For our light affliction, which is but for a moment 
[comparatively speaking] , worketh for us a far more 
exceeding and external weight of glory/' — 2 Cor. 4:17. 
It is impossible now to have more than a glimpse of 
the heavenly treasures and the attending unspeakable 
joys that shall be the portion of those who possess 
these treasures as an everlasting heritage. Now, as 
the eyes of our understanding open wider and wider, 


we have an increased vision by faith of their wonder 
and beauty ; but when we are made in the likeness of 
our Lord and Master and view these treasures with 
unclouded eyes and realize they are actually ours forever
, then we shall not only feel infinitely repaid for 
all the sufferings and hardships we have endured, but 
our joy will know no bounds and pleasures will be ours 
for evermore as we dwell in the house of the Lord 
and continue to acquire knowledge of his marvelous 
character and behold his beauty through all the ages 
to come. 


A WORD IN EXPLANATION 


Dear Brother Rutherford: 

Greetings in his dear name. I am taking the liberty of 
writing you about a matter that has disturbed, to some extent, 
the minds of some of tht dear friends, namely: Is Chiropractic
 akin to spiritism or occultism? I have just received 
the following letter from one of the Pilgrim brethren in 
regard to the rumor that Chiropractic is a form of spiritism. 
Part of the letter is as follows: (1) Is there anything in 
Chiropractic that is akin to spiritism or occultism? (2) Does 
every school of Chiropractic require the student to take 
such a course as is outlined in the inclosed leaflets before 
granting a diploma? (3) Do all Chiropractors practice 
psychism and mentalism? (4) Is it true that the founder of 
Chiropractic received the knowledge concerning it from the 
spirits ? 

In replying I assured the brother that the whole matter 
was absured. That the school mentioned was not a recognized
 Chiropractic school, and that neither Hypnotism nor 
Mentalism nor any other 'Ism had anything to do with Chiropractic
. Chiropractic is a mechanical science and is so 
taught by Chiropractic schools worthy of the name. There 
are at the present time about a dozen of our brethren in the 
Palmer school at Davenport, and there are quite a number 
practicing Chiropractic in different parts of the country, 
and I am sure that the ones I have met regard our Vow just 
as sacredly as I do and they would not be mixed up with 
Chiropractic if it were tainted, in the least, with spiritism. 
Chiropractic was accidentally discovered by Dr. D. D. Palmer, 
and has been developed into a wonderful health-giving science 
by his son, Dr. B. J. Palmer. The fact that some cheap 
school teaches a course in hypnotism and also tries to teach 
Chiropractic in connection with it does not contaminate the 
science, only in the minds of those who do not understand 
the truth on the subject. Some even believe that those of us 
who practice Chiropractic are candidates for the second 
death. This thought is prevalent in quite a number of the 
classes in the middle states and is at least not doing the 
friends any good to feel toward fellow-members as some do. 
I feel like a word from you to the friends would clarify their 
minds on the subject and thereby be a great blessing. 

Rest assured, dear Brother Rutherford, that this matter 
will bear the "acid test" of investigation, and that this school, 
of which I am sending the leaflet does not represent the 
teachings of Chiropractic. I was not aware until I received 
this letter that this school had added such a branch to their 
teaching. 

Faithfully your brother, W. H. Dunn, D. C— Ky, 

My Dear Brother Rutherford: 

Greetings in the name of our King. My attention has 
been called recently to a matter which I believe ought to be 
corrected in the minds of some of the friends. This idea 
seems to have gained considerable headway in this part of the 
country, at least, and that is, "Chiropractic" is a form of 
spiritism. Upon visiting a certain class recently I was surprised
 when I was asked the question, "Do you think that 
*Chiro' has any connection with spiritism?" A little later I 
learned that several of that place have that idea, and that the 
business of a brother chiropractor there (who was formerly a 
pilgrim and is still loyal to the Lord and the Society) is 
suffering, partially at least, on account of the circulation of 
this rumor. The rumorists say that a certain ex-pilgrim 
brother "went out of the truth" on account of Chiropractic 
If the brother here referred to did go out of the truth, we 


knew that it was self and not Chiro that put him out. 

These two reports have come to me also, viz.; (1) that a 
certain pilgrim has advised against use of Chiro for reasons 
stated above; (2) that you yourself have taken the same 
stand, and this I do not believe. 

For myself, I cannot see how this idea could be true. 
I cannot see any connection between the two. My father, 
Brother W. D. Pelle, is a Chiropractor as well as an M. D., 
and two of our elders are Chiropractors. These three 
brethren are all loyal, faithful followers of the Lamb. 

I understand that a certain college in Chicago will not 
teach Chiropractic unless hypnotism is studied also. There 
are other subjects also with which hypnotism is required. 

Satan is surely busy and is always starting rumors. It 
pays us to be on guard on all sides against his machinations. 
He will try to damage anything that will be a blessing to 
humanity. I believe that Chiropractic is a restitution blessing, 
and will mean much to the human race yet 

It seems to me that it would be helpful to get the truth of 
this matter before the friends, and that anyone who is contemplating
 studying Chiropractic should be warned against 
this college in Chicago, or any other school that requires such 
things as this one does. 
Your brother and servant in his name, W. Leo Peixe— Ky. 

IK REPLY 

Dear Brother Dunk : 

Yours of October 30th to hand. I have no knowledge 
of chiropractic service except that gained through receiving 
adjustments or treatments from various practitioners of this 
profession. I cannot conceive, however, how it could be fr»m 
the demons. I have heard this from time to time, but I know 
nothing on which to base it. We can very easily see how 
those who are under influences of the demons might take up 
the teaching of Chiropractic in connection with their work. 
That would not at all prove that the profession itself, or the 
practice, art, or science, originated with the demons. 

Personally I can testify that it has been a great benefit to 
me at times. It is most reasonable to conclude that any displacement
 of the vertebrae that would impinge a nerve would 
cause a disturbance in some part of. the system and a proper 
replacement of the vertebrae, releasing the pressure on the 
nerve, would permit nature to adjust the difficulty. To my 
mind that seems both practically and strictly a mechanical 
science. 

I have great faith in you, dear brother, and in your judgment
 as a practitioner of this science. I likewise know some 
other brethren who are doing the same thing and I believe 
they are doing much good. I believe both osteopathic and 
chiropractic service are reasonable and proper, giving temporary
 relief to the body, permitting nature to adjust its own 
difficulties. Of course, each one must determine this matter 
for himself and I am not writing this to influence anybody 
else, but personally, I do not believe for a moment that the 
practice emanates from the demons and T do believe that it 
accomplishes good. 

Any school that has a course of instruction in psychic, or 
occult, science, so-called, should be ignored by those in the 
truth, because we know that the major portion of that which 
passes under the name of psychic research is spiritism or 
demonism, but there seems to me to be absolutely no connection
 between psychic research and Chiropractic. 
Your brother and servant by his grace, J. F. Rutherford 


QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS 


WBDDIira QABMEJTT AND BOBB OF BIOHTE0USWB88 

Question : Is the "wedding garment" mentioned in 
Matthew 22:11, 12 (and implied in Canticles 5:3) 
the same as the "robe of righteousness" mentioned in 
Isaiah 61 :io and alluded to in Luke 15:22? 

Answer: Not exactly. Our wedding garment is 
more than the robe of Christ's righteousness. The 
wedding garment represents opportunity for participation
 in the marriage of Christ, and while justification 
is one of the things necessary to secure that opportunity
, the two are not one and the same thing. Along 
with the opportunity for participation goes the expectation
 that, as a result of faithful laying down of 
life with the Lord, participation with him in his sufferings
, we shall be joined to him in glory as his bride. 
Those who are less appreciative of this opportunity, 
and consequently less faithful to the Lord and his 
Word, do not reject the robe of Christ's righteousness, 
but they do not use it for the purpose provided. They 
do not think of it as offering them participation in the 
wedding, hence do not think of it as a wedding garment
 until it is forever too late. They lay aside these 
nuptial prospects in favor of earthly approbation, ambitions
, or emoluments, thinking always that sometime, 
when it is more convenient, when they get time and 
feel like it, they will begin making the sacrifices which 
they know full well are the necessary preliminaries to 
reigning. Only "if we suffer with him shall we reign 
with him". 

JOSEPH'S TRIBE LEAST HON OB ABLE? 

Question: Are we to understand the fact that 
Joseph's tribe is mentioned last in the list of Revelation
 seventh chapter to indicate that tribe's position 
in respect to honor, that it will be the least in honor ? 

Answer: Any view which would make Joseph's 
tribe least honorable would be unsatisfactory. One 
suggestion as to possible arrangement of the gates *s 
given in "The Finished Mystery", based on the tribal 
territorial allotments prophesied by Ezekiel. Although
 these allotments evidently apply to the fleshly 
tribes during the Millennium, that arrangement ^s 
worthy of careful consideration as possibly applying 
also to the mystic tribes. Then there is another way 
of viewing the matter: if we assume Judah's gate 
to be in the northern central position on the mystic 
walls of the New Jerusalem (a fair assumption 
because of the seeming identity of the north 
with justice, the basic principle of God's character
 and throne) and naming the tribal gates from 
right to left, Hebrew fashion, we will end up with 
Joseph on the immediate right of Judah. In such an 
arrangement Reuben, Judah, and Joseph would grace 
the northern wall. We have no exact information as 
to the order or location of the various gates. But it is 
reasonable to assume that the order given in the text 
can be followed with safety in the manner suggested. 

COVENANT BREAKERS TEEMED WICKED 

Question: Who are the wicked whom God will destroy
, as mentioned in Psalm 145 :20? 

Answer: The wicked whom God will destroy are 
the wilfully wicked, those who with sufficient light 
and knowledge of Jehovah's character and plan to 


enable them to understand the operation of his 
principles still prefer wrong and are not amenable to 
the benign, happifying influences of God's gracious 
provisions for them and for all mankind. Whether 
such live in this age or in the age to come makes no 
difference, except that those who come to full knowledge
 and responsibility in this age are very few, 
whereas in the next age "all shall know him, from the 
least of them to the greatest of them, saith the Lord". 

While many now have a general knowledge of God, 
very few know him personally. Only those who approach
 him in his appointed way can have any dealings
 whatever with him. There must be an introduction
; or else they cannot have a word with him, nor 
will he deal with them. Whoever comes to the Father 
must come through the Son, as our Lord declares. 
(John 16:6) All who will come in this specified way 
have the privilege of coming; and all such shall know 
him, trust in him, and be thoroughly sympathetic with 
his ends and objects. Moreover, they must lay down 
their lives in the doing of his will, as did their Advocate
 and Head. After God has accepted them into his 
family, then as his children he will talk to them. But 
unless they become his children, he will have no dealings
 with them at all. 

To the wicked the Lord says : "What hast thou to 
do to take my words into thy mouth, seeing that thou 
ha test instruction and castest my words behind thee ?" 
(Psalm 50:16, 17) These words we understand to be 
addressed to those who have come into covenant relationship
 with God but who have failed to carry out 
their part of the contract. In the Scriptures the world 
of mankind in general is not spoken of as wicked. On 
the contrary, the world is described as blind, buried in 
ignorance and superstition, dead in trespasses and sins. 
The class to whom the Psalmist refers are those who 
have become children of God through Christ and who 
have then become wicked — covenant breakers. To illustrate
: In the case of the Sodomites, although they 
were accounted very reprehensible, yet God does not 
speak of them as the wicked. But in the case of those 
who have been introduced to the Father, those who 
have come to a knowledge of the truth and have 
consecrated their lives to the Lord, it is different. If 
any such shall live contrary to that knowledge and that 
consecration they would be classed as the wicked. So 
we see that it is not the world at large who are denominated
 the wicked, but only those who have come 
into the divine relationship and who have proved themselves
 unworthy to remain therein. 

God has no dealings with the world at large ; for all 
mankind are under the death sentence. All the children
 of Adam go down into death under the sentence 
pronounced in Eden, Mankind are aliens, strangers 
from the commonwealth of Israel — outside of every 
relation which God has made. But he tells his people 
not only about himself but also about his great plan 
for the blessing of all the families of the earth. When 
the due time arrives, when the Spirit and bride say, 
Come, then all mankind will have the opportunity 
granted them to come to a knowledge of the truth as it 
is in Christ Jesus. Then all the blind eyes shall be 
opened, and all the deaf ears unstopped. Any who 
are found to be wicked will be destroyed in the second 
death. 


365 


PETER PREACHES AT PENTECOST 

January 4.— Acts 2:14, 22-24, 32-42. 

THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM USED BY PETER— JESUS **OT HOLMJN OF DEATH— RAISED IN POWER AND GREAT GU)HY— JESUS THE 
RANSOM PRICE—CHRIST, THE LORD OF GLORY— NO FEAR OR SHAME IN PETER'S PREACHING— SAVOR OF LIFE UNTO LITE AND 
OF DEATH UNTO DEATH— REPENTANCE AND BAPTISM FOR TH JEWS— REMISSION OF SINS THROUGH CHRIST; OUR REDEEMER. 

"Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved"— -Acts 2:21. 



ETER had been told by our Lord that he would 
be given the keys to or the privilege" of opening 
the way into the kingdom of heaven. Many 
people childishly assume that this promise was 
intended to announce some position which the 
Apostle Peter would occupy in the heavenly 
realm. From this false conception of our 
Lord's words has come down the legend that 
Peter's duties in heaven are to open and shut 
the pearly gates. Even without any other 

I understanding of the passage this interpretation 

would be largely nullified by the statement of our Lord that 
it was not within his providence to designate where various 
members of the body should be located in the heavenly kingdom
. — Matthew 20:23. 

The simple and evident meaning of our Lord's promise 
was that Peter was to have the privilege of opening up the 
way into the church, or kingdom class. This he did for the 
Jews at Pentecost, and a part of his words constitute the 
basis for today's lesson. He told them plainly what steps 
were necessary to gain admission into the church of Christ, 
into the assembly of consecrated and spirit-begotten believers. 
Three and one-half years after that time he had the privilege 
of explaining to the Gentiles the conditions on which entrance 
into the kingdom class could be gained; for the first Gentile 
convert was Cornelius. (Acts 10:34-43) These two experiences
 given to Peter were a special honor and blessing; and 
they completely fulfilled our Lord's promise that the keys of 
the kingdom were to be given to him.— Matthew 16:19. 

Peter is represented in the fourteenth verse of our lesson 
as standing up with the eleven. This naturally must mean 
with the rest of the eleven, since Judas Iscariot was dead 
by suicide and Paul, his successor, had not yet been chosen 
of the Lord. 

"HEAB YE, ISRAEL" 

The Apostle then breaks forth into his sermon, which was 
a simple and straight- forward exposition of certain elementary
 truths. Making all due allowance for brevity of 
report, the Apostle's remarks were evidently direct and hardly 
capable of being misunderstood by his hearers. Two elements 
entering into our Lord's death are mentioned by him: (1) 
the fact that it was in harmony with Jehovah's intention and 
in harmony with utterances of the Hebrew prophets on that 
point (Isaiah 53*.3-8);. (2) the fact that the Jewish rulers 
were responsible for his death. 

He then touched upon what was probably a tender spot 
in the minds of many of his hearers: he told plainly of the 
resurrection of our Lord from death. But he did not stop 
with a mere assertion of the fact; he showed how it was 
impossible for him to be holden in death* It was not possible, 
because he had kept the divine will perfectly, and thus, according
 to divine arrangement and promise, he had accomplished
 two things: (1) the giving of the ransom price for 
the human family; (2) the attestation of his own fidelity and 
his worthiness to high exaltation to the divine nature and 
glory, "that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor 
The Father "—John 5 :23- 

The same justice which had operated for four thousand 
years against Adam and his race because of transgression 
was now operative on behalf of Jesus for his deliverance 
from death, into which he had voluntarily gone as man's 
redemption price. But it must be borne in mind that our 
Lord was raised as a new creature. At the river Jordan 
three and one-half years before his crucifixion he entered 
into a contract with Jehovah to lay down his perfect human 
life as a ransom or off-set price for the penalty which had 
been justly laid against Adam's sin of disobedience. It was 
God's intention to accept that offer of a substitutionary payment
 of the death penalty to liberate all the children of 
Adam, who had been condemned with Adam because they 
were in his loins. "For since by man came death, by man 
also the resurrection of the dead." (1 Corinthians 15:20 
As a mark of appreciation of our Lord's willingness to die 
as man's Redeemer and in furtherance of the divine purpose 
in providing man with an effective king, as well as savior, 
God begat Jesus to a new nature, the divine nature; he 
started in rum a new life which eventuated at the time of 


his resurrection in his glorious exaltation "far above all 
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named."— Ephesians 1 :2i. 

HIS HTJMAN LIFE AN ASSET 

On Calvary our Lord ceased for ever to experience his 
human life. But since he had committed no sin he still had 
a right to apply or to dispense the right to life and the blessings
 which would normally belong to a perfect human being. 
He did not, would not, and will not again live on the human 
plane; for if he did he would nullify the ransom price which 
rnust^ remain on account in satisfaction of Adam's transgression
, if mankind are to receive the promised blessings. 
(Genesis 12:3) At his resurrection, therefore,' our Lord was 
a glorious new creature, "the express image of [the Father's] 
person," having "all power in heaven and in earth." (He* 
brews 1:3; Matthew 28:18) Furthermore our Lord will not 
again experience the human life because it would limit him 
in the proper exercise of his responsibilities as Prophet, 
Priest, and King over all the earth for a thousand years, to 
bring to men the actual blessings which his ransom sacrifice 
guaranteed them. 

When we come to see matters from the divine standpoint 
and arrangement we can well rejoice that the Father's character
 is unchangeable, and our Lord's resurrection becomes 
an evidence, or, as the Apostle says, an "assurance", of the 
carrying out of every feature of the divine plan, all of which 
center in our Lord Jesus and are made dependent upon his 
faithfulness unto death, even the death of the cross. _ (Acts 
17:31) Our Lord as a new creature had done no sin and 
while it was necessary for man's redemption that his human 
life be not again taken up, no such restrictions could apply 
to him as a new being, whom God purposed to exalt to his 
own right hand 

Coming to the narrative of our Lord's resurrection from 
the standpoint above set forth, realizing that ail of our hopes 
of life eternal are dependent upon him, we come to it with 
much more and much deeper interest than we could have if 
it were approached from any other standpoint or theory. 
And we are to remember that the followers ef Jesus were 
Jews and that the heathen philosophies had not yet made 
great inroads upon the people to mislead them into thinking 
that the dead are not dead. As a people they believed the 
dead were dead, and placed their hopes in a resurrection, 
though they looked upon that resurrection as being in the 
distant future. 

Our Lord was the firstfruit of them that slept, aad following
 him throughout this Gospel age have been chosen his 
faithful members who are to constitute his church and mystic 
body. It was God's intention that at the close of the Gospel 
age and in advance of the mass of mankind these were to 
be called forth from death in the first resurrection to the 
glory, honor, exaltation, and opportunities held out for them. 
They were to be the balance of the "firstf ruits". — James 1 :i8, 

WOED CAME IN POWER OF GOD 

The meager outlines of the preaching on the day of Pentecost
, afforded us by the extracts from Peter's discourse, indicate
 simplicity, wisdom, and courage, such as we should 
expect in those who were guided by the holy Spirit The 
Apostle first took advantage of the charge of some that the 
speakers were intoxicated. He showed the unreasonableness 
of the proposition on the surface and then explained the 
true meaning oi the phenomenon, referring his reader* 
directly to Joel's prophecy. "And upon the servants and the 
handmaids in those days I will ?our out my spirit", — Joel 
2 :2g. 

It may be well to note in passing that Joel's prophecy is a 
double one, and that, probably for the very purpose of hiding 
the truth until due, it states matters in their reverse order; 
telling first about the general blessing of the Millennial ugt 
"aferward", and telling subsequently about the blessing of 
the Gospel age, which is confined exclusively to God's servants 
and handmaidens — "in those days'* — during the Gospel age, 
prior to the general outpouring of the spirit which will follow 
the establishment of the kingdom. 


366 


Dhcbmber I, 1919 


THE WATCH TOWER 


367 


Having gotten the attention of bis hearers, many of whom 
were believers in the prophets — and "waiting for the consolation
 of Israel", which they promised— the Apostle proceeded 
to preach Christ unto them. He did not becloud his subject 
and confuse his hearers by saying: You have heard of great 
philosophers and great teachers among the Gentiles, and as 
Jews we have had some great prophets ourselves, one of 
whom was Jesus ; but he came directly to the point he wished 
to impress, and declared to them that Jesus, the despised 
Nazarene, of whom, doubtless, the majority had heard something
, probably derogatory, was indeed the Messiah; that 
though he had died he had arisen ; and having arisen and 
ascended on high he had shed forth his power upon these 
speakers, who were now his representatives and mouthpieces 
in the world, to declare his mercy. 

Neither fear of rulers nor shame in confessing the crucified 
one to be his Master is the least apparent in the Apostle's 
language. He fully identified himself with the crucified One, 
and as plainly declared that the rulers had been wickedly and 
sinfully responsible for his death, in that they had incited 
the Roman governor to its accomplishment He pointed out 
that this was no mischance, but God's foreknown and prearranged
 plan — that it was necessary that Messiah should 
die as the Redeemer of the people, before he could deliver 
them fully. He pointed out that although it was necessary 
for Christ to die nevertheless a heavy responsibility, a curse, 
hung over that nation which had thus, in its wickedness of 
heart, rejected and crucified God's Son. 

LITE TO SOME; DEATH TO OTHERS 

The word of truth, as always, was a savor of Hfe unto 
life or death unto death. (2 Corinthians 2:16) To many 
the words were foolishness and had the death odor, and they 
passed on ; but to those deeply interested ones who remained, 
the Apostle's explanation of matters was forceful, especially 
as he backed this up by quotations from the prophets, showing
 that God had foreknown the death of Messiah, and had 
foretold his resurrection also, and this miraculous outpouring 
of his spirit, of which they all were witnesses. The record 
is that many of the hearers were pricked to the heart, conscience
-smitten. They noted the aptness of the Apostle's 
quotations and their application, and the logic of his reasoning
; and doubtless in all things they remarked of the apostles 
what they had previously remarked of our Lord — that the 
teaching was not like that of the scribes and Pharisees^ uncertain
, indefinite, but with force, with authority, with distinctness
, with conviction of its truth. 

And afer this same sort is all the preaching of God's true 
servants, done under the influence of the holy Spirit. It is 
illuminating and not confusing. Error is never clear ; it is 
always confused and confusing. Clearness and simplicity, on 
the contrary, are marks of the truth. For various reasons 
the old, old story, which the apostles here preached, is considerably
 neglected in our day by professed ministers of the 
Gospel of Christ. One reason is that those who attempt to 
teach realize their own confusion of thought, and need first 
to be taught of God through his Word, by his holy Spirit, 
and through such channels as the holy Spirit may use in 
granting illumination of mind and appreciation of the Word. 
Another reason is that the nominal churches have in great 
measure ceased to believe the old, old story, and have accepted 
instead an evolution theory. Only to a small minority of 
Christian people, therefore, is the true Gospel precious. The 
majority more and more have itching ears for something 
new — a new gospel of education, refinement, culture, wealth. 
—2 Timothy 4:3, 4. 

TBUTH FINDS ITS MABK 

As the Apostle clinched one feature after another of his 
argument, and showed how completely Jesus had fulfilled the 
declaration of the prophets in respect to his life, his teachings, 
his miracles, his death, his resurrection, and the holy Spirit 
now poured out upon his followers, conviction of the truth 
was forced upon the minds of many of his hearers, and they 
cried out: "Men and brethren, what shall we do?"— is there 
any mercy for us, seeing we are members of this nation, 
whose rulers have thus despised God's grace, and crucified 
his Son and special Messenger to us ? . . , 

This was exactly the condition of heart which Peter desired 
to awaken. He wisely realized that people must see the 
provision for their forgiveness and rescue before they will 
lay hold upon salvation. He would not begin by tendering 
mercy, but by showing the right, the truth, in contradistinction 


to the wrong. But now that his hearers were in the right 
condition of heart, the Apostle did not seek to terrify them, 
but promptly told them that they were God's favored people' 
and that if they would come to the repentant condition of 
heart they would be accepted of the Lord, even as the other 
believers were already accepted; and that they, too, would 
have the blessing of the holy Spirit and its gifts. There is 
a pattern in this preaching which all of the Lord's royal 
priesthood should take note of and practice as they have 
opportunity to dispense the good tidings. Instead of ranting, 
they should use logic, reason, and Scriptural quotations* and 
those convicted, and seeking to know the way, should not be 
terrorized, but should be promptly assisted and guided in the 
Lord s way, and assured of his mercy. 

The Apostle was fully justified in telling his hearers that 
the promises were still theirs as a people; for it was clearly 
declared bythe Lord, through the prophet, that Christ should 
be cut off in the midst of the seventieth symbolic week of 
Israels favor, leaving one-half of that seventieth week, viz., 
three and one-half years, of special favor to Israelites individually
, after their national favor had ceased.— Daniel 
9:25-27; Matthew 23:37, 38. 

EEPENT AND BE CONVEBTED 

Specifically, Peter's answer was that his consciencestricken
 hearers should individually repent and be baptized 
He did not make the mistake that some are inclined to make, 
when they suppose that sorrow for a wrong is repentance. 
Peter perceived that they already were sorry, "perplexed in 
their hearts." Sorrow is not repentance, but, as the Apostle 
explains, "Godly sorrow leadeth to repentance." (2 Corinthians
 7 :ft 10) Repentance would be the proper fruitage or 
result of a proper sorrow. Repentance would mean a full 
retraction of all share in the great national sin of Israel, the 
rejection and crucifixion of Messiah. It would mean, therefore
, an acceptance of Jesus as the Messiah, and the confession
 of him as such. And this, in turn, would mean that 
confessing him to be the Son of God, they would become 
fully submissive to his teachings, become his disciples. Repentance
, therefore, rightly understood, meant a great deal, 
and it means no less today than then. Whoever today refuses 
to acknowledge Christ as the Messiah, the sent of God— whoever
 refuses to obey his teachings, to follow him — is unrepentant
; no matter how fully he may believe that Jesus of 
Nazareth was the Messiah, the sent of God, the Redeemer; 
and even though he sorrow at the record of the sufferings 
of Christ, he has not come to the point of repentance until 
he has renounced the sins for which Christ suffered, and 
become a follower of his teachings. Only such as are thus 
repentant have part or lot in the household of faith. God's 
proposition is not to save people in their sins, but to save 
them from their sins; and during this Gospel age the first 
condition of acceptance and blessing is that the sinner shall 
renounce his sin and accept the Lord and the righteousness 
and harmony with God for which he stands as representative. 
"He that hath the Son of God hath life, and he that hath not 
the Son of God hath not life." — 1 John 5:12. 

REMISSION OF SINS 

The persons whom the Apostle addressed were all Jews, 
and hence he said: "Be baptised for the remission of your 
sins/* Baptism is^ not God's appointed channel for the remission
 of sins; for, as the Apostle declares, "Without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission." (Hebrews 9:22) 
However, the Jewish nation, under God's arrangement 
through Moses, was accepted of him as a whole, as a nation, 
and sin-offerings had been made for them all as a nation, 
and had been accepted, and a covenant had been made called 
the Law Covenant. Those whom the Apostles addressed, 
being under the Law Covenant, were under ah these favorable 
conditions, under the blood of the typical sacrifices, typically 
justified and reconciled; and to them, consequently, God's 
promises pertained, as they did not pertain to the Gentiles, 
who had not come under such typical reconciliation through 
typical sacrifices. The sin which the Apostle wished his 
hearers emblematically to wash away in baptism was not, 
therefore, original sin, but^was a sin against their Law Covenant
, including their national sin in the rejection of the 
Messiah. With these purged away, with the symbolical washing
, they would be back to the standpoint of true Israelites, 
"Israelites indeed"; and as such they would have every right 
and privilege belonging to the Israelites, but belonging to 
members of no other nation. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lecturer and Studies by Traveling Brethrea 


Wenatchee, Wash. 

Everett, Waah 

Port Townsend, Waah. 
Burlington, Waah. . . 
Bedro Wool ley, Waah 
Belling ham, Wash. . . 


BBOTHEB W, 

.Dec. 5 

7 
8 

9 

10 
11 


a- BAKER 
Vancouver, B. 0. . 
Victoria, B. 0. . . 
Olympia, Waah. . . 
Aberdeen, Waah. 
Centralia, Wash. . 
Portland, Ore. . . . 


.Dee. 12 
. " 14, 15 
. " 18 

. M 19 

". 20 

. " 31 


BBOTHEB B. L. 10BXB 


Sanf ord, Fla Dec. 

Grand Island, Fla . . 

Orlando, Fla 

Apopka, Fla 

Farpon Springs, Fla 
Tampa, Fla 


BBOTHEE B. H. BARBER 


1 

2 

8.4 

6 

7,8 
9 


Avon Park, Fla. . . 
Lakeland, Fla. . . . 
Punta Gorda, Fla. 
Arcadia, Fla. 
Sarasota, Fla. . '. . 
Key West, Fla . . . 


.Dee. 


Sheridan, Wyo Dec. 4, 5 

Sterling, Colo * 4 0, 7 

H&xtuxn, Coio * * 8 

Holyoke, Colo " 9 

Bloomington, Neb. .. " 11,12 
St. Joseph, Mo " 18,14 


BBOTHEB T. E. BARKER 


Linneus, Mo. 

Quincy, 111 

St. Louis, Mo. . . 
Evansville, Ind. . 
Hopkinsville, Ky. 
Louisville, Ky. . . 


10 
11 
12 
18 
14, 16 
19 


.Dee. 16 
. " 16, 17 
. " 18 

. " 19 

. " 20, 21 
. " 22 


BBOTHEB J, A. BOHNET 


Foatoria, Ohio . . 
Marion, Ohio . . . 
Delaware, Ohio . 
Columbus, Ohio . 
Newark, Ohio . . . 
Crooksville, Ohio 


.Dec. 


1 White Cottage, Ohio. Dee. 8 

2 Zanesville, Ohio " 9 

• Dresden, Ohio ** 10 

4 Coshocton, Ohio " 11 

6 Dayton, Ohio " 12,18 

7 Pittsburgh, Pa " 14 


Caney, Kan 

Independence, Kan. 
Parsons, Kan. . . . 
Chetopa, Kan. . . . 
Ceffeyville, Kan. . 
Nowata, Okie. . . . 


BBOTHEB B. H. BOYD 


.Dec. 


1 Claremore, Okla. . . .Dee. 8 

2 Muskogee, Okla. . . . " 9 
8,4 Bidding Spr., Okla.. " 10 

6 Dkmulgee, Okla. ... " 11,12 
3apulpa, Okla " 18, 14 

7 rulsa, Okla " ' * " 


14,16 


Birmingham, Ala. 
Randolph, Ala. . . 
Jemison, Ala, . . . 
Montgomery, Ala. 

Selma, Ala 

Brewton, Ala. . . 


BBOTHEB A. J. 

..Dec. 1,2 

.. " 8 

.. " 4 

.. " 6 

.. " 7 

. . " 8, 9 


Kalamaioo, Mich. . 
Battle Creek, Mich. 
Albion, Mich. . . 
Jackson, Mich. . . 
Ypsilanti, Mich. 
Detroit, Mich. . 


BBOTHEB A. 

..Dee. 1 

2 
8 
4 
6 
7 


ESHLEMAN 

Pen sac o la, Fla Dee. 

Ponce de Leon, Fla. 

Altha, Fla 

Marianne, Fla 

Monticello, Fla. . . 
Jacksonville, Fla. . 

I. GRAHAM 

Windsor, Ont Dee. 

Port Clinton, Ohio. 

Tiffin, Ohio 

Lima, Ohio 

Dayton, Ohio 

Cleveland, Ohio . . 


10 
11 
12 
14 
16,16 
17 


7,8 

9 

10 

11 

12, 18 

14 


Charlottesville, Va. Dee. 

Lynchburg, Va " 

Hurt, Va " 

Chatham, Va " 

Java, Va " 

Danville, Va <# 


BBOTHEB X. L. HEBB 

1 Keysville, Va Dae. 8 

2 Richmond, Va " 9,14 

8 Orchid, Va " 10 

4 Petersburg, Va " 12 

6 Emporia, Va " 16 

7 Suffolk, Va " 10, 17 


Belleville. 111. . - 
Carterville. HI. 

Marion, HI. 

Thebes. 111. 
Dexter, Mo. . . 
Avert, Mo. . . . 


BBOTHEB O. 

...Dee. 1 

... " 2 

. .. " 8 

... " 4 

..." 6, 7 


EEHDAIJ, 

Poplar Bluff, Mo. . . Dee. 10 


Chaonia, Mo. 
Mounds, 111. 
Anna, 111. . . . 
Elva, Ky. . . . 
Paducah, Ky. 


11 
12 
14, 15 
17 
18 


Lane, Kan 

Garnet t, Kan 

Williamsburg, Kan. 

Iola, Kan 

Mound City, Kan. 
Fort Scott, Kan. . . 


BBOTHEB O. MAGNTJSON 

.Dec. 1 Arcadia, Kan Deo. 

. ** 2 Pittsburg. Kan " 

. *• 8 Joplin, Mo " 

. " 4 Baxter Springs, Mo. " 

. " 6 Webb City, Mo " 

. " 7 Carthage, Mo " 


Stem, N. C 

Louisburg, N. O. 
Henderson. N. C. . 
High Point, N. O. 
Welcome, N. C . . . 
Winston-Salem, N 


. O 


8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
14 


BBOTHEB S. MORTON 

Dec. 4 Leeksville, N. Dec. 12 

" 6,6 Greensboro, N. 0... " 14,15 

" 7 Charlotte, N. C " 

" 8 Spartanburg, S. 0... " 

9 Greer, 8. " 

" 10, 11 Westminster, S. O. . " 


10 
17 
18 
19 


BBOTHEB W. H. PICKERING 


Comanche, Okla. . . . Dec. 1, 2 

Marlow, Okla " 8 

Chic kasha. Okla. ..." 4 

Minco, Okla " 5 

Hobart, Okla " 7 

Booasrelt, Okla. ..." 8 


Blair, Okla Dee. 9, 10 

Custer, Okla " 11 

Enid. Okla " 12 

Shattuck, Okla " 14 

Ivanhoe, Okla " 16,10 

Woodward, Okla. ... " 17,18 


Fayetteville, Ark. . .Dec. 1, 2 

Red Star, Ark * ' 8.4 

Swain, Ark " 6, 7 

Springdale, Ark. ..." 9 

Bileam Springs, Ark. " 10 

Menett, Mo " 11 


BBOTHEB V. 0. BIOB 


Springfield, Mo. 

Taneyrille, Me 

Mountain Grove, Mo. 
Willow Springs, Me. 

South Fork, Mo 

Moody, Mo 


.Dec. 13, 16 
14 
16 
17 
18 
19 


Plympton, Mas*. . 
FaU River, Maas. . 
New Bedford, Mass.. 
Providence, B. I.... 
Woonsocket, B. I... 
Bradford, B. I 


Dee. 1 Westerly, R. I Dm. i 

" 2 New London, Conn, " t 

8 Norwich, Conn. " • 

4 S. Coventry, Conn.. " It 

5 Hartford, Conn. ..." 11 
New Britain, Conn. . " 13 



BBOTHEB E. 

D. SEXTO* 

Nashua, N. H 

Manchester, N. H. . 
West Epping, N. H. 

Kittery, Me 

Dover, N. H 

Kennebunk, Me. . . . 

iz : : : : 


Portland, Ma. Dee. 7 

Lewistown, Me. ....*' 9 

Canton, Me. " 9 

Wilton, Me " 19 

Pittsfield, Me. " 11 

Belfast, Me " IS 


BBOTHEB 

W. 

J. THORN 

Denison, Tex 

McKinney, Tex. . . . 

Piano, Tex 

Ennis, Tex 

Dallas, Tex 

Fort Worth, Tex. . 

.Dec. 1 

. " 2 

. " 8 

4, 6 

0, 7 
. " 7 


Graham, Tex Dec. 8,9 

Stoneburg, Tex ' * 10 

Bowie, Tex " 11 

Wichita Falls, Tex.. " 12,14 
Archer City, Tex. .. " 18 
Electra, Tex " 16,16 


Bolivar, N. T. . . 
Allentown, N. Y. 
Shinglehouse, Pa. 

Warren, Pa 

Oil City, Pa. ... 
Titusville, Pa. .. 


BBOTHEB T. H. THORNTON 

..Dec. 1 Erie, Pa 

. . " 2 MeadviUe, Pa 

. . " 8, 4 Sharon, Pa 

.. " 5 Ellwood City, Pa,... 

.. " 7 Frostburg. Md 

. . " 8 Lonaeoninf, Md 


Dee. 


t 
10 
11 
IS 
19 
14 


BBOTHEB D. TOOLS 

San Francisco, Cal..Dec. 18, 14 Petaluma, CaL Dee. 19 

Oakland, Cal " 14 Santa Rosa, Oal " 30 

Berkeley, Cal " 15 San Jose, Oal " 21 


Richmond, Cal. . . . 
San Raphael. Cal. . 
Calistoga, Cal. . . . 


10 
17 
18 


Paso Robles, Cal. . 

Santa Maria, CaL 

Los Angeles, Cal. 


Seattle, Wash. . 
Sultan, Wash. . . 
Wenatchee, Wash. 
Spokane, Wash. 
Orient, Wash. . . . 
Revere, Waah. . . 


BBOTHEB 8. H. TOTJTJIAN 

. . Dee. 9 Pelonse, Waah. 

.. " 10 Latah, Wash. . 

.. " 11. 12 Colfax, Wash. 

.. " 18, 34 Dayton, Wash. 

.. " 15 Mesa, Wash. .. 

.. " 10 Yakima, Wash. 


33 
St 
35,39 


..Dm. 17 
. . " It 

. . " It 

.. " 31 

.. " 3S 

tt 


BBOTHEB J. A. BAEUERLEIN 

Dec. 7 Tarrytown, N. 


Albany, N. Y 

BBOTHEB E. W. BETLEB 
Bayonne, N. J Dec 7 Schenectady, 


.Dee. 14 


N. Y. 


.Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB L, T. COHEN 
Deep River, Conn Dec. 14 Bridgeport, Conn, Dee. 38 


BBOTHEB E. L, DOCKEY 
Poughkeepaie, N. Y. . . .Dec. 7 New Britain, Conn Dee. 31 


BROTHER A. DONALD 
Dec. 7 Washington, D. Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB A. D. ESHLEMAN 
Dec. 7 New Brunswick, N. J. .Dee. 14 


Brooklyn, N. Y. . . 
Plainfleld, N. J... 

Newark. N. J 

BBOTHEB H. E. HAZLETT 
Johnstown, N. Y Dec. 21 Boston, Mass. Dec. 28 


BBOTHEB a. H. FT SHE B 
. . .Dec. 7 Wilmington, Del. Dee. 31 


BBOTHEB W. F. HT7DGINGS 

Dee. 7 Granville, N. Y Dee. 21 


New Haven, Conn. 

BBOTHEB J. H. HOEVELEB 
Camden, N. J Dec. 14 Cromwell, Conn Dee. 21 


Glens Falls, N. Y. 
Washington, D. O. 


BROTHER B. J. MARTIN 
...Dec. 7 Brooklyn, N. Y Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB H. H. RIEMEB 
Dec. 7 Brooklyn, N. Y. 


.Dec. 31 


BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 
Easton, Pa Dee. 7 Providence, R. I Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB H. A. 
Springfield, Mass Dec. 7 


Bangor, Pa Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB W. E. VAN AMBUBOH 

Wilkes-Barre, Pa Dee. 7 Washington, D. Dee. 31 


BROTHER B. VAN HYNTNG 
New London, Conn. ...Dec. 7 PoUsville, Pa Dee. 14 


BBOTHEB 0. A. WISE 
Lancaster, Pa. Dee. 14 Cleveland, Dee. 21 


BBOTHEB 0. H. ZOOK 
Reading, Pa Dee. 7 South Norwalk, Conn.. Dee. SI 


sa 


W&m^MR, 






-M 




m^\ 


-^ 


:« 


i 


iz&$ 




- ROCK OF ACES - 
Other foundation can 
no man lay- ^ .'< 

A.RANSOM.FOR- ALL^- 


£-, 




# 
k^^; 


Vol. XL Semi-Monthly No. 24 

Anno Mundi 6048— December 15, 1919 

CONTENTS 

Annual Report for 1919 371 

Many Friends Shared Ignominy 371 

Colporteur Work 371 

Volunteer Work ^.~ 372 

The Golden Age 372 

Pilgrim Service 373 

Conventions 373 

Foreign Field 373 

Financial 374 

Bethel Restored 374 

Let Brotherly Love Continue 375 

Peter and John Heal a Lame Man._ 376 

The Boldness of Peter and John 377 

Peter Stands up for Truth and Honesty.. 378 

The Gospel a Message of Joy 3SU 

Your Good Hopes for 1920 381 

"I will stand upon my watch, and icill net my foot 
upon the Tower, and will icatvh to *ee what He will 
say unto me, and what atmtcrr I xhall make to them 
that oppose me." — Uabakkuk 2: i. 



Upon the earth digress of nations with po-pir^itv- the sea and the wives (the restless, discontented) roaring; men's hearts falling them for fear and for looking 
to the rhmfr- r-ommc upor \t-e >-an h isunen <- fur the powi th of the heivens (ecclesiastirism) .shaJl be shaken When > e see these things begin to come to pass, 

tbeu taiuw mat tile Km^doiu of '^ ¥ od in ui hand. Lwut up. lift up yuur iiti.dri. rejoice, for your redemption draweth nigh. — Matthew 24:33; Mark 13:29; JLuite 21:25-31 


THIS JOURNAL AND ITS SACRED MISSION 

T'HIS journal is one of the prime factors or instruments in the system of Bible Instruction, or "Seminary Extension", now being 
x presented in all parts ot the civilized world by the Watch Tower Bible * Tract Society, chartered A. D. 1884, "For the Pro 
motion of Christian Knowledge". It not only serves as a class room where Bible students may meet in the study of the divine Word but 
also as a channel of communication through which they may be reached with announcements of the Society's conventions and of th* 
coming of its traveling representatives, styled "Pilgrims", and refreshed with reports of its conventions. 

Our "Berean Lessons" are topical rehearsals or reviews of our Society's published Studies, most entertainingly arranged, and very 
helpful to all who would merit the only honorary degree which the Society accords, viz., Verbi Dei Minister (V. D. M.), which translated 
Into English is Minister of God's Word. Our treatment of the International Sunday School Lessons is specially for the older Bible 
students and teachers. By some this feature is considered indispensable. 

This journal stands firmly for the defense of the only true foundation of the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated 
— redemption through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for 
all". (1 Peter 1 : lit ; i Timothy '2 : OJ Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver and precious stones (1 Corinthians 3:11* 
15; 2 Peter 1 ;5-ll) of the Word ot God, its further mission la to "make nil see what is the fellowship of the mystery which . . . has 
been bid In God, ... to the intent that now might be made known by the church the manifold wisdom of God"— "which in other ages 
was not made known unto the sons of men as it is now revealed". — Ephesians 3 : 5-9, 10, 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest 
subjection to the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the holy Scriptures. It is thus free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord 
hath spoken — according to the divine wisdom granted unto us to understand his utterances. Its attitude is not dogmatic, but confident; 
for we know whereof we affirm, treading with implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to be used only in his 
service ; hence our decisions relative to what may and what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment of his 
good pleasure, the teaching of his Woni, for the upbuilding of his people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our 
readers to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference is constantly made to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 

That the church is "the temple of the living God", peculiarly "his workmanship"; that its construction has been in progress throughout 
the Gospel age — ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and the Chief Corner Stone of his temple, through which when 
finished, <;«d s blessing shall come "to all people", and they find access to him. — 1 Corinthians 3:16, 17; Ephesians 2*20-22; 
Genesis 28 : 14 ; Galatians 3 : 29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping, and polishing of consecrated believers in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses ; and when the 
last of these "living stones", "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, the great Master Workman will bring all together 
in the first resurrection ; and the temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting place between God and men throughout 
the Millennium. — Revelation 15 : 5-8. 

That the basis of hope, for the church and the world, lies in the fact that "Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man," "a ransom for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that comet h into the world", "in due time". — 
Hebrews 2:9; John 1 : 9 ; 1 Timothy 2:5, 6. 

That the hope of the church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him as he is," be "partakers of the divine nature", and share his 
glory as his joint-heir.— 1 John 3:2; John 17 : 24 ; Romans 8 : 17 ; 2 Peter 1 : 4. 

That the present mission of the church is the perfecting of the saints for the future work of service; to develop in herself every 

frace ; to be God's witness to the world ; and to prepare to be kings and priests in the next age.- — Ephesians 4 ; 12 ; Matthew 24 : 
4 ; Revelation 1:6; 20 : 6. 
That the hope for the world lies In the blessings of knowledge and opportunity to be brought to all bv Christ's Millennial kingdom, the 
restitution of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the hands of their Redeemer and his glorified church 
—when all the wilfully wicked will be destroyed. — Acts 3 : 19-23 ; Isaiah 35. 


WATCH TOWER. BIBLE (r TRACT SOCIETY 

124 COLUMBIA HEIQHTS a a BROOKLYN, N-y, USA 

Foreign Offices : British Branch : 34 Craven Terrace, Lancaster 
Gate, London XV. 2 ; Australasian Branch ; 495 Collins St.. Melbourne, 
Australia ; South African Branch : 123 Plein St, Cape Town, 
South Africa. 

Please Address the Society in Every Case 

ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION TRICE $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS OR POSTAL ORDER, OR BY BANK DRAFT 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY INTERNATIONAL POSTAL ORDERS ONLY 

{Foreign translations of this jour nal appear in several languages) 

Editorial Committee: This journal is published under the supervision 
of an editorial committee, at least three of whom have read and 
approved as truth each and every article appearing in these columns. 
The names of the editorial committee are : J. F. Rutherford, 
W. E. Van Amburgh, F. H. Robison, G. H. Fisiier, \V. E. Page. 

Terms to the Lord's Poor: All Bible Btudents who, by reason of old age or other infirmity
 or adversity, are unable to pay for this journal, will be supplied free if they send 
& postal card each May stating their case and requesting such provision. We are not 
only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually and in touch with the 
B«rean studies. 

Notice to Subtcriher*- We do n< >t. " ■ "»'*> 3 *nd a card of acknowledgment for a renewal or 
'"" lr tu ^""""i"*™- for „ new subacrWon. Receipt and entry of renewal are indicated 
wfthin a month by chanire in expiration date, aa shown on wrapper label. 

Entered as Steond Clast Matter at Brooklyn, N. Y. . Pogtojjire under the Act of March 3rd 1879, 
______ nn <i ■ sV <' + sy . par - *. I' L. & R. rraymjrrred from PitUburgh. Pa 

LOCAL CONVENTIONS 

Charlotte, N. C., December 25-28. Brother Rutherford and 
at least two pilgrim brethren will be present. Further 
information may be secured from Oliver Haverstock, 406 
South Church St., Charlotte, N. C. 

St. Petersburg, Fla., December 25-28. At least two pilgrim 
brethren will address this convention. Address Mrs. E. F. 
Wilson, 227 South Fifth St., St. Petersburg, Fla., for further 
information. 

Columbus, Ohio, January 1-4. Three pilgrim brethren will 
be present at this convention. Address Frank D. White, 
147 Winner Avenue, Columbus, Ohio. 

PROXY HOLDERS NOTICE 

Some of the friends report that they did not receive 
blank proxies for the approaching election, January 3rd. 
These proxy blanks were inserted as a supplement in the 
December 1st issue, and anyone who has failed to receive 
a blank will be gladly supplied if notification Is sent us. 


STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES 

These Studies are recommended to students as veritable Bible 
keys, discussing topically every vital doctrine of the Bible. More 
than eleven million copies are in circulation, in nineteen languages. 
Prices are net, postpaid, and barely cover cost of production and 
handling. Two sizes are issued (in English only) : the regular maroon
 cloth, gold stamped edition on dull finish paper (size 5" x 71*), 
and the maroon cloth pocket edition on thin paper (size 4"x 6f") ; 
both sizes are printed from the same plates, the difference being In 
the margins ; both sizes are provided with an appendix of catechistic 
questions for convenient class use. Prices for both editions are 
uniform. The leather bound and fine India paper editions formerly 
issued are permanently out of stock. 

Series I, "The Divine Plan of the Ages,'* giving outline of the 
divine plan revealed in the Bible, relating to man's redemption and 
restitution : 350 pages, plus indexes and appendixes. 75c. Magazine 
edition 15c. Also procurable in Arabic, Armenian, Dano-Norwegian, 
Finnish, French, German, Greek, HoHandish, Hungarian, Italian, 
Polish, Roumanian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish, and Ukrainian ; 
regular cloth style, price uniform with English. 

Series II, "The Time is at Hand/' treats of the manner and 
time of the Lord's second coming, considering the Bible testimony 
on this subject: 366 pages, 75c. Obtainable in Dano-Norwegian, 
Finnish, German, Polish, and Swedish. 

Series III, "Thy Kingdom Come/' considers prophecies which 
mark events connected with "the time of the end'*, the glorification 
of the church and the establishment of the Millennial kingdom ; It 
also contains a chapter on the Great Pyramid of Egypt, showing its 
corroboration of certain Bible teachings : 380 pages, 75c. Furnished 
also in Da no- Norwegian, Finnish, German, Polish, and Swedish. 

Series IV, "The Battle of Armageddon/' shows that the dissolution
 of the present order of things is in progress and that all of 
the human panaceas offered are valueless to avert the end predicted 
by the Bible. It contains a special and extended treatise on our 
Lord's great prophecy of Matthew 24 and also that of Zechariab 
14 : 1-Q : 65G pages, ,S5c. Also in Dano-Norwegian, Finnish, Greek, 
German, and Swedish. 

Series V, "The Atonement Between God and Man/ 1 treats an all 
important subject, the center around which all features of divine 
grace revolve. This topic deserves the most careful consideration 
on the part of all true Christians : 61S pages, 85c. Procurable 
likewise in Dano-Norwegian, Finnish, German, Greek, and Swedish. 

Series VI, "The New Creation/' deals with the creative week 
(Genesis 1,2), and with the church, God's new creation. It examines
 the personnel, organization, rites, ceremonies, obligations, 
and hopes appertaining to those called and accepted as members of 
the body of Christ : 730 pages, S5c. Supplied also in Dano-Norwegian
, Finnish, German, and, Swedish. 

Xo foreign editions in the pocket size. 


Vol. xl 


Deckmber 15, 1919 


No. 24 


ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1919 

'Thou crownest the year with thy goodness." — Psalm 65: 11. 


WHAT more appropriate thing could Christians 
do than to make an inventory at the end of 
the year of the blessings bestowed upon 
them by the Lord during the year past ? It is the time 
to take a broader and more comprehensive view of 
our experiences, looking circumspectly at the way we 
have traveled and considering well which have been 
the steps that hindered progress and which have been 
the proper steps, the ones which advanced us in our 
course, bringing us nearer to. the goal. We are one 
year nearer the kingdom, and we hope that all of us 
are one year better prepared for the kingdom and for 
the experiences that lie between us and the consummation
 of our hopes. 

The year 1919 has passed into history and despite 
the vicissitudes that have beset the church during that 
period, it has been one freighted with many blessings. 
Truly the Lord has crowned it with his goodness. 
The opening days of the year found a number of our 
brethren languishing behind prison bars under the 
charge of sedition, but in fact because of their faithfulness
 in an effort to proclaim the message of the 
kingdom. Such a condition was not and is not surprising
 to the footstep followers of the Master when 
they remember that it has pleased the Lord to permit 
Satan's instruments to inflict persecution upon his followers
 throughout the entire age. While for the time 
the experience may seem distressing, yet in the moments
 of calm consideration it is realized that the 
Lord causes all things to work together for good to 
those who love him and are called according to his 
purpose. Where one member of the body suffers all 
suffer; and when one rejoices all repoice. This is 
the spirit manifested by those whose hearts are united 
closely together in Christ. 

MANY FRIENDS SHARED IGNOMINY 

True to the spirit of loyalty which marks the church 
of God, the dear ones remaining on the outside of 
prison walls slacked not their hands, but with fitting 
zeal pressed on, advancing the work in the best way 
they could. That was a time of testing of faith and 
love, but those who loved the Lord and his cause better
 than any earthly thing made valiant efforts to 
advance the message of the kingdom. They manifested
 a confidence in and love for their incarcerated 
brethren bv reelecting to office those who went to 
prison as office-holders of the Society which we all 
love. And when in the Lord's providence these came 
forth, it was a season of joyful reunion and a united 
effort to continue to make proclamation of the glad 
tidings which ultimately shall come to all. 

The work during the year has been greatly impeded
 by reason of the efforts of the adversary. Although
 the war ended more than a year ago, still the 
spreading of the truth is hindered. Here we are re- 

371 


minded of St. Paul's statement that the God of this 
world blinds the minds of many, lest the light of the 
glorious gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the image of 
God, should shine into their hearts. (2 Corinthians 
4:4) We attribute, therefore, the hindrance of the 
proclamation of this message to the blindness of the 
part of many and to the fact that it is by the Lord's 
permission. In due time this will be made manifest 
and all the glory will be given unto him. 

Satan is the very personification of darkness and he 
hates anything that threatens his kingdom. He hates 
the light of truth because it exposes him and his 
methods ; and to carry out his purposes he has blinded 
the masses and has many dupes amongst men to oppose
 every effort made for the advancement of the 
cause of truth and righteousness. The true followers 
of the Master, however, are not at all discouraged by 
such conditions because they are not ignorant of his 
devices (2 Corinthians 2:11), and they know that 
the Lord will overrule all these conditions and circumstances
 is due time to his own glory. They realize 
that the final conflict is on between the seed of the 
serpent and the seed of promise and that the battle 
between the beast and the Lamb will now be fought 
to a finish, and they know that the Lamb will be 
triumphant, following which the blessings of the Lord 
shall be bestowed upon mankind, — Revelation 17: 14. 

COLPORTEUR WORK 

The year opened under very disadvantageous conditions
 for the colporteurs afield. The reproaches 
that had been cast upon the Lord's people during the 
time of the great whirlwind -made it quite difficult for 
the brethren to spread the glad tidings by the printed 
page. Nevertheless, some of them, brave of heart 
and with a devotion known only to those whose eyes 
are fixed on Jesus, went forward in the work. The 
ranks were thin, however, and at the beginning of the 
year there were only about 150 engaged in the colporteur
 service. About the first of May the number 
began to increase and at the close of the fiscal year 
there were 507 colporteurs devoting all their time to 
the service and 150 sharpshooters. Notwithstanding 
the many conditions to retard this work, the colporteurs
 during the year have put out 139,974 books and 
we hope that these have brought gladness to many 
hearts. The number of books distributed is greatly 
reduced by the inability of the printers and manufacturers
 to furnish us books, due to strikes and labor 
conditions. Nevertheless, the colporteurs enjoyed a 
wonderful privilege in the service ; for in addition to 
placing in the hands of truth-hungry people the 
printed message, an opportunity was afforded for personal
 conversation, calling their attention to the great 
events now transpiring in the earth and giving them 
some idea of their meaning, and suggesting to them 
the presence of the Lord's kingdom. 


372 


SWATCH TOWEH 


Brooklyn, n, Y. 


volunteer work 

Since the organization of this Society it has been 
the custom to distribute free of charge a large number
 of papers containing^the message of the divine 
plan, and all the friends who have felt so disposed 
have been invited to participate in this work; hence 
it has been called the volunteer work. The adversary, 
of course, has put everything possible in the way of 
this work and by his subtle influence has blinded 
many good people of the world to the real purpose 
and object of this work, making them believe that it 
is for some sinister propaganda purpose. Readers of 
The Watch Tower know, however, that the purpose 
of the free distribution of literature is to aid other 
people in getting some knowledge of God's wonderful
 plan for the blessing of humankind. The Society 
has never engaged in propaganda work ; it has not 
sought to get anybody to join it. Its sole purpose is 
to preach the glad tidings of great joy which ultimately
 shall come to all. 

Social and political conditions during the year made 
this branch of the work very difficult for those engaging
 in it. Notwithstanding, during the year the 
volunteers distributed free booklet tracts to the number
 of 900,000. A special edition of the National 
Labor Tribune was arranged for and issued, carrying
 two full pages of the message of truth ; and these 
were distributed freely throughout the country to the 
number of 6,000,000. In the early part of the year 
the friends determined upon a general campaign in the 
way of distribution of a tract giving a brief resume 
of the trial of our brethren who were incarcerated, 
together with a petition, inviting all order-loving people
 who desired to do so to sign this petition asking 
for their release. These tracts, to the number of 
4,000,000, were spread throughout the country and in 
less than a month approximately a million persons 
signed the petition asking for the release of the 
brethren, which petition, however, was not presented, 
for the reason that they were released by the court 
before an opportunity to present it was afforded. 

In many towns and cities of the United States efforts
 have been made to prevent any volunteer work 
by the passing of ordinances making it next to impossible
. Believing it to be our duty to put forth 
every possible effort to witness to the Lord's kingdom 
and not to slack our hand because we see the door 
closing, and in view of the fact that there was such 
systematic effort against the volunteer work, arrangements
 were made for the use of a magazine, which 
readers of The Watch Tower know as 

THE GOLDEN AGE 

Arrangements are made with this magazine to carry 
in each issue a department devoted to some feature 
of the divine plan, the purpose being to explain current
 events in the light of divine prophecy and thus 
to enable the people in this hour of great stress and 
sorrow to learn something about the incoming kingdom
 of Messiah which will ultimately bless and comfort
 all the groaning creation. 

The Watch Tower is advised that some of the 
friends have been in a measure disappointed concerning
 The Golden Ace work. First they thought the 
magazine should have a better cover ; that the one 
provided appeared too commonplace. In this connection
 we would suggest that just at the time the publication
 of The Golden Ace started there was a 


printers' strike in Greater New York. Only a few 
days before, a contract had been made for the publication
 of The Golden Ace and the men who were 
operating the presses which take the kind of paper 
and cover used in it did not go on strike. It thus 
seemed providential that the character of cover and 
paper had been selected, for the reason that had any 
other been selected it would have been impossible to 
start the magazine at all. Thus the Lord seemed to 
favor the infant publication. 

It seems that this is a time for the fulfillment, at 
least in a measure, of St. Paul's words: "Ye have 
need of patience [cheerful endurance], that, after ye 
have done the will of God, ye might receive the promise
". (Hebrews 10:36) Surely the conditions now 
prevailing are trying to the patience of every one and 
the opportunities afforded for each one of the Lord's 
people to have his patience thoroughly tried and tested 
are many. Friends in some parts report that they 
have been discouraged in their attempt to carry on 
The Golden Age work. To such we would like to 
say: "Cast not away your confidence;" the time is 
here now for the testing of your patience and doubtless
 the Lord is permitting each one to have a test in 
the outset to determine whether he will slack his hand 
or whether he will press on, doing with his might 
what his hands find to do and leaving the increase 
entirely with the Lord. 

"SHALL HIMSELF BE WATERED" 

One of the great advantages of engaging in any 
part of the Lord's service — the chief advantage, in 
fact — is the blessing and benefit derived by the Christian
. It enables him to keep busy. "An idle brain is 
the devil's workshop." Hence the Apostle Peter admonishes
 us to "be sober, be vigilant; because your 
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, 
seeking whom he may devour". One of the great 
advantages in this work is the personal contact the 
friends have with the people, calling their attention 
to the magazine and telling them something about the 
Lord's kingdom so near at hand. It strengthens the 
one who is doing the work and comforts the hearts 
of those who are sad. The chief purpose, therefore, 
is not to get subscriptions, but a witnessing to the 
Truth and a developing of the Christian. However, 
each one is anxious to get just as much of the message
 of truth into the hands of as many people as 
possible. We feel quite sure that after the test of the 
patience of his people, the Lord's blessing will be especially
 upon those who cheerfully endure and that 
the blessing will be made quite manifest. 

Now let us consider the fact that never before has 
a magazine in such a short time developed such a 
large subscription list as The Golden Age. Never 
before has a magazine for the benefit of the public 
carried so much truth concerning the divine plan. 
Never before has there been a magazine that afforded 
an opportunity for so many people to engage in the 
work of comforting the sad by proclaiming the glad 
tidings. In view of the condition of stress in the 
world, we consider it nothing short of miraculous 
that the magazine has made the wonderful progress 
it has up to this time. We encourage the dear brethren 
everywhere to continue their activities in thus giving 
witness to God's gracious goodness in providing the 
blessings for the people which are near at hand. Let 
us remember that all of the consecrated this side the 


DKCEMB«a 15, liUW 

vail are but a little army bearing the banner of truth 
to witness to the world, and let us be faithful in giving
 that witness with a pure and joyful heart. Ihe 
report from The Golden Age shows a subscription 
list that exceeds our expectations and the daily increase
 is very marked. 

PILGRIM SERVICE 

The Lord has graciously arranged and permitted 
the continuation ot the Pilgrim service through the 
year. These dear brethren have traveled up and 
down the country, meeting with the classes and encouraging
 them and addressing the public from time 
to time. During the year there have been engaged in 
the Pilgrim service constantly brethren to the number 
of 86, besides many others who could take only Sunday
 meetings, being required to engage in secular employment
 during the week. The regular Pilgrims visited
 6,330 towns and cities, traveling a total of 506,^60 
miles. They addressed 867 public meetings, the total 
attendance at which was 107,893. They also held 
10,398 class or parlor meetings, with a total attendance
 of 479,311. 

During the latter months of the year there has been 
a greatly increased interest and a larger attendance at 
the public meetings, and the Society is encouraged to 
press on further with this branch of the service. The 
public seems eager to know something about the times 
in which we are living and the meaning of all these 
wonderful phenomena. It is a great comfort to the 
hearts of many people to hear the message, "Millions 
Now Living Will Never Die," which the Lord's people
 can confidently announce, knowing that many of 
the generation now upon the earth shall not pass away, 
but live on until the Lord's kingdom is fully established
. They have in mind the words of the Master 
that 'were not the days of tribulation shortened there 
would be no flesh saved, but that for the elect's sake 
much flesh will be saved' ; and that thus these millions 
will be brought through the time of trouble and have 
the opportunity of accepting the blessings of life under
 the terms of the New Covenant. Thus it is a 
great privilege and a great joy to the Pilgrim brethren 
to announce these blessings coming to the people. 
We urge the classes to make special arrangements for 
Sunday public meetings on occasion of Pilgrim visits, 
providing a first class hall and thoroughly advertising 
the lectures. 

CONVENTIONS 

During the year there have been held under the 
auspices of the Society more than forty local conventions
. It has long been recognized that these gatherings
 serve to build up the saints in the most holy 
faith and enable them to keep their minds fixed upon 
the general convention of the church of the firstborns
, to which all are looking forward who have entered
 the race for the prize of the high calling. 

For some time the Society had not held a general 
convention in the United States; and it was determined
 in July last that such a convention should be 
held and efforts looking to a proper place and suitable 
arrangements were put forth. Finally, Cedar Point, 
Ohio, was selected as the place, and while little more 
than thirty days* time was given for announcement, 
the attendance far exceeded the expectations of every 
one. It was thought that possibly 2,500 of the friends 
might attend. We are advised by the railroad people 
that they sold for that convention about 7,500 tickets. 
In addition to that a large number came by boat, 


<& WATCH TOWER 


373 


automobile and other private conveyances; so it can 
be safely said that when the attendance was at high 
tide there were fully 7,000 persons present. Never 
had such a convention been witnessed by any in present
 truth; never such a harmonious spirit and keen 
desire to be a blessing one to another. It is a convention
 that will always be remembered by those who 
attended. Beautiful for situation, the surroundings 
ideal, entirely removed from the influences of the 
world— here the Lord's saints for seven days engaged 
in sweet fellowship together and in listening to discourses
 on the divine plan from various viewpoints. 
It was a time of wonderful refreshment and great 
blessing to all who were there. Indeed, it was good 
to be there, suggesting to one that such fellowship is 
a foretaste of the homecoming of the Lord's people, 
for which they are longing and waiting. 

The little city of Sandusky lies just across the bay 
from Cedar Point and a large number of the brethren 
attending the convention were domiciled in private 
homes there. The convention resulted in such an interest
 in the truth in that town that a class has been 
organized there. We are advised that about sixty 
attend regularly; and thus the Lord used his people 
to witness to others to make glad their hearts. 

FOREIGN FIELD 

The world war hindered the work in foreign countries
 as well as in America. In Canada a branch 
office was opened for the purpose of serving the Canadian
 friends and the Lord's blessing has been very 
markedly upon it. Although no volunteer work has 
been permitted, the friends have met often together 
and have encouraged each other by personal correspondence
, holding meetings and witnessing to the 
public. Ten years ago it sounded strange to hear 
one relate horn the pJatform that a time once was 
when it was made a crime to have in one's possession 
a Bible. A condition finding its parallel only in the 
dark ages now exists and for some time has existed 
in Canada. A censorship was put on our literature 
upon the pretext that it was necessary during the war ; 
and notwithstanding the armistice was signed more 
than a year ago, Bible students are still being arrested 
in Canada for having in their possession Bible literature
. Only a short time ago a brother was arrested 
and thrown in jail because he had in his possession 
a hymn book which our Society has used for several 
years, containing hymns that all Christian people have 
used for many years. In one place a number of the 
brethren were haled into court because they had in 
their possession the Berean Bible. Their Bibles, hymn 
books, and even the memoranda they had written out 
in the study of their lesson, were taken from them 
and each one, without any opportunity for being heard, 
was summarily punished by a heavy fine. 

Of course we are not complaining, because we realize
 that the Lord has power to prevent all these things, 
but he is permitting the adversary and his instruments 
to take their own course until his time to act. "Vengeance
 is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord." So we 
can confidently leave all these things in the hands 
of the Lord, knowing he will cause them all to work 
out in due time to his own glory and to the good of 
his people. 

In Germany the persecution of the Bible Students 
began on the theory that they were anti-German and 
they were severely dealt with. After the fall of the 
autocratic government oi Germany there has been a 


374 <& WATCH TOWER »„„.„. K . ,. 

great turning to the truth and now where meetings dition of the Society at the close of the present fiscal 

were once attended by a hundred or more, from 800 year. 

to 1000 come regularly on Sunday afternoons. There Receipts— "Good Hopes" $183,003.63 

never has been such a demand for the Studies in Deficit from last year $4,252.57 

the Scriptures in Germany as at the present time, p^-^L^ 11 '^^ 15 ' P am P. hlets - etc - &?|H? 

, . • - -Li * i «.u j j a i ^ Pilgrim service and conventions 28,710.81 

and it is impossible to supply the demand. A letter S ent to foreign branches 35.703.2G 

from Germany reports that following the fall of the Incidentals (including storage rentals, 

autocracy, the legislative body of Saxony had pub- moving of office to Brooklyn, auto 

Iicly read in its session The Bible Students' ^'7 c , ase > etc * •••>:■•;•;:• 16,043.42 

tljt J T . • ■ .1 .■ t t<Tu t? ti £ Office and Family expenses (including 

Monthly containing the article on The Fall of rents for office an d omce workers in 

Babylon", and that this paper was freely distributed Pittsburgh) 44,674-26 

throughout all Germany. The people have been great- $167,297.03 

ly humbled by the war and their hearts are an open Balance on hand _a£?^M 

field for the message of consolation that comes only $183,003.63 $183,003.63 

from the Lord's Word. Incoming mail, total 95,478 

In Russia it has been impossible for years to make ° ut ^ oin & maiI » " 75,719 

any public proclamation of the truth because of the ^v,* -r^j^i tj^™ E * HEL ^ E f T ? RED 4. n - .1 

J : \ • £ ,, , ^ u u c* ■<. r 11 • Lne -oetnel Home is a spot dear to a ot the saints 

great opposition of the state church. Since its fall rtrt ^^u T u^ „ om n^u~i ±u 1 r 7- 1 

?u u u z a v • u* j on e artn. I he name Bethel means the house of Ltod. 

there has been a freedom ot religious worship and a Tf „ rnc , ^ f ,„^,i u, +iw • a r -*\A 1 

j <* 4. +u \\r 1 a ± lt was founded by that wise and faithful messenger 

great turning toward the truth, we are pleased to ^ £ T or ,A-^ rt „„ V ^ o^u^ -d n \u . 

*.u * u u r *u c - * mi 1 • °* Laodicea, our dear Brother Russell, as the home 

announce that a branch of the Society will soon be in from which the - » 

operation ,n Warsaw and a large quantity of books In the autumn f lg * 8 . dismantled and stood 

and literature will be available there for the spread vacam for some ^ M h s 

of the glad tidings in that benighted and sin-cursed toward BetheJ ■ th ^ . ; h b h f ^ 

country We should remember hat , has been a wiu it would '^ rest0 S red> so that f is , e in this 

matter of history from the time of our Lord that the , and mi ht h , ; w P P 

ruth progresses only under adverse circumstances. as a tem S rest ing place in the earth.' 

It has pleased the Lord to permit his people to develop t U T ; , / nflt , . ;? ^ „ , , , . 

A v ■. a j 11 u ij ■ • • i-u 1 ine Lord opened the way to restore it and alter a 

in adversity. And all now should rejoice in the clos- r„„ r mnnf u> X.^„„^ „ ^ * ■* * */l 1 .u 7 

j / a- u j ± x • -i 1 * v. iL re w months strenuous effort it is with pleasure that 

ing days of this old order to be privileged to have the we are abk now to annQunce h h f 

opportunity of announcing the incoming of the new refurnished and the offices - moved into it . The decoShtilESS
 a nHn r °1 ° Ur g ° rations throughout have been changed, symbolizing 

righteousness and peace the incoming age. While most of the furniture is 

Reports from Switzerland and from France show la ; t C0 8 mf * rtable( ^ drawing _ room and arlors 

a marked increase m the turning of the people to the have ^ neat] and comfortab , g furnished . P So me 

truth. In tact, everywhere the war. the sorrow, and „-• u*. ^„j ^„^;^ *~ ,...*+•«; *u a-. r 

*u * ui u j 4-t. 1 » 1 _* might find occasion to criticize the expenditure of 

the trouble have made the peoples hearts more sus- mo ^ in fumishm these> but it has £ en th ht 

ceptible to the consoling message of the kingdom. not im obable that f he Lord would ^ leased t0 g re . 

From far away India comes the mfonnation of m- serve this lace and that - m due time P some of P the 

creasing interest ; likewise from the Netherlands, Aus- ancient wo £ hies wou]d find here an abidi 

tralia and South Africa. From every part of the field Whatever is the l,,^ wffl concerni thi of^^ 

come encouraging reports hat the Lord is opening will be done> but we are h tQ g ^ ^ fa 

the way for a wider Proclamation of the kingdom offices and home are nQw a „ ^ * f 

message. We would understand, therefore, that while restoration of Bethel it became necessary to limit the 

he harvest period of forty years closed m 1918 since force onl to those ho are needed d ^ 

hen there has been a g eanmg work, m which the a]] y d m the work because f ft , ; ; d 

Lord has been here and there gathering out some of and an effort therefore has been made J hi ^ 

his wheat and at the same time he has had proclaimed force strict , on the , ines f ^ J reaHzin 

the day of his vengeance and the announcement of t u of u : c ^ ^ r ;^;i arr ^ +« «„«.-, « * fu t j> • 

Tir * i> • 4. i. j tin . it j t j tnat !t 1S a privilege to engage in the Lords service. 

Messiah s reign at hand What a blessed and wonder- A house ^ arnii * & or ^f^, reception> was g vm 

ful privilege it is for the Lord s people to engage in t0 the friends of ^ ter New Y oric. Thiv were re- 

*is work How beautifu upon the mountains are ceived in the store and shown throu hout - the house 

he feet of him that bnngeth good tidings, that pub- and then assembled in the acious di £ n g- ro om where 

hsheth i peace; : that bnngeh good tidmgs of good; that refreshments were served and some devotional serpubhsheth
 salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy God vices held It was in(jeed a happy occasiotif aU fe _ 

reignetni — isaian ^Z;/. j oicing the Lord had been p leased [ Q crown this year 

hnancial w ; t }j his goodness and to bring us to its close with the 

It has pleased the Lord to bless the Society from a happy thought that all the way our Savior has led us, 

financial standpoint during the year. As is well and that he leads us still. The year has been one of 

known by the readers of The Watch Tower, the So- varied experiences, many trials and many joys, for all 

ciety has never solicited any funds, no collections are of which we are truly grateful to the Lord, knowing 

ever taken at meetings, the money being provided en- that he has the affairs of his people in hand and whattirely
 by the voluntary donations of those who are in- soever is for their welfare he will permit and overrule 

terested in the proclamation of the message of the for his own glory and their highest good. 

Lord's kingdom. The year opened with a deficit, as In view of the fact that both the office and the home 

shown by the last annual report, in the sum of are now at one place, we suggest a change in para- 

$4,252.57. We give below a brief summary of the graph two of the Vow as to read: "colaborers at the 

receipts and disbursements, showing the financial con- Brooklyn Bethel and everywhere". 


LET BROTHERLY LOVE CONTINUE 

"By this shall all mtn know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for the other." — John 13:35. 


CHRISTENDOM nominal is estimated at four 
hundred millions of people and is represented 
by more than two hundred creeds and organizations
. Somewhere in this great mass the Lord's 
faithful few, styled the "little flock", are to be found; 
but they can be discerned only with difficulty. We are 
to look for them everywhere — in all denominations and 
outside of all. We are to remember that the Lord has 
not left himself without a witness. But how shall we 
know these true followers of Jesus of whom it is 
written: "The Lord knoweth them that are his"? 
What are some of their characteristics? 

Our Redeemer's words give the key suggesting the 
characteristics for which we should seek, when he 
says: "Ye are my disciples, if ye have love one for 
the other". He emphasized this thought, saying, "A 
new commandment give I unto you, That ye love one 
another as I have loved you". (John 13:34) Ah! 
here we get the thought that the church is a blessed 
brotherhood of all those who not only love God supremely
, so that they delight to do his will even at the 
cost of self-interest, but w r ho also love one another as 
Christ loved them. He loved them to the extent of 
laying down his life for them ; and they are to have 
the willingness to lay down their lives for one another
. We look in vain for such an organization 
among men. W r e perceive various bundles or organizations
 under various names, all of them professing 
love but none of them even dreaming of union under 
such bonds of love as the Master pointed to. 

TENDER-HARTEDNESS AND HUMBLE-MINDEDNESS 

The Apostle Peter points out that the Lord's followers
 should love as brethren (1 Peter 3:8, 9), as 
proper brethren ought to love. He points out to them 
that this will mean tender-heartedness and humblemindedness
, and forbearing to resent injuries and revilings
. He shows that the proper brotherly love 
would not only submit to all this without retaliation, 
but, on the contrary, would return a blessing. 

Oh, such love ! Such a high standard of love ! How 
many of us, how few of us have ever realized the 
standard of brotherly love that would be appreciated 
by our Lord, the standard that he demands as a condition
 of our being his brethren, the standard that he 
implies in the prayer that he taught us, saying, "Forgive
 us our trespasses, as we forgive those who trespass
 against us". 

The same Apostle points out that to be of the Lord's 
true disciples means not only an exercise of faith in 
God and in the Lord Jesus Christ and in the forgiveness
 of sins through him, but that it means more than 
this : "Seeing that ye have purified your souls in your 
obeying of the truth through the spirit unto unfeigned 
love of the brethren, see that ye love one another 
with a pure heart, fervently 1 '. (1 Peter 1 : 22) There 
it is, dear brethren. We are not only to believe and 
to receive forgiveness of the Lord, but we receive a 
knowledge of the truth, a knowledge of his will, and 
then it is for us to put that knowledge into practise, 
to weave it into our thoughts and words and doings, to 
obey it to the extent of an unfeigned love for the 
brethren. It is to be before our minds as the proper, 
grand outworking of the truth which the Lord grants 
to us through his Word, the Bible. 
"Blest be the tie that binds 
Our hearts in Christian love, 

375 


NEW AMBITIONS, DESIRES, LOVES 

The truth is designed to sanctify; as our Lord 
prayed: "Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word 
is truth". (John 17: 17) As this truth gains control 
of our thoughts and words and doings it will cast out 
the spirit of selfishness from our desires and create 
in us new ambitions, desires, and love for the Father, 
for the brethren, including our elder Brother, Jesus, 
and this love will gradually become more and more 
fervent. It will not be merely an outward courtesy, 
a feigned love, but an inward heart sentiment. 

Listen to the Apostle John on this subject : "Marvel 
not, brethren, if the world hate you". We are not to 
expect any special sympathy from the world, but 
rather expect that they will misunderstand us. But 
we are to expect something different from the brethren
, as the Apostle proceeds to show: "We know 
that we have passed from death unto life because we 
love the brethren". Whoever, then, does not love the 
brethren can not be sure that he has passed from the 
death condition to the life condition of mind and 
heart. How anxious we should be to have this testimony
 of the Apostle corroborating our hopes that we 
are new creatures in Christ, that we have passed from 
the kingdom oi darkness into the kingdom of God's 
dear Son, and from a condition of condemnation and 
death to a condition of justification of life! 

But the Apostle continues: "He that loveth not his 
brother abideth in death. Whosoever hateth his 
brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer 
hath eternal life abiding in him." Crucial words these 
for the brethren ! Let us not lose their import, their 
value; let us test our hearts and ascertain our standing
 with the Lord by our love or our lack of love for 
the brethren, as the Apostle by inspiration here directs
. But the Apostle is not through with this subject
; he caps the climax by saying, "Hereby know we 
love, because he laid down his life for us, and we 
ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren". 
— 1 John 3:15, 16. 

WHO ARE THE BRETHREN? 

If by their fruits we shall know them, there are not 
many brethren of this kind in the world. The early 
church showed some noble examples of such brotherhood
, Jesus himself being the elder brother who laid 
down his life on our behalf. The apostles and many 
in humble stations followed closely in the Master's 
footsteps and some, we believe, all the way down the 
centuries, have similarly been found, and some today, 
we believe, may be found in the denominations and 
outside of them who have this character-likeness to 
Christ — but they are few. 

The_ Apostle, speaking of our Lord's feeling toward 
his faithful church, says that "he is not ashamed to 
call them brethren". (Hebrews 2:11) Like him they 
have" consecrated their lives to the Father's business, 
the service of the truth, the service of the brethren. 
Recognizing that God is now taking out of the world a 
people for his name, it is their chief concern in life 
to be colaborers together with God in the finding of 
this elect class and in assisting them to make their 
calling and election sure. Neither time nor influence 
nor money is too precious for these to spend in his 
service. Yes, life itself with them, as with the Master 
and the apostles, is being gradually used up along 
this line— "This one thing I do". 


PETER AND JOHN HEAL A LAME MAN 

— — January ii.— Acts 3:i-i6. — — 
mutual experiences of peter and john — community of interest in matters spiritual — a beggar with noble qualities 

— BEGGING THEN AND NOW — VALUE OF TEMPORAL AND SPIRITUAL GIFTS — "MORE BLESSED TO GIVE THAN TO RECEIVE." 

"Freely ye have received, freely give" — Matthew 10:8. 


PROBABLY it was not long after the day of Pentecost that 
the events of this lesson transpired. Our last lesson notes 
the fact that the believers, filled with their new Joy, went 
frequently to the temple for prayer and thanksgiving. This 
lesson shows us Peter and John attending the temple service 
at the hour of prayer, three o'clock in the afternoon. These 
two had been with the Lord and with each other for now 
several years. Both had been disciples of John the Baptist, 
and previously they two had been together in the fishing business
. They were also specially favored among the twelve, 
being with Jesus on the Mount of Transfiguration, and in the 
inner circle in the Garden of Gethsemane. Although Peter 
was probably the eldest of the disciples, and John probably 
the youngest, and although their dispositions were quite different
 in many respects, apparently there was a strong element 
of harmony between them ; they both loved the Lord very 
intensely and they were both of ardent temperament. It was 
natural, therefore, that these two should be considerably in 
each other's company because of special compatibility. While 
it is well for the stronger brethren to pray with and company 
with the weaker, sometimes, for the assistance of the latter, 
it is well also that kindred spirits should come together in communion
 with each other and with the Lord, as in this case. 

AT THE BEAUTIFUL GATE 

As the apostles evidently went frequently to the temple, 
and probably often by the same route, through the "Beautiful 
Gate," it is more than likely that the lame beggar, who had 
long been accustomed to that locality, in seeking alms, had 
seen them almost daily. Indeed, it would not be surprising 
if a knowledge of the Pentecostal wonders which had converted
 several thousand, and been "noised abroad," had 
reached the poor beggar, as well as many others of the 
religious class, who assembled almost daily at the temple. 
Quite evidently, therefore, the beggar knew Peter and John 
in advance of his healing. If so, it would to some extent 
account for bus readiness of faith, by which, accepting the 
Apostle's word and hand, he was healed. 

Why the Apostle Peter on this particular occasion was led 
to bestow a blessing upon this man we may never know, for 
it is probable that in that time, when there were no hospitals 
for the lame and blind, etc., the apostles frequently passed 
by others as badly crippled and distressed as this one, without
 proffering aid. It would seem, however, that the man 
was an "Israelite indeed" — from the way in which he received 
the Lord's blessing. Otherwise, instead of having a heart 
overflowing with gratitude and thankfulness, he before would 
have been in an attitude of discontent, repining at his lot 
and complaining of divine providence; and in such a frame 
of mind his attitude after his healing would have been one 
of complacent satisfaction rather than of gratitude. He would 
have felt that he had received no more than his due. The 
connections, therefore, seem to indicate that the Lord's 
providence, directed the apostles to him specially, on this 
account. And so it is with those of the Lord's people today 
who are in a right attitude of heart. They will, whatever 
their condition, find much to be thankful for, and can trace 
the Lord's providence and grace in life's affairs, notwithstanding
 its trials and difficulties. Such people are the objects 
of God's care, and have the assurance that all things are 
working together for their good. The Lord's providence may 
not always bring them physical health and strength, but it will 
surely bring to such the highest blessings which it brought 
to the poor cripple of this lesson — a knowledge of the Lord 
and a share of his spiritual favors. 

At that time, when there was no provision for the indigent 
and helpless, alms-begging and alms-giving were entirely 
proper. It is creditable to the civilization of our day and 
land, however, that the helpless are provided for at public 
expense, all property paying a poor or alms tax. It strikes 
us as being as much wrong to encourage public begging now, 
as it was right to respond to it at the time mentioned. If 
the friends of the indigent cannot amply provide for them 
the public can, and should. And it would be a false pride 
which would ignore these provisions and not blush to seek 
others of our initiative and choice. 


SUCH AS I HAVE I GIVE 

The Apostle said : "Silver and gold have I none*'. We can 
hardly suppose that he intended this statement to be taken 
literally, for in the preceding verses we have the record that 
considerable property was sold, and the proceeds laid at the 
apostles' feet, put at their disposal. But this evidently the 
apostles considered as belonging to the Lord and not to 
themselves — as trust funds. We assume, therefore, that the 
Apostle meant, Silver and gold we have none to give you, 
but we have something better to give you, something which 
God intended we should dispense. And undoubtedly what the 
apostles gave was more valuable than money. 

So it is today; we are unable to respond as liberally as we 
would like to the requests which sometimes come to us for 
financial aid. The means which the Lord has put into our 
hands we understand him to intend us to transform in the 
main into spiritual food and clothing and strength and help, 
for the sin-sick and lame and for the error-blinded; and 
accordingly we are sometimes compelled to say, Silver and 
gold we have little to give; but of the spiritual blessings we 
are willing to give liberally, without money and without price. 

Our Lord's words were, "The poor ye have always with 
you; but me ye have not always". In seeking to be helpful 
to brethren in the church and to the unfortunate world it is 
well that all should cultivate a largeness of heart; and yet 
it is well also to remember that in the cases of many of the 
Lord's children adversity has evidently been of the Lord's intention
, to bring to them blessings which they would not be 
prepared to receive in any other manner. We are to endeavor 
to be helpful to each other, while seeking not to conflict with 
the operations of divine providence, and the learning of 
important lessons by those whose welfare we seek. We 
should never forget the Apostle's inspired words. — 2 Thessalonians
 3:10. 

GOOD FOR FRIEND AND FOE 

"It is more blessed to give than to receive". Undoubtedly 
every child of God has realized the truthfulness of this; God 
is ever a bountiful giver, and his people, in proportion as they 
cultivate this quality, generosity, are therefore cultivating a 
grand, God-like quality. "Do good and lend, hoping for 
nothing again [no reward] ; and ye shall be children of the 
Highest". (Luke 6:35) If we cannot always give much 
money, or if we cannot give as much as we would like to 
give to those who are in need, we may always, like Peter, 
give something. We cannot, like him, give health and strength 
miraculously, since we are not embued with those apostolic 
powers; but we can give a word of encouragement, a kindly 
look, a helping hand over difficulties; and these will often 
be more valuable than money, and sometimes more appreciated
. Even an "enemy" should be fed, if hungry; but 
neither friend nor foe should be encouraged in indolence, nor 
in wastefulness. 

We notice how distinctly Peter acknowledged the source 
of his power, and how he was not ashamed of any feature 
of divine truth. He boldy declared his miracle to be in 
the name of "Jesus of Nazareth". He did not say, 'In the 
name of Jesus, the greatest of all Jews, the highly esteemed 
friend of Joseph of Arimathea, and of Nicodemus, one of 
your influential rulers'; but, ignoring all such human weaknesses
, he plainly declared that it was Jesus the Nazarene, 
the despised one, whose power had healed. We find some 
of the Lord's people today far less courageous than Peter; 
inclined rather to feel ashamed of the truth and ashamed of 
the agencies God used in its dissemination; for fear that 
these would be a reflection against it. We stiould rather follow
 the Apostle's course, and be very courageous and ready 
to affirm publicly whatever we find possessing divine sanction. 
Whatever agencies God may make use of in connection with 
his service we may be sure that he has some purpose, some 
object in view, and that his purposes will best be accomplished 
by plain, candid, truthful statements, like Peter's. 


376 


THE BOLDNESS OF PETER AND JOHN 

January 18.— Acts 4:8-21. 

THE FIAST PERSECUTION— PETER, JOHN AND THE FORMER CRIPPLE ARRESTED— IN WARD OVER NIGHT— BROUGHT BEFORE THE SANHEDRIN 
—PETERS DEFENSE— THE SANHEDR1N PERPLEXED— THE APOSTLES FORBIDDEN TO PREACH THE TRUTH— THEIR MARVELOUS COURAGE 
REALLY AUTHORIZED BY THE LAW— THE SANHEDRIN OVERSTEPPED ITS AUTHORITY— WONDERFUL RESULTS FOLLOWED THE 
APOSTLES' WITNESS OF THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS. 

"Stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong." — 1 Corinthians 16:13. 


THE commotion caused by the healing of the cripple by 
Peter and John, and the gathering of the crowd of worshipers
 to whom they preached, brought upon the apostles
 a new difficulty. The priests, whose ministries were more 
or less interrupted by the disturbance, felt a grievance against 
those who thus attracted attention away from themselves and 
their services; and the officers of the Temple, whose duty it 
was to preserve order, were also disturbed. These, coming 
upon the preaching apostles and the interested multitude, arrested
 the three men who were the cause of such a commotion
, in order that the matter might be inquired into. It 
was toward evening, and therefore too late to gather the 
members of the Sanhedrin. The three who had been witnessing
 for God and for Christ were put in ward, in the prisonnot
 as felons, but for trial. 

It would have been possible for the imprisoned men to view 
their situation from the standpoint of unbelief, and to say to 
themselves and to each other : 'God did not approve our 
work, and hence has permitted us to be thus arrested and 
imprisoned. Now we know not what the result will be on 
the morrow; for those who crucified our Lord may crucify 
us also.' Or they might have reasoned still otherwise and 
have said to each other: 'After all, what right have we to 
think that God has anything to do with these matters? We 
are like other men, and have merely found some new way 
in which natural law operates in the healing of the sick. God 
evidently is not concerned in this work; for if he were, surely
 he would not have permitted us to come into these straits 
while we were seeking to serve him and to declare the good 
tidings.' But we may safely assume that the thoughts and 
the words of the prisoners took a totally different direction. 
Full of faith they no doubt said to themselves: *We know 
not in what way God may intend to use this which seems to 
be a disadvantage to us and an interruption to his work. 
Doubtless, however, he will use it in some manner to forward
 his cause and to reach more of his people with his truth.' 

As a matter of fact the Lord evidently intended through 
this seeming calamity to bring to the apostles a still grander 
opportunity of testifying to the truth on the next day, of 
preaching to a class that they might never again have opportunity
 to reach — the priestly class, the ruling class, represented 
in the Sanhedrin and those who would gather at its sessions. 
When the Sanhedrin opened the next morning, among its 
seventy members, representatives of the most influential classes
 in Jerusalem, were Annas the high priest andCaiaphas^ his 
son, both of whom had about two months previous presided 
in the trial of the Master himself. Nevertheless the apostles 
were evidently not at all dismayed by the dignity of the court, 
the Lord fulfilling to them his promise, "Ye shall be brought 
before kings and governors for my sake, for a testimony 
against them and the Gentiles ; but when they deliver you up, 
take no thought how or what ye shall speak, for it shall be 
given vou in that hour what ye shall speak." (Matthew 
10:18,19) That Peter, the spokesman for the three, was 
supernaturally assisted, is implied in the narrative. "He was 
filled with the holy Spirit." 

THE REAL OBJECT OF THE TRIAL 

It is not amiss here to notice that the Jewish party which 
most particularly persecuted our Lord was the sect of the 
Pharisees, the holiness people of that time, basing their opposition
 upon our Lord's public declarations of their hypocrisies
, the Sadducees taking less interest in the persecution. 
But on the contrary, in the Acts of the Apostles, the persecutions
 of the church seem to have been largely at the hands 
of the Sadducees. The Sadducees should scarcely be considered
 a religious party; for they denied the resurrection of 
the dead and also the existence of spirit beings, and hence believed
 principally in a religion for the present life merely. 
They were the policy men, the opportunists of that time. They 
favored harmony with the Roman Empire, and might indeed 
be termed the politicians of the Jewish nation. History says 
that the high priest and his family, and those principally in 
influence, were Sadducees. It is evident, therefore, that the 
preaching of the resurrection of Jesus, and of some spiritual 
power by which he could work through the apostles to the 
healing of the man born lame, would be an irritation to the 
Sadducees ; for it was directly in conflict with their belief 
and teachings. 


Indeed, it is worthy of notice, here and in subsequent lessons
, that one of the main features of the Gospel which 
apostles preached was the doctrine of the resurrection — that 
Christ had risen from the dead, and that through him in due 
time not only believers should be raised from the tomb but 
ultimately all the world of mankind should be released from 
death, in order that each and all might have a full share in 
the judgment or trial for life everlasting, which had been 
secured by the ransom sacrifice of Christ. No wonder, then, 
that the Sadducees especially resented this new doctrine, which 
antagonized their views and to some extent supported their 
religious opponents, the Pharisees. 

It may at first seem peculiar that a court trial should be 
held in respect to the healing of a cripple. However, the 
object of the trial evidently was to condemn the apostles, if 
possible, for having practised necromancy, sorcery, the black 
art. For, according to the law, a witch or a wizard or a necromancer
, a spirit medium, was to be put to death. — Leviticus
 20:27; Deuteronomy 18:9-12. 

THE APOSTLE PETER'S DEFENSE 

When we remember that the apostles were illiterate fishermen
, unaccustomed to public speaking and to contact with 
the great and learned, we may well be amazed at their courage 
and at the straight- forward presentation of the Gospel given 
by Peter. It astonished the Sanhedrin also. They wished 
to arraign the apostles, not for the good of healing the lame 
man, but rather for their preaching of Jesus as the Messiah. 
If Peter had been filled with fear he would not have spoken 
as he did to this court. If he had been filled with the spirit 
of egotism and boastfulness he would have spoken unwisely, 
rashly, no doubt But filled as he was with the holy Spirit, 
the spirit of meekness, patience, gentleness, long-suffering, 
brotherly kindness, and guided in his words by this spirit, he 
made an address which is beautiful both for its simplicity, 
its directness and its meek boldness. 

The Apostle's opening sentence had in it, possibly, a gentle 
irony respecting a trial for a good deed ; but as on previous 
occasions he immediately proceeded to disclaim for himself 
and his associate, John, any power, any authority, in connection
 with the matter and to declare that the miracle was 
performed in the name, by the authority, by the power, of 
Jesus of Nazareth. Once again he was not ashamed to own 
that the One he acknowledged was contemptuously called the 
Nazarene, nor to say that he was a follower of the One who 
was crucified as a malefactor. While telling the plain truth 
that this very Sanhedrin had caused the death of Jesus, he 
stated the matter without bitterness or acrimony. He allowed
 the fact that God had raised up Jesus from the dead 
to stand as the proof that they had erred in their condemnation
 of the Master. Then without parleying the question he 
proceeded to assure his hearers that this Jesus, whom they 
had despised and rejected, had nevertheless been owned of 
God as the chief corner stone of the great temple which God 
purposes to build. He thus referred their minds to a Messianic
 Psalm (118:22) familiar to them, pointing out its fulfillment
 in Christ, and declared. ''Neither is there salvation in 
any other". This expression, "the salvation," to his hearers 
would have the sense of *the salvation for which we Jews 
as a nation have been waiting and longing, a national salvation
, and an individual salvation in the kingdom of God'. 

THE PERPLEXITY OF THE COURT 

If there was a force, a sting, to his hearers in these words, 
it was because the members of the Sanhedrin were so seriously
 in the wrong. How fortunate it would have been for 
them if they had been humble-hearted, like those who heard 
the Apostle on the day of Pentecost! Then they also would 
have cried out in consternation : "Men and brethren, what 
shall we do !" But alas ! education, honor of men, high station
, often put the possessors of these at a disadvantage. 
The members of the Sanhedrin were rich, not only financially
 and intellectually, but in honors of men and in education
. To them forcefully belonged the words of Jesus, "Woe 
unto you rich !" — you are at a disadvantage. Pride, honor of 
men, self-conceit, hinder many such from receiving the simple 
message of the kingdom. Thus we perceive that there are 
compensations in the divine arrangement, and that in some 


377 


3?8 


«& WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


respects poverty is a blessing in disguise. Hence the assurances
 of the Word that not any rich, not many great, not 
many noble, not many learned, would be among the chosen 
of the Lord or would receive positions in the bride class and 
in the heavenly kingdom. — 1 Corinthians 1 : 26-29. 

Perceiving the boldness of Peter and John, and noting that 
they were unlearned and ignorant, the Sanhedrin marveled, 
and "took knowledge of them that they had been with Jesus". 
Ah, yes. Of Jesus also some one had said : "How knoweth this 
man letters, having never learned ?"• — in any of our schools. 
(John 7: 15) They knew of his power with the people through 
the Spirit of the Lord and of his straight-forward presentation
 of the truth. They recognized these men as of the same 
character, filled with the spirit of Jesus. And to this very 
day this is true of the followers of our Lord. As the Apostle 
wrote : "God hath not given us the spirit of fear, but of 
power and of love and of a sound mind." (2 Timothy 1:7) 
All of the Lord's people should remember this point and 
should cultivate such a spirit and be copies of our Lord Jesus 
and of the faithful apostles, so that of all of them the people 
might take knowledge that they have been with Jesus and 
have learned of him. 

But let no one forget that there is only one way of coming 
into relationship with God — through the Lord Jesus Christ. 
As the Apostle Peter indicates in this discourse, "There is 
none other name under heaven given among men whereby 
we must be saved". We must have faith in Jesus. We must 
understand that he died for the sin of the world. We must 
make a personal acceptance of him as our Savior. We must 
consecrate our little all to follow faithfully in his footsteps, 
even unto death. On these conditions we become his disciples
, learners in the school of Christ, and having been begotten
 of the holy Spirit, we are privileged to show forth 
more and more his praises and to let our light shine before 
men, than they, seeing our good works and our likeness to 
the Master, may glorify God on our behalf. 

COURAGE IN PREACHING THE GOSPEL 

The Sanhedrin was perplexed as it perceived that the disciples
 had so strong a case and had really turned the tables 
upon that body, charging its members before the people of 
being the true culprits, murderers of the Son of God, the 
Messiah. As they looked at the man who had been healed, 
they perceived that a great miracle had been performed. 
They could say nothing. So they put forth the apostles 
from their midst, in order that they might discuss the case 
privately. They could not deny the miracle, and they were 
afraid of what it would lead to if talk of this kind about 
Jesus and about their being his murderers should spread 


among the people to any degree. They thought best to let 
the disciples go, charging them, threatening them, not to 
preach any more in the name of Jesus. Then was shown 
the marvelous courage o f the Apostles. They replied : 
"Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto 
you more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak 
the things which we have seen and heard." 

The Bible directs the followers of Jesus to be subject to 
the powers that be. (Romans 13: 1-7; 1 Peter 2: 13-17) But 
while seeking to be thus law-abiding in every respect, Christians
 are to recognize that there is a still higher law and a 
still higher ruler, and they are to be subject to the worldly 
powers only in the absence of a contrary admonition from 
the higher power, from God. Through Jesus God had commanded
 the disciples to be the divine mouthpieces to preach 
the Gospel message that the death of Jesus was efficacious 
for the cancellation of sins, and that he who was slain was 
bye and bye to come and set up his kingdom and to bless 
all the world by releasing mankind from the bondage of sin 
and death. They were also to invite all who had faith to 
believe this message to associate themselves as disciples of 
Jesus, loyal and faithful to the Prince of that kingdom which 
is not yet set up. By such faithfulness they would manifest 
their faith and their loyalty to God ; and on account of this 
they were promised a share with Messiah in the kingdom 
which we would establish for the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. 

It was therefore the duty of the apostles, as it is the 
duty of all the followers of Jesus, to make known the Gospel 
message wherever there are hearing ears, and not to fear 
what man may do, although it would be our duty not to 
offend against ^ the laws by holding a meeting where the 
crowds would interfere with traffic or otherwise be in conflict
 with legal regulations. The apostles were not interfering
 with the regulations of the Jewish law in speaking in 
public, as they did in the Temple. Their courage was really 
authorized by the law; and the Sanhedrin, in forbidding them 
to speak, went beyond its bounds. 

The church, young in faith, had no doubt been greatly 
distressed by the imprisonment of the leading disciples ; and 
when these were released, then a general meeting was held 
for the rejoicing and praise to God, thanking the Lord for 
the courage given the apostles, for the promises of his Word 
and for the miracle which had led up to all this. As a consequence
, we read, all were encouraged to speak the Word 
of God with boldness; and "with great power gave the apostles
 witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great 
grace was upon them all**. 


PETER STANDS UP FOR TRUTH AND HONESTY 

January 25. — Acts 5: 1-11. 

AN ATTEMPT TO DECEIVE GOD — COMMUNISM IN THE EARLY CHURCH — DIVINE METHOD OF KEEPING THE INFANT CHURCH FREE 
FROM HYPOCRITES — DECEPTION PUNISHED WITH DEATH— TH E PRINCIPLE THUS ILLUSTRATED — LESSONS FOR THE CHURCH OF 
TODAY — HONESTY OF HEART ESSENTIAL TO DIVINE APPROVAL. 

"Lying lips are an abomination to Jehovah; but they that deal truly are his delight.'* — Proverbs 12:22, 


WHILE men slept the enemy came and sowed tares, 
our Lord's parable explains, (Matthew 13: 24-30, 
36-43) After the apostles tell asleep in death the 
adversary had a comparatively free hand in the sowing of 
the seeds of error, and as a result cultivated in the church 
the tare class. But at the time of our lesson, shortly after 
Pentecost, circumstances were different. The apostles were 
still in the church, and exercised the special powers of the 
holy Spirit conferred upon them, as the Lord's representatives, 
for the establishment of the church, sowing only the good 
seed and hindering the adversary from sowing the tares and 
developing hypocrites in it. Our lesson today illustrates the 
method by which the Lord through the apostles kept the infant
 church free from hypocrites. 

As previously suggested, a partial community of interest 
among believers was early established. A number of the 
faithful had already sold possessions and contributed to the 
general fund. Joses was one of these, whose case is particularly
 cited. (Acts 4:36, 37) He was one of the noble brethren
 whose generosity and helpfulness was generally recognized
 in the church, so that among the believers he received 
a new name, Barnabas, which signifies "son of consolation", 
or son of comfort and helpfulness. 


Although there was nothing compulsory upon any in respect
 to this selling of goods and giving to the common 
treasury, the very fact that those who did so were highly 
esteemed in the church would naturally become a snare to 
some who, without the real spirit of helpfulness and sacrifice, 
would appreciate and desire to have the approbation of the 
brethren. Ananias and Sapphira, his wife, were of this class, 
desirous of the approval of the church, yet deficient in the 
real spirit oi sacrifice. They had a property which they determined
 to sell; and in order to pass before the believers 
as saints of the same kind as Barnabas, they pretended to 
give to the general fund the full amount received for the 
property. Secretly, however, they had agreed to retain part 
of the sale money for future contingencies, yet would pass 
as sacrificers to the full amount. 

The wrong of their course is manifest. As the Apostle 
Peter declared, the property was their own, and after they 
had sold it they still had the right to do so as they pleased 
with the proceeds. But they should have been honest about 
the matter; and if they wished to give a tenth, a half or even 
all of the amount, it was a matter of their own business 
alone. No one would have the least right to find fault with 
them or to criticise them. The entire wrong consisted in the 


December 15, 1919 


SWATCH TOWER 


379 


deception practised, the palming off of a part of the price 
as the whele, for the purpose of deceiving the church and 
of gaining applause for an amount of sacrifice more than 
they had made. In this, and in this alone, consisted the sin 
for which they both died. 

CONSECRATION NOT A MEANINGLESS FORM 

The record is that "great fear came upon all the company
'', great reverence for God and for the apostles, his representatives
. Not only to those who had already espoused 
the Lord's cause, but also to all who for some time thereafter
 would identify themselves with the church, this would 
mean that any who were insincere would best make no pretensions
 to discipleship. Quite probably the influence of this 
event lasted for a considerable time — during the lives of the 
apostles. Since their death r however, any number of hypocrites
 have come into the church, indeed, have been coaxed 
and dragged in to swell the numbers ; and God has been 
pleased to permit the many false assumptions and false pretenses
 of these "tares'* to go unpunished and unchallenged. 
(Matthew 13:30) This does not mean a change on God's 
part as respects such characters, but rather that the case of 
Ananias and Sapphira was made a special one to serve as 
a lesson in the church. Likewise, the first offense of Sabbathbreaking
 was punished with death (Numbers 15:32-36), although
 Sabbath-breaking was not similarly punished subsequently
 under the law. \\ e are not to think of Ananias 
and Sapphira as being sinners above others of their class, 
because summary punishment was meted out to them. 

Those who believe that eternal torment is the punishment 
for sin must, to be logical, suppose that Ananias and Sapphira
 passed on to torments at the hands of devils, from 
which they have since been suffering. Such must wonder 
that many who are equally hypocritical in nominal churches 
of today, as far as human judgment can discern, go unpunished
, and are encouraged by their spiritual leaders to 
hope for a share in the best the future has to give. 

From our standpoint, the Bible standpoint, these two deceivers
 received no other punishment than the loss of the 
present life. As they were not of the "wheat" class at all, 
and had not become partakers of the holy Spirit, but deceived
 themselves, as they attempted to deceive others, their 
conduct did not affect their cases everlastingly, but merely 
as respects the present existence. They were made an illustration
 of a principle; they served as ensamples for the 
instruction of the church. In the loss of present life they received
 the full penalty of their deception. As respects the 
future life, an opportunity for which the Lord Jesus has 
purchased for all mankind, it will in due time be thrown 
open to them and to the whole world, to be accepted or rejected
, under terms of clear knowledge and obedience. They 
are still heirs to a share of those blessings which will come 
to the world after the spirit-begotten church shallhave been 
glorified and shall have begun the work of blessing all the 
families of the earth. 

HONESTY THE QUALITY APPROVED OF GOD 

The particulars of the lesson require no further detailing. 
We merely note the fact that the Apostle Peter evidently had 
the gift of discerning spirits (1 Corinthians 12: 10), and that 
God fortified the knowledge granted him, as evidence or 
proof of his apostleship. We proceed next to consider some 
of the lessons which may properly be learned from this incident
 of the past by the Lord's people of today. The chief 
of these is that God desires "truth in the inward parts", in 
the heart; and that any who have not this quality of candor, 
honesty, truthfulness, cannot be pleasing to God, and therefore
 cannot share in the glories shortly to be dispensed to 
the elect class of the Gospel age. — Psalm 51:6. 

As we look at ourselves we come to realize how imperfect 
are all the members of the fallen race. And when we consider
 God's perfection we can conceive of only one quality 
which the fallen creature could possibly possess that would 
meet with divine approval, even when viewed through the 
merit of Christ's atonement. That one quality is honesty. 
The true Christian must in honesty confess his own shortcoming
, his own deficiencies. He must in honesty acknowledge
 that his sufficiency is of God through Christ, and not of 
himself. He must honestly strive for the standard set before 
him in the Gospel. He must honestly admit that he cannot 
do the things that he would. He must candidly and fully 
accept the righteousness of God in Christ Jesus as the covering
 for his blemishes. We are inclined to the belief that 


the greatest sin in the church, even among the consecrated 
believers, is the sin of dishonesty, the sin of which divine 
disapproval is so excellently illustrated in the case of Ananias 
and Sapphira. 

We have no desire to distort or to make matters appear 
worse than they really are, but from our standpoint the nominal
 church teems and overflows with just such hypocrites 
self-deceived to some extent. These are the tares, or imitation
 wheat. Do not all who claim to be Christians profess 
to be following in the footsteps of Jesus, to bear his name, 
to be "the church which is his body", and to take up his cross 
and follow him? Yet how few of the nominal whole have 
or have ever had any thought of so doing! By their profession
 they declare that they have sold their earthly possessions
, their earthly interests ; that they have sacrificed these 
and have presented the whole matter as a loving gift and 
sacrifice to the Lord. Yet in reality they have done nothing 
of the Kind. N'ever for a moment have they thought of even 
as much liberality to the Lord's cause, keeping as proportionately
 little to themselves, as did Ananias and Sapphira. 

HYPOCRISY EVEN IN THE PULPIT 

We cannot judge the heart, and will not attempt to do so. 
We cannot even always tell which are grains of "wheat" and 
which "tares", but out of their own mouths we may judge 
those who profess to be "wheat". Some professing this and 
occupying very high places in the church, even as ministers 
of the Gospel, tell us plainly, not only by their actions but 
also at times by their words, that in pretending to sell out 
their interests and to turn over the entire proceeds in consecration
 to the Lord's service, they have grossly falsified. 
Some of them tell us that they do not even believe the things 
which they vowed they would preach. They thus tell us that 
they have been dishonest with men and with themselves in 
respect to the things of God. Truly this is a serious, a dreadful
 condition. The church of today, instead of being free 
from deceivers, has them in its very highest positions of 
trust and honor, as representatives of the Lord, purporting 
to be his mouthpieces. 

This is an individual matter still, as it was in the days of 
the apostles. Each individual of the Lord's people must answer
 for his own course, to the Lord himself. It therefore 
behooves all who are seeking divine approval to see that 
they are not influenced by prevalent disposition to hypocrisy, 
but that they deal with the Lord in purity and honesty of 
heart. Having covenanted to give to God and his service their 
all, they should see to it that they keep nothing back, but consider
 their time, their influence, their means, their lives, fully 
devoted to the Lord, and that they use these as his, as they 
believe he would have them used — as stewards. Whoever is 
honest with himself will be honest with God and also with his 
fellow men. As Shakespeare expresses it : 

"To thine own self be true; 
And it must follow, as the night the day, 
Thou canst not then be false to any man." 

Our Golden Text is quite to the point and requires no 
comment. We perhaps should, however, guard some against 
a mistaken view of truthfulness. Some persons of large 
conscientiousness fail to balance that subject properly, and 
reach the conclusion that they are bound to answer every 
question that may be asked them, telling all that they know 
upon any subject. This is a mistaken view. We are not 
bound by any laws of honesty to tell all that we know in 
all cases. Some people ask questions which they have no 
right to ask, questions about things which are not their 
proper business. Such persons should not be encouraged ; 
their queries should not be satisfied. Nor is it necessary 
to truthfulness that we should say to them in so many 
words : 'You are busybodies. Your questions are impertinent
, and I will not answer them/ On the contrary a 
soft answer will be better, an answer which will tell them 
as much or as little as suits convenience, permitting them 
to draw the conclusion that for some reason unmentioned 
you would not care to give a full statement of the facts. 
An exception to this rule would be a case in which the 
keeping back of the information would be to the injury of 
the inquirer. Then, love for our neighbor should prompt 
the giving of the information ; perhaps, indeed, the volunteering
 of it without being asked, especially if it be concerning 
a matter of which you have not merely an opinion but actual 
knowledge, without the revealing of which he would suffer 
some injury to his temporal or spiritual interests. 


THE GOSPEL A MESSAGE OF JOY 

''Fear not; for, behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. For unto you is born this 
dap in the city of David a Savior, which is Christ the Lord" — Luke 2:10, 11. 


ONE of the most powerful agencies at work In Influencing
 human conduct and affairs during the last six 
thousand years is fear. Fear is an acknowledgment 
of weakness: it Is an admission to one's self of one's 
inability to understand or to cope with extraordinary 
situations as they arise. Our first record of fear In man's 
heart was when the disobedient Adam hid himself In the 
darksome bowers of the garden of Eden, hoping, apparently, 
to avoid a meeting with his Maker, or at least to defer it 
to the furthest possible limit. He knew that he was a 
sinner and that his willful sin had sundered for him the 
tender ties which had bound him to his only Master. 

Satan has sought to play upon this human tendency to 
fear. In all the world we see this disposition manifest. A 
very large portion of the rites of pagan religions is inspired 
by fear. The poor heathen agonize themselves to appease 
the supposed wrath of their deities; and these tragic performances
 bear testimony to the fact that they recognize 
themselves to be far from perfect. Satan has sought to 
pollute and pervert the religion of Christ in that he has 
misrepresented the character of Jehovah, seeking to make 
him out as a heartless tyrant possessed of little else than 
power and intelligence. He has foisted the view T upon mankind
 that God has prepared and caused to be created a place, 
the capacity of which is sufficient to hold the vast majority 
of the human family ; that he has provided that place with 
interminable and unremittant heat, and into which burning, 
flery caldron he purposes to cast the poor fallen members 
of the human race, where throughout all the reverberating 
aeons of eternity they would be called upon to experience 
the most excruciating pain and to writhe in unendurable 
anguish, which must ever be endured. Satan has even done 
all he could to encourage the thought that there Is no 
hope of escape from this terrible condemnation — except for 
the elect few. 

When we recognize the activities of Satan and his iniquitous
 Influences in the forming of human opinion, and 
when w T e remember the fact that man is a sinner and is 
estranged from God, it is not to be wondered at that the 
shepherds on the hills of Judaea feared when so extraordinary
 a sight as the appearance of an angelic being w T as 
suddenly presented to them. But the angel delayed not 
to calm their fears by saying, "Fear not" — I have no message 
of disaster but one of good— "for, behold, I bring you good 
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people". The word 
here translated good tidings is elsewhere in the New Testament
, and in fact generally, translated gospel. The thought 
is the same in either case ; for gospel means good news. 

JOY FOR ALL THE PEOPLE 

This good message was made even more acceptable by 
the fact that it was announced as being for all people. 
Surely any blessing from God, even though its application 
be for but a limited group of his creatures, is an occasion 
for joy. But if the message of good news is so broad in its 
scope as to take in all people the occasion for joy is all 
the more intense. 

This broad message conveys much peace and joy because 
it implies that somehow, at some time, not stated by the 
celestial messenger, the curse which has been upon the 
world will be dispelled and divine favor will bring Its 
benign fruition of life. ( Psalm 30:5* For more than four 
thousand years prior to the giving of this message mankind 
had languished under the Adamic sentence of death. Year 
after year, century after century, thousands upon thousands, 
millions upon millions, of mankind had gone down into the 
tomb. The pagan nations were without God and without 
hope in the world. But Israel had been looking for the 
Messiah for more than eighteen hundred years. Nevertheless
, he had not come until that moment when the angels 
announced his birth. All they had before that time was 
anticipation. But now the angels brought the happy news 
that the long-looked-for Messiah w T as born in the city of 
David, Bethlehem. 


A SAVIOR, CHRIST THE LORD 

The word Christ means anointed and corresponds to the 
Hebrew word Messiah, the term by which the long-promised 
Seed of Abraham was known. It was he who should bless 
all the families of the earth. (Genesis 12:3, 22:15-18) At 
the time of our Lord's birth, however, he was the Savior 
only In a prophetic sense. He was a savior in the sense that 
his work of salvation lay before him, and not behind him. 
He was not yet the Christ of glory, because first he must be 
tested and must demonstrate his loyalty to Jehovah, even 
under the most humiliating circumstances. And even when 
he had finished his trial time on Calvary he was not the 
world's Lord in the grand sense that was to follow. After 
lie had risen from the dead and when all power in heaven 
and in earth was his, when it could be said of him that "he 
upholds all things by the word of his power", then the real 
grandeur and scope of his office began to be manifest. 

Holy men of old, speaking under the inspiration and 
guidance of the holy spirit, had foretold that a great one, 
an anointed one, should come and be king of the Jews. It 
was even shown that he would be king over the whole world. 
This great King had been pictured in the office of Melchlsedic
, King of Salem, Priest of the Most High God. (Psalm 
110: 4) In all probability the shepherds on the star-lit hills 
around Bethlehem were familiar with these things long 
promised to Israel. 

THE BASIS OF THE REJOICING 

It was a message of joy conveyed to mankind through 
the shepherds in that it implied a return of divine favor to 
the world. In the beginning God had cursed the earth, not 
in the sense of swearing at mankind nor manifesting weakness
, but in the sense of blighting the race. He had declared 
that man must die, (Genesis 2: 17; 3: 17-19) As a result of 
that curse pronounced In Eden all the sickness, all the 
crying, and all the dying which has ever happened in the 
world, came. But God, who had justly placed the curse 
upon man, had planned that in due time the former things 
should pass away and that thereafter there should be no 
more sorrowing, sickness, suffering, or death* 

There Is no intimation in these words of the popular 
theory fostered and nurtured by ecclesiastical organizations 
to the effect that there Is bad tidings of great misery for 
nearly all members of the Adamic race. On the contrary, 
it was a message of great joy to all peoples, all nationalities, 
just as God had promised long ago to Abraham, declaring, 
"By myself have I sworn ... In thy seed shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed". 

As it was night time w T hen the angels came and as the 
message was delivered to those who were alert and watching
, so the good news of God's oncoming favor for mankind 
has come during the dark night of sin and death. All have 
not known of it, all have not been illuminated by the 
celestial lightnings of truth, but only those who were 
watching and who had the courage to listen to the good 
message. God's messengers, or angels, have not all been 
brilliant to man's eye, but to the extent that they have 
held the torch of truth they have had the heavenly Illumination
, even though, outwardly, they have been very inconspicuous
 and humble. 

"Yet with the woes of sin and strife 

The world has suffered long ; 
Beneath the angel-strain have rolled 

Two thousand years of wrong ; 
And men, at war with men, hear not 

The love-song which they bring : 
Oh ! hush the noise, ye men of strife, 

And hear the angels sing!" 

'For lo ! the days are hastening on, 

By prophet-bards foretold, 
When with the ever-circling years 

Comes round the age of gold ; 
When Peace shall over all the earth 

Its ancient splendors fling, 
And the whole world send back the song 
Which now the angels sing." 


380 


0ECEMBEE 15, 1919 


SWATCH TOWER 


381 


YOUR "GOOD HOPES'* FOE 1920 

<The plan here proposed we designate "good hopes'*, because 
nothmg is actually promised; only your generous hopes are expressed
, based upon your future prospects as they now appear to 
you, The plan has proved not only so beneficial to the cause of 
truth* but also so blessed to the hopers, for some years past, that 
we ean commend it to all as Scriptural and good. Those who desire 
to make use of this plan can Ml out both of these memoranda* 
One should be kept for refreshment of your memory , the other 
mailed to us,) 

TO THE 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIBTX 

Dear Friends : I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Stumes and for educational and evangelistic work 
work both in this country and in foreign lands. I need not 
tell yon that 1 am interested in the spread of the glad 
tidings concerning the breadths and lengths and depths and 
heights of redeeming love as expressed for us in God*s great 
plan of the ages, 

I am anxious to use myself, my every power and talent, 
my voice, my time, my money, my influence, my all to give 
to others this knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, 
cheered and comforted my own heart and placed my feet 
firmly upon* the rock Christ Jesus. 

I have considered carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's glory 
and for the service of his people— those blinded by human 
tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering for "the good 
word of GkxT\ and those also who are naked, not having on 
the robe of Christ's righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, 
at best, in the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I 
have decided that so far as my money talent goes, I will 
follow the rule so clearly laid down for us by the great 
Apostle Paul (1 Corinthians 16:2), and will lay aside on 
the first day of each week, according to my thankful appreciation
 of the Lord's blessings during the preceding week. 
Out of this fund I wish to contribute to the several parts 
of the Lord's work in the earth as that work is now in 
operation or as it may need to be performed throughout the 
year. Such special applications of my contribution as I 
desire to have made are mentioned on the reverse side of 
this sheet 

Of course, X cannot in advance judge or state particularly 
what the Lord's bounty may enable me to set apart weekly, 
and hence you will understand the sum indicated to be 
merely my conjecture or hope, based upon present prospects. 
It shall be my purpose to contribute more than I here 
specify ; and should I not succeed in doing as well, the Lord 
will know my heart, and you will know of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be 
able to do in this cause is to enable those in charge of the 
work of publishing and translating literature, conducting 
evangelistic meetings, etc., to form estimates, lay plans, 
make contracts, etc., with some idea of what I will at least 
try to do in the exercise of this, my highly appreciated 
privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the corning year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for home and foreign mission 
work (to assist In translating the Scriftuke SrtrorES into 
foreign languages, and in meeting the expenses of brethren 
sent out as lecturers to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 

may deem best), the amount ol per week. 

All or any portion of my donation may be applied as 
subscription price for The Watch Toweb sent to the Lord's 
poor or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter year, I will secure an express or postal 
money order, or bank draft, as I may find most convenient, 
and will address the letter to 

Watch Tower Bibo; & T&act Society 

124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A, 

or, 34 Craven Terrace, Lancaster Gate, London W, 2, England; 
495 Collins St., Melbourne, Australia; 123 Ptein $t» Cape Town, 
South Africa, 


YOUR "GOOD HOPES" FOR 1920 


{The plan here proposed we designate "good hopes", because 
nothing is actually promised ; Only your generous hopes are expressed
, baaed upon your future prospects as they now appear to 
you. The plan has proved not only so beneficial to the cause of 
truth, but also so blessed to the hopers, for some years past* that 
ue ran commend it to all as Scriptural and good. Those who desire 
to make use ol this plan can fill out both of these memoranda. 
One should be kept for refreshment of your memory; the other 
mailed to us ) 

TO THE 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY 

Dear Friends ; I have read with interest of the openings 
for the Studies and for educational and evangelistic work 
work both in this country and in foreign lands. I need not 
tell you that I am interested in the spread of the glad 
tidings concerning the breadths and lengths and depths and 
heights of redeeming love as expressed for us in God's gj*eat 
plan of the ages. 

I am anxious to use myself, my every power and talent, 
my voice, my time, my money, my influence, my all to give 
to others this knowledge, which has so greatly blessed, 
cheered and comforted my own heart and placed my feet 
firmly upon the rock Christ Jesus. 

I have considered carefully, and praying to be instructed, 
how to use my various talents more to my Redeemer's glory 
and for the service of his people — those blinded by human 
tradition who are, nevertheless, hungering for "the good 
word of God", and those also who are naked, not having on 
the robe of Christ's righteousness, the unjustified, who stand, 
at best, in the filthy rags of their own righteousness. I 
have decided that so far as my money talent goes, I will 
follow the rule so clearly laid down for us by the great 
Apostle Paul (1 Corinthians 10:2), and will lay aside on 
the first day of each week, according to my thankful appreciation
 of the Lord's blessings during the preceding week. 
Out of this fund X wish to contribute to the several parts 
of the Lord's work in the earth as that work is now in 
operation or as it may need to be performed throughout the 
year, Such special applications of my contribution as I 
desire to have made are mentioned on the reverse side of 
this sheet* 

Of course, I cannot in advance judge or state particularly 
what the Lord's bounty may enable me to set apart weekly, 
and hence you will understand the sum indicated to be 
merely my conjecture or hope, based upon present prospects. 
It shall be my purpose to contribute more than I here 
specify ; and should I not succeed in doing as well, the Lord 
will know my heart, and you will know of my endeavors. 

My only object in specifying in advance what I hope to be 
able to do in this cause is to enable thorn in charge of the 
work of publishing and translating literature, conducting 
evangelistic meetings, etc., to form estimates, lay plans, 
make contracts, etc., with some idea of what I will at least 
try to do in the exercise of this, my highly appreciated 
privilege. 

My present judgment is that during the coming year, by 
self-denial and cross-bearing, I shall be able to lay aside on 
the first day of each week for home and foreign mission 
work (to assist in translating the Sciuftuee Studies into 
foreign languages, and in meeting the expenses of brethren 
sent out as lecturers to preach the divine plan of salvation, 
and in general to be expended as the officers of the Society 

may deem best), the amount ol ~per week. 

All or any portion of my donation may be applied as 
subscription price for The Watch Toweb sent to the Lord's 
poor or others, as the Society's officers may deem advisable. 

That the work be not hindered, I will endeavor to send 
you what I shall have laid aside for this cause at the close 
of each quarter year. I will secure an express or postal 
money order, or bank draft, as I may ^nd most convenient, 
and will address the letter to 

Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society 

124 Columbia Heights, Brooklyn, N. Y., U. S. A. 

or, 34 Craven Terrace, Lancaster Gate, London w\ 2, England j 
4u5 Colhns St, Melbourne, Australia ; 123 Plem St, Cape To^n, 
South Africa. 


(#ame) 


(^ame) 


{Past Office) (Posf Office) 

iState or Province) {Country* */ Foreign) (State or Province) (Country, if Foreign}, , 


382 


SWATCH TOWER 


BSOOKLTN, N, Y + 


WATCH TOWER SUBSCRIPTIONS 


The friends who contribute to the "Good Hopes'* (described
 on the reverse side of this sheet) at times desire to 
send The Watch Towm to friends who are not yet interested
 enough to subscribe for themselves, or to deeply 
interested friends who are too poor to subscribe and backward
 about accepting our Lord*$ Poor otter. They are 
Invited to give us such addresses below, the expense to be 
deducted from their donations. Give full name and address 
in each instance, and write very plainly, please, mentioning 
the length of the subscription, using 1, J, J to represent 
full year, half year, and quarter year: 


Names 


Length 


WATCH TOWER SUBSCKIPTION RENEWALS 

Most of our subscriptions md with the year, so we take 
this opportunity to remark that we snail be glad to hear 
promptly from such as desire the visits of Thu Watch 
Towse to be continued. The Lord's Poor friends have been 
requested to send their applications in May. When names 
are dropped and afterward renewed it makes us unnecessary 
trouble. When desiring to know date of expiration look on 
your Toweb wrapper. The date is given in the iower left 
hand portion of the printed labeL 

A PRIVILEGE AND A SERVICE 

We are convinced that The Watch Toweb lists do not 
contain the names of all those who are deeply interested in 
its teachings. The total is small enough, surely, and we are 
not content that the name of any should be missing. We 
believe that all who are in the "narrow way" would be 
stimulated and encouraged by its semi-monthly appearance 
on their reading tables, reminding them afresh of those 
things which the world, the flesh, and the devil continually 
tend to crowd out of mind and heart 

In times past we have required that all who desired The 
Watch Towb& on credit or free under the "Lord's Poor" 
arrangement, should make personal application; but now 
we request every subscriber to inquire among those whom 
he knows to be interested in present truth and to obtain the 
consent of all such to send in their subscriptions either on 
credit or free, as the circumstances may necessitate. Those 
who receive our journal on credit may at any future time 
request that the debt be cancelled and we will cheerfully 
comply* We desire that as nearly as possible The Watch 
Towub lists shall represent all deeply interested in its 
message* 

CREATION DRAMA SCENARIOS 

These Scenarios constitute a condensed statement of the 
divine plan of the ages, profusely illustrated ; much information
 ia little space. The ninety-six short, pithy lectures 
of The Photo-Drama of Creation are supplied in two bindings
 and three styles: red cloth (red edges), in English, 
Armenian, Dano-Norweginn, Finnish, German, Greek, Italian
, Polish, Slovak, Spanish, Russian, and Swedish, S5c; 
Be Lw#e*, maroon cloth, embossed in four colors, gold edges, 
English only, $1.25; paper bound edition in English, Armenian
, Dano-Norwegian, Finnish, German, Greek, Polish, 
Slovak, Russian, and Swedish* 35c. All these prices include 
carriage charges. 

* De Ivuse edition will l>e out of stock for about two months. 


YEAR MOTTO FOR 1920 



These richly colored, but not gaudy, motto cards are of 
our own design and manufacture. Produced by the lithographic
 offset process in eight colors, and embossing, they 
present an extraordinary appearance of elegance and beauty, 
weU suited to the rare and exalted character of the text 
which the card carries— "The Lord is my strength w& 
song"*— Psalm 118:14. 

By producing them in large quantities we are able to sell 
them lower than our other mottoes of the same size. Our 
object is to encourage the embellishment of the homes of 
the Lord's people with faith-stimulating and courage-inspiring
 texts, tastefully prepared. The mottoes are printed 
on sturdy lithographic board, 9"x 14", and punched for 
convenient hanging. 

Prices: We will supply these 1920 year mottoes for ^oc 
each, $2.40 per dozen, or $8.00 for 50, carriage charges prepaid
 by us, It will be to the advantage of all concerneo; to 
order in quantities, where that is possible. 

MOTTO CARD ASSORTMENTS 
The uncertain condition of the motto market makes it 
practically impossible for us to advise in advance just how 
many or what kind of mottoes we will be able to enclose in 
each package. But for those who care to employ our judgment
 in ma&ing up the assortments we promise good value 
for the money— better value, we confidently believe, than 
is obtainable in mottoes anywhere else in the country* We 
furnish the following assortments; prices include prepay* 
ment of carriage by us: 

Packet HA (assorted) f^Q 

Packet MB (assorted) - J-J*[ 

Packet MC (assorted) £**> 

Packet MB (assorted) AW 

SCRIPTURE TEXT CALENDAR CARDS 

We have two sizes, the smaller 5T' * Si", and the larger 
8J"x 10T; each adorned with appropriate scenic views m 
colors and embellished with helpful Scripture teste. OftW 
dar pad is attached in such a manner that each montfl iw» 
be torn oft when it has fulfilled its purpose. ^<* ™Jf 
provided with delicately tinted ribbon or cord, for wwgw 

Prices for smaller size 15c each, or $1.50 per dozen, .pw 
paid: $5.00 for 50, carriage charges collect; ^J*e T* 
size, 25c each, or $2,25 per dozen, postpaid; $&5» w w * 
carriage charges collect. 


International Bible Students Association Classes 

Lectures and Studies by Traveling Brethren 


BROTHER R. H. BARBER 


Sanford, Fla Dec. 16 

Miami, Fla " 18 

Key West, Fla " 19 

Miami, Fla " 20, 23 

Lakeland, Fla " 24 

St. Petersburg, Fla... " 25-27 


..Dec. 


Jacksonville, Fla. 

Brunswick, Ga " 

Fitzgerald, Ga " 

McRae, Ga " 

Eastman, Ga, Jan. 

Rentz, Ga " 


BROTHER B. H. BOYD 


Pad en, Okla Dec, 

Chandler, Okla 

Edmond, Okla 

Minco, Okla 

Chickasha, Okla. .. 
Marlow, Okla 


16 Comanche, Okla Dec. 

18 Lawton, Okla " 

19 Oklahoma City, Okla. " I 

20 Harrah, Okla " 

21 McLoud, Okla " I 

22 Shawnee, Okla " 


28 
29 
30 
31 
1 


23 


24 
25,26 

27 
28,29 

30 


BROTHER E. F. CRIST 


Caro, Mich Dec. 16 

Midland, Mich " 17 

Alma, Mich. * " 18 

Wheeler, Mich " 19 

Lansing, Mich " 20, 21 

Charlotte, Mich " 22 


Woodland, Mich Dec. 

Muskegon, Mich 

Grand Rapids, Mich. 

Sparta, Mich 

Kalamazoo, Mich 

South Haven, Mich... 


23 

24 
25 

26 


BROTHER A. 
Jacksonville, Fla. .. Dec. 18 

Arredondo, Fla " 21 

Williston, Fla " 22 

Tarpon Springs, Fla. " 23 
St. Petersburg, Fla... " 25-28 
Tampa, Fla " 29 

J. ESHLEMAN 
Avon Park, Fla... ... 

Lakeland, Fla 

Punta Gorda, Fla. 

Arcadia, Fla 

Sarasota, Fla. .. .... 

Tampa, Fla. 

..Dec. 30 

.. " 31 
Jan. 1 

" o 

.".' " 3 
4 





Suffolk, Va 

Newport News, 
Norfolk, Va 

BROTHER 

Dec. 16, 17 

Va... " 18 
" 19-21 

M. L. HERR 

Charlotte, N. C 

Spartanburg, S. C. 

GreenviUe, S. C 

Westminster, S. C. 

Athens, Ga 

Wiliard, Ga 

S. KENDALL 

Jud&onia, Ark 

Batesville, Ark 

Little Rock, Ark. .. 
Ward, Ark 

.Dec. 25-28 

.. " 29 

30 

Raleigh, N. C... 

" 22 

31 

Gastonia City, N 
Shelby, N. C 

Fristoe, Ky 

Paducah, Ky. .. 
Mayfield, Ky. 

. C... " 23 
24 

BROTHER G 

Dec. 17 

" 18 

" 19 

.Jan. 1, 2 

.. " 3 

Dec. 25 

.. " 20, 27 
28 

Memphis, Tenn. 

" 20,21 

" 22 

. *' 29 

Helena, Ark. . . 

Rosebud, Ark. 

. " 30, 31 

Keasett, Ark. 

... . . " 23, 24 

Little Rock. Ark. .. 

Jan. 1 

Charlotte, N. C. 
Spartanburg, S. 

Greer, S. C 

Westminster. S. 
Union Point, Ga 
Thomson, Ga. .. 

BROTHER 
Dec. 16 

C. " 17 
-. . " 18 

CV_ " 19 

" 21 

" 22 

S. MORTON 

Augusta, Ga 

Charlotte, N. C. ... 

Hickory, N. C 

AshMville, N. C 

Hendersonville, N. C 
Brasstown, N. C 

.. " 23 
. " 25 28 
. " 29 
30 
\ " 31 
.Jan. 1, 2 





Woodward, Okla Dec. 17, 18 

Wichita, Kan " 19 

Topeka, Kan " 20 

Clay Center, Kan. ... " 21 

Riley, Kan " 22 

Marysville, Kan. . .. " 23. 24 


BROTHER W. H. PICKERING 


Topeka, Kan Dec. 

Atchison, Kan " 

Leavenworth, Kan. " 

Kansas City, Mo Dec. 

Freeman, Mo " 

Chilhowee, Mo '* 


25 
20 
°7 
28 
30 
31 


BROTHER V. C. RICE 


Mountain Grove, Mo. D<> 

South Fork, Mo 

Moody, Mo 

Thayer, Mo 

Jonesboro, Ark 

Gilmore, Ark, ._ 


1»; 

18 

19 
21 

23 


Memphis, Tenn. 
Jackson, Miss. .. 
Vieksburg, Miss, 

Monroe, La 

Kelly, La 

Verda, La 


..Dec. 


!4. 25 
26. 27 

28 
29 
30 
31 


Deep River, Conn Dp 

New Haven, Conn. .. 
Bridgeport, Conn. .. 
South Norwalk. Conn. 

Stamford, Conn. 

Brooklyn, N. V 


BROTHER R. L. ROBIE 


16 Port Jervis, N. Y Dec. 

17 Eldred, X. Y " 

18 Liberty. N. Y _. " 

19 Peckville, Pa Jan. 

21 Carbondale, Pa " 

28 Scranton, Pa. " 


Portland, Me 

Springvale, Me. ... 

Lynn, Mass 

Taunton, Mass 

New Bedford, Mas 
Fall River, Mass. 


BROTHER E. D. SEXTON 


Doc. 


16 Newport, R. I Dec. 

17 Providence, R. I " 

l^ Westerly, R. I " 

19 Washington, D. C... " 

20 Hairerstown, Md " 

21 Cumberland, Md " 


Childress, Tex Dec. 17 

Dalhart, Tex 

Hooker, Okla 

Dalhart. Tex 

AmarilTo, Tex. . . 
Fort Worth, Tex. 


BROTHER W. J. THORN 


is Alvarado, Tex Dec. 

19 Oleburne, lex 

21 Waco, Tex 

22 Uill^boro, Tex 

24 Athens, Tex 

25 Murehison, Tex. ... 


29 

30 

31 

1, 2 

4 

4 


21 
23 


29 
30 


29 
30 
31 


Lonaconing, Md Dec. 15 

Rock Enon Sp'gs, Va. " 16 

Boyce, Va " 17 

Grottoes, Va " 18 

Waynesboro, Va. . .. " 19 

Roanoke, Va M 21 


BROTHER T. H. THORNTON 


Leaksville, N. C Dec. 22 

Greensboro, N. C " 23 

Charlotte, N. C " 25-28 

Winston-Salem, N. C. '* 29 

Roanoke, Va " 30 

East Radford, Va " 31 


Santa Rosa, Cal.... 

San Jose, Cal 

Paso Robles, Cal..... 
Santa Maria, Cal.... 
Los Angeles, Cal.... 
Santa Barbara, Cal. 


BROTHER D. TOOLE 

..Dec. 


20 

Pasadena, Cal 

...Dec 

21 

Alhambra, Cal. .. 

M 

22 

Lawndale, Cal 

" 

23 

Long Beach, Cal... 

...Jan. 

25, 28 

Santa Ana, Cal... 

" 

26 

Oceanside, Cal 

... '* 


BROTHER S. H. TOUTJTAN 

Mesa, Wash Dec. 23 Stan wood, Wash. 

Yakima, Wash " 24 Seattle, Wash. ... 

EJlensburg, Wash. .. " 25 Puyallup, Wash. 

Tacoma, Wash M 26 Olvmnia, Wash. .. 

Everett, Wash " 28-31 Aberdeen, Wash. 

Burlington, Wash. ..Jan. 2 Centralia, Wash. 


.Jan. 


20 

30 

31 

1 

2 

3 


BROTHER J. A. BAEUERLEIN 
Elizabeth, N, J Dec. 21 Linneld, Pa... 


BROTHER E. W. BETLER 
Portchester, N. Y. ...Dec. 21 Paterson, N. J.. 


Dec. 28 
..Dec. 28 


BROTHER L, T. COHEN 
Bayonne, N. J. Dec. 21 Bridgeport, Conn Dec. 28 

BROTHER E. J. COWARD 
Benton, Pa Dec. 21 Hamburg, N. J Dec. 28 


BROTHER E. L. DOCKEY 
New Britain, Conn Dec. 21 Allentown, Pa Dec. 28 


BROTHER A. DONALD 
East Stroudsburg, Pa. Dec. 21 Valley Stream, N. Y Dec. 28 

BROTHER A. D. ESHLEMAN 

Pottstown, Pa Dec 21 Norristown, Pa Dec. 28 


BROTHER G. H. FISHER 
Wilmington, Del Dec. 21 Scranton, Pa Dec. 28 


BROTHER H. E. HAZLETT 
Johnstown N. Y Dec. 21 Atlantic City, N. J Dec. 28 


BROTHER W. F. HUDGINGS 
Granville, N. Y Dee 21 Kingston, N. Y .Dec 28 

BROTHER J. H. HOEVELER 

Cromwell, Conn Dec 21 Kankletown, Pa Dec. 28 


BROTHER R. J. MARTIN 
Harrisburg, Fa Dec. 21 Cleveland, Ohio Dec. 28 


Passaic, N. J.. 


BROTHER C. E. MYERS 
Dec. 21 North Bergen, N. J Dec. 28 


BROTHER H, H. RIEMER 
Brooklyn, N. Y Dec. 21 Holtsville, N. Y Dec. 28 


BROTHER F. H. ROBISON 

Reading, Pa Dec 21 Philadelphia, Pa Dec. 28 


BROTHER H. A. SEKLEMIAN 
Millville, N. J Dec. 21 Long Branch, N. J Dec. 28 


BROTHER W. E. VAN AMBURGH 

Washington, D. C Dec. 21 Waterbury, Conn Dec. 28 


Dover, N. J.. 


BROTHER R. VAN HYNING 
Dec. 21 Taunton, Mass Dec. 28 


BROTHER C. A. WISE 
Cleveland, Ohio.. Dec. 21 Bridgeton, N. J Dec. 28 


BROTHER C. H. ZOOK 

South Norwalk. Conn. ..Dec. 21 Hartford, Conn Dec. 28 


Conventions to be addressed by Brother J. F. Rutherford 

Norfolk, Va Dec. 21 Spartanburg, S. C Dec. 29 


Charlotte, N. C Dec. 28 


Columbus, Ohio Jan. 4 


I.BS-A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 

ByMeansoF -STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 

Quest/DOS from MANUAL on l/OLUM£ S/X 
Study XIII: "Parental Obligations of New Creation" 


Week of Jan. 4 
Week of Jan. 11 


Q. 47-55 
Q. 56-61 


Week of Jan. 18 ... Q. 62-67 
Week of Jan. 25 .... Q. 1-8 


Question Manuals on Vol. VI, Studies in tbt Scriptures. 15c each, postpaid 


INDEX TO THE WATCH TOWER 


VOLUME XL, 1919 


JANUARY 1 p a gQ 

View from the Watch Tower 3 

Pastor Russell's Mission 3 

A Scathing Criticism 4 

Serious Breach of Etiquette. o 

The Inner Sanctuary (Poem) 6 

Who Is He that Condemneth? 7 

Lovers of Religious Liberty 8 

Retribution upon Persecutors 9 

In What Sense God Rests 10 

The Passover 11 

Israel Crossing the Red Sea 13 

Interesting Letters 15 

JANUARY 15 

"Lord, Teach Us to Pray" 19 

The Lord Will Direct the Issue 22 

Annual Meeting of Shareholders 23 

The Law of Development 25 

"Love as Brethren, Re Pitiful" 26 

The Giving of the Manna 27 

Partakers of Heavenly Calling iPoem).. 28 

Jethro's Counsel 29 

Faithful unto Death U J oem> 29 

Tin* Ten Commandments 30 

Letters from Afield 31 

Date of the Memorial 18 

FEBRUARY 1 

Views from the Watch Tower 35 

Bear Thou Me Up (Poem) 36 

Satan's Snares and Delusions 37 

Two Methods of Attack 38 

Violation of Principle of Justice 39 

Four Important Points 40 

"He Knows, He Loves, He Cares" (Poem) 40 

Interesting Questions 41 

Moses Praying for Israel 42 

Report of the Spies 43 

Joshua, Patriot and Leader 45 

Encouraging Letters from Brethren 47 

FEBRUARY 15 

Views from the Watch Tower 51 

Possible Political Storm Center 51 

A Singular Proceeding 52 

Notable Fulfillments of Prophecy 52 

In Re the Use of the Word Channel 54 

One Special Channel Foretold 54 

The World's Final Test 57 

Rejoicing in Tribulation (Letter) 58 

The Cldes of Refuge 60 

Israel Warned Against Compromise 61 

God's Hand in a Nation's Life 62 

Letters from Afield 63 

MARCH 1 

Stand Fast — Striving Together 67 

Why We Were Illuminated 68 

Several Pertinent Facts 68 

Punishing Fellow Members 69 

The Last to Welcome the King 70 

Responsibility of the Clergy 70 

Persecutors of God's People 72 

God's Providential Care (Poem) 72 

Love's Victory Over Fear 73 

God Our Heavenly Father. 75 

Christ Our Savior 76 

In the Furnace (Poem) 78 

MARCH 16 

Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Releasing the Sincere S3 

Political Prisoners 84 

Rebirth of a Nation 84 

The Memorial Supper 85 

Cup of the New Covenant 86 

Known by Their Fruits 87- 

"Let Us Keep the Feast" 88 

Christ in Gethsemane (Poem) 88 

Our Risen Lord 89 

The Holy Spirit Our Helper 91 

Letters from Afield 94 

APRIL 1 

View's from the Watch Tower.. 99 

"Rolling Together as a Scroll" 99 

Famines, Pestilences, Earthquakes 100 

Wonderful Witness for the Truth 101 

Lovalty to the Brethren 101 

"He that Receiveth You Receiveth Me"-102 

Antitypical "Son of Perdition" 102 

Evil Influences Now at Work 104 

The Table of tlu* Great King .105 

Interesting Questions _ 10$ 

Man Made in the Image of God 109 

Letters from Afield Ill 

APRIL 15 

Liberty in Christ 115 

Resume of Our Brethren's Case 115 

Petition for Their Release,. 115 

Judge Howe Asks Clemency for Them. .117 

Released on Bail 118 

The Finished Mvstery 120 

"Ye Are Dead" (Poem).. 121 

Guiding the Feet of Christ 122 

Resigns in Favor of Brother Macmillan. 123 

Sin and its Consequences 124 

The Grace of God.... 126 

Letters from Afield 127 


MAY 1 Paf6 

Views from the Watch Tower „ 131 

Two horned Beast and Image , 131 

Asks Catholic to Fill Pulpit. 132 

The Harvest Ended- What Shall Follow? 133 

The Door Now Closed 133 

Eccclesiasticlsm's "Rich Men" 134 

Heralds of the Kingdom "Killed" 135 

Great Test Now Before the Church.... 136 

Requests for Pilgrim Visits 139 

Repentance 139 

Faith : What It Is and What It Doe8~~140 
Obedience a Test of Discipleahtp _ 142 

MAY 15 

Views from the Watch Tower 147 

Earthquakes, Famines and Pestilences 147 

Kingdom of Heaven at Hand 148 

Human Schemes not Adequate, 149 

Churches Demand Money and Life 150 

Memorial Supper Reports 151 

The Cross of Christ 152 

Jesus' Ruptured Heart 152 

Crucified with Christ 153 

Consecrated but not Crucified 155 

Lessons Respecting Prayer 150 

Corroborations in the Tabernacle 159 

JUNE 1 

Who Will Gain the Victory? 103 

God an Economist 164 

Occasion for Reflection 165 

Editors Not Infallible. 166 

Hour of Temptation Here 167 

Bitterness, Pride, Ambition, Fear Iflx 

Coming Conventions 169 

"Thy Shield and Thy Reward". 170 

"The Greatest of These Is Love" 171 

Response to God's Love .172 

Temple Chart Revision. 174 

Letters from Afield 174 

JUNE 15 

God's Covenants and Blessings 179 

The Oath-Bound Covenant 180 

The Law Covenant 180 

Covenants of Sacrifice 181 

Grace Without a Mediator 183 

Seed of Abraham Twofold 183 

The New Law Covenant 184 

Covenants in Type and Picture- 185 

Conventions and More Conventions 186 

The Church : Its Life and Work 187 

Philip and the Ethiopian 189 

Letters from Afield 190 

JULY 1 

The Test of Sonship 195 

How We Become Sons of God 195 

Proofs of Sonship 196 

Zeal for the Lord 197 

Love for the Brethren 197 

Not Swift to Take Offense 198 

Loyalty 199 

Why Stand Ye Idle? 200 

The Lord's Supper 202 

New Wine in the Kingdom 203 

Christian Fellowship 204 

Christian Worship 206 

JULY 16 

Views from the Watch Tower 211 

Bloodless English Revolution 211 

Mr. Vanderlip on British Finance 212 

Not Clear, Arresting Voice in Pulpit..213 
Many Interested in the Apocalypse. .213 

From "Messiah" to "Community" 214 

Unhappy, hut Aspiring Vatican 215 

Methodist Leaders Lean Toward Truth 216 
"Sown in Weakness, Raised in Power". .21" 

Winning Others to Christ 218 

Christian Missions 220 

Social Responsibility ...221 

AUGUST 1 

Blessed Are the Fearless 1 227 

Gideon's Triumph 228 

The Beast and the Lamb 220 

Distribution of Volunteer Matter 230 

Spirit of Little Flock 231 

Power and a Sound Mind .232 

Test of a Perfect Love 233 

Scripture for a Purpose 234 

General Convention : Cedar Point, Ohio. .235 

The Wisdom from Above 236 

The Kingdom of God. 237 

The Sheep and the Goats 238 

AUGUST 15 

Blessed Are the Fearless IT 243 

Elijah a Type 243 

Suddenly Becomes Fearful 244 

Elijah Regains his Courage 245 

Whom Does Elisha Type? 246 

Twice as Fearless 247 

Invisible Cohorts 247 

The Mantle 248 

The Gleaning Work 249 

Opportunities for Service 250 

In Re General Convention 253 

The Holy Scriptures 254 


SEPTEMBER 1 Pape 

Glorifying God 259 

Hope of God's Glory 259 

God's Character Glory 260 

God's Image In Man 261 

Character in Drawer and Drawn 262 

Power in Courage 264 

Some of Our Deficiencies 265 

Rest of God for People of God .266 

Ages of Glory to Follow 266 

Jesus Our Savior and King 268 

John and Peter Become DiRcipIes .270 

Fishers of Men 271 

SEPTEMBER 15 

Viewe from the Watch Tower 275 

Triumphantly Distressed 275 

Pulpiteers' Great Responsibility 276 

Wisdom of Their Great Men 277 

League of All Religions 278 

Announcing the Kingdom 279 

Future Service 280 

How to Proceed 281 

Questions of Interest and Import. 282 

Bethel to be Restored 283 

Jesus in Peter's Home 284 

A Lesson in Trust 285 

OCTOBER 1 

Report of General Convention 291 

Convention Program 292 

Wednesday's Discourses 293 

Faith : Morale of the Christian 294 

Wonders of Creation 295 

World Not Converted 29ft 

Many Baptized 297 

Colaborers' Day 298 

The Golden Age 299 

Jeremiah Commends the Rechabites 300 

What Power at Bottom of It? 301 

Peter's Great Confession 302 

OCTOBER 15 

Views from the Watch Tower 307 

Is Christendom a Failure? 307 

The Old World Gone 308 

Violet Rays for Agriculture. 309 

Progress In Palestine 311 

Cleansing from All Unrighteousness 313 

Justification Follows Consecration 313 

Why Justification Is Necessary 314 

Witnesses of Christ's Glory 316 

Jesus Corrects John's Narrowness 317 

The Golden Age. 318 

Jesns Teaches Peter True Greatness 319 

NOVEMBER 1 

Green Leaves and Budding Hopes 323 

Bevond the Mist of Dreams 324 

Tests of Faith for Zionists 325 

The Livery of the King 325 

Joy for the Humble. 327 

Future Advantages 328 

Imitations of Humility 329 

On Brother Russell's Will 330 

The Golden Age — 331 

Encouraging Experiences Reported.... 331 

Gethsemane : watching and Praying 332 

Delivered Unto Sinful Men 334 

NOVEMBER 16 

Ransom Implies Restitution 339 

Salvation by Resurrection .340 

Times of Restitution. 341 

None Other Name Given 34? 

Isaiah's Rhapsody No. 1 343 

Threefold Ground for Comfort 344 

"Prepare Ye the Way" 345 

Jehovah's Glory Revealed 346 

Nurturers of the Flock 347 

The Fmptv Tomb ; the Risen Lord 348 

A Gross but Common Error 349 

The Training of Peter and John 350 

DECEMBER 1 

Views from the Watch Tower 355 

All Gentiles In Distress 355 

Voices from Jewry 356 

Churchianiry's Sincerity Questioned. ...356 

Trend Toward Islam 357 

Anglican-Non-Oonformist Agreements 358 

Treasures in Heaven 359 

Fame — Good Name ...360 

Jovs of Life - 363 

A Word in Explanation 364 

Questions and Answers 365 

Peter Preaches at Pentecost 366 

DECEMBER 15 

Annual Report for 1919 371 

The Golden Age - 372 

Conventions 373 

Foreign Field 373 

Financial 374 

Bethel Restored 374 

Let Brotherly Love Continue...... 375 

Peter and John Heal a Lame Man 376 

The Boldness of Peter and John 377 

Peter Stands up for Truth and Honesty. .378 

The Gospel a Message of Joy _ 380 

Your Good Hopes for 1920 381 


