Study 30
Coherent Development of a Talk
 1-3. What role does coherence have in a talk, and how can it be attained?
1 A coherent talk is one that is easy for the audience to follow. On the other hand, if coherence is lacking, their attention will soon be lost. Obviously, this is a matter that deserves serious attention when you prepare a talk; so “Coherence through connectives” is included on the Speech Counsel slip as deserving of your careful consideration.
2 Coherence means a sticking together within, a uniting of parts held fast together making a logical whole. Sometimes this is accomplished in large measure simply by the logical order in which the parts are arranged. But in most talks there are parts that need to be connected beyond the simple arrangement of material. In such cases coherence requires a bridge from one point to another. Words or phrases are used to show the relation of the new ideas to what precedes them, thereby filling in gaps due to change in time or point of view. This is coherence through connectives.
3 For example, the introduction, the body and the conclusion of your talk are separate parts of the talk, distinct one from another, yet they must be tightly united by transitions. Additionally, main points need to be tied together in a talk, especially if they are not too directly related in thought content. Or sometimes it is just sentences or paragraphs that need connectives.
 4-7. What is meant by the use of transitional expressions?
4 Use of transitional expressions. Frequently a bridge between ideas can be built simply by a proper use of connecting words or phrases. Some of these are: also, in addition, furthermore, moreover, likewise, similarly, hence, thus, for these reasons, therefore, in view of the foregoing, so, so then, thereafter, however, on the other hand, on the contrary, contrariwise, formerly, heretofore, and so forth. Such words effectively join sentences and paragraphs.
5 However, this quality of speech often calls for more than such simple connectives. When one word or phrase alone will not suffice, then a transition is called for that leads the audience completely over the gap to the other side. This might be a complete sentence or even the addition of a more fully expressed transitional thought.
6 One way such gaps can be bridged is to try to make the application of the preceding point a part of the introduction to what follows. Frequently this is done in our house-to-house presentations.
7 Furthermore, not only should consecutive points be tied together, but sometimes points more widely separated in the talk should be. For example, the conclusion of the talk should be tied in with the introduction. Perhaps an idea or illustration introduced in the beginning of the talk could be applied in such a way in the conclusion that it will motivate or further show the relation of the illustration or idea to the purpose of the talk. Reintroducing some aspect of the illustration or idea in this way serves as a connective and makes for coherence.
 8. How does the audience affect the use of transitions for coherence?
8 Coherence adequate for your audience. How extensive connectives must be will be determined to some extent by your audience. Not that some audiences need no transitions. Rather, some audiences just need more, due to their lack of familiarity with the ideas to be related one to another. For instance, Jehovah’s witnesses will readily connect a scripture dealing with the end of the present wicked system of things to a text speaking of the Kingdom. But to someone who views the Kingdom as a state of mind or something in your heart, the association would not be so readily grasped and some transitional idea would have to be introduced to make the connection clear. Our door-to-door work continually calls for such adjustments.
**********
 9-13. What is logical development, and what are the two basic ways to develop an argument?
9 A closely related aspect of speech is “Logical, coherent development,” and this, too, is included on the counsel form. It is a fundamental requirement of persuasive speech.
10 What is logic? For our purpose we might say that logic is the science of correct thinking or sound reasoning. It imparts understanding because it is the means by which a subject is explained in its connected parts. Logic shows why they act and belong together. The development is coherent if its reasoning follows a gradual growth in such a way that all parts are united in sequence. A logical development may be in order of importance, in chronological order or one going from problem to solution, to mention a few possibilities.
11 In the development of argument there are two basic methods that can be followed. (1) Set the truth directly before the audience, producing facts to substantiate it. (2) Attack some erroneous position, which, being demolished, will leave the truth to assert itself. It only remains then to make proper application of the truths under discussion.
12 No two speakers will reason exactly alike. A perfect example of different approaches to the same subject is in the writing of the four Gospels. Four disciples of Jesus wrote independent accounts of his ministry. Each is different, yet all wrote reasonable, logical presentations. Each developed the material to accomplish a particular purpose and each was successful.
13 In this connection the counselor must identify your purpose and endeavor to evaluate your sequence of thought on the basis of whether the purpose was accomplished or not. You can help him, and your audience, by making your purpose clear, particularly in the way you introduce your material and then apply it in the conclusion.
14, 15. Show why our having material in reasonable order is so important.
14 Material in reasonable order. First, in organizing your material or your outline, make certain that no statement or idea is brought in without some preliminary basis being laid for it. Keep asking yourself these questions: What is the most natural thing to say next? Having gone this far, what would be the most logical question that could be asked? Having identified this question, then simply answer it. Your audience should always be able to say: “From what you have already said I can see that this point is so.” If no foundation is laid, then the point would usually be considered as being out of logical sequence. Something is missing.
15 In arranging your material you should consider those parts that naturally depend upon each other. You should endeavor to see the relationship of such parts and then arrange them accordingly. It is somewhat like building a house. No builder would try to erect the walls without first laying the foundation. Nor would he lay all the pipe for the plumbing after he had plastered the walls. So it should be in the building of a talk. Each part should contribute its share in constructing a solid and compact whole, each in order, each adding to the part it follows and preparing the way for the ones to come. You should always have a reason for the order in which you present the facts in your talk.
16-20. How can one be certain that he has only relevant material in his talk?
16 Only relevant material used. Each point you use must be tied in tightly to the talk. If not, it will appear unrelated, it will not fit; it will be irrelevant material, that is, not bearing upon or connected with the matter in hand.
17 However, your counselor will not arbitrarily call something irrelevant that may outwardly appear unrelated if it is successfully tied in. It might be that you have chosen to use such a point for a particular purpose, and, if it fits the theme, is made a part of the talk, and is introduced in logical sequence, your counselor will accept it.
18 How can irrelevant material be quickly and easily identified in preparing your talk? Here is where a topical outline serves so effectively. It helps to classify your information. Try using cards or something similar, with all related material on each card. Now, rearrange these cards according to the natural sequence in which you think they would normally be presented. Not only will this help in determining what approach should be made to the subject, but also it will help to identify anything that is irrelevant to the theme. Those points that do not fit into sequence should be adjusted so that they do, if they are necessary to the argument. But, if they are not necessary, they should be eliminated as irrelevant to the theme.
19 From this it can quickly be seen that the theme of your talk, selected with audience and purpose in mind, controls in determining the relevancy of a point. In certain circumstances a point might be vital to accomplishing your purpose, depending upon the background of your audience, while, to a different audience or with a different theme, it might be unnecessary or totally irrelevant.
20 In view of this, how complete should coverage of the material in your assignment be? Logical, coherent development should not be sacrificed just to cover every point that may be included in your assignment. It would be best, though, to select a setting that will allow you to include just as much of it as is practical, since the student talks are an instructive part of the school arrangement. However, those ideas essential to the development of your theme as key points cannot be omitted.
21. Why is it vital that no key ideas be omitted?
21 No key ideas omitted. How do you know whether an idea is a key idea or not? It is essential if you cannot accomplish the purpose of your talk without it. This is particularly true in logical, coherent development. For example, how could you manage if a contractor built you a two-story house and left out the staircase? Just so, a talk with certain essential points omitted could not possibly be logical and coherent in development. Something is lacking and some of the audience will be lost. But that does not happen when a talk is coherent and is logical in its development.

