Study 20
Counsel Builds Up
 1, 2. Why do we seek counsel, and in what way do we receive it?
1 Worshipers of the true God have always looked to him unhesitatingly for guidance in all their ways. Confidently one of the Bible psalmists wrote: “With your counsel you will lead me.” (Ps. 73:24) And Jeremiah used these words in earnest prayer: “The whole matter is not too wonderful for you yourself, . . . the true God, the great One, the mighty One, Jehovah of armies being his name, great in counsel and abundant in acts.”—Jer. 32:17-19.
2 To his Christian worshipers today Jehovah’s counsel comes through his written Word and through the organization of his genuine servants. So those who enroll in the Theocratic Ministry School soon realize that the counsel they receive and the spirit in which it is given are governed by the fine principles of the Bible.
 3-5. Explain how the Speech Counsel slip and the material in Studies 21 through 37 are designed to be used together.
3 Progressive counsel. As an aid both to students and to the school overseer, the Speech Counsel slip is provided. It lists thirty-six points that will help students develop their ability to present the truth effectively. Helpful information on each point will be found in a concise form in Studies 21 through 37 of this book, the specific study being indicated by number on the Speech Counsel slip. These Studies are specifically provided for use with the counsel slip. In most instances two or three qualities that are closely related are combined into a single Study, with the idea that it would be good to take them up at the same time.
4 It would be beneficial for those newly enrolled in the school to prepare well, having in mind the points listed on the Speech Counsel slip. For their first talk in the Theocratic Ministry School, the school overseer (or another counselor, if the enrollment is large) will offer only commendation on points the student handles well. Thereafter, the counselor will progressively concentrate on a counsel point that most needs attention to improve the student’s presentation, and he will specifically assign the student to work on that point in connection with his next talk. The counselor will inform each student when he is ready to move on to other points on the counsel slip.
5 Some student speakers may move ahead rather quickly, while others may need to work on just one point at a time rather than trying to handle the points covered in any one full Study. In fact, some students may be well advised to give several talks while working on one difficult point, so that they really master the speech quality involved before passing on to another.
 6, 7. On what points will counsel be given by the school overseer?
6 The counsel given after each student talk should be kindly,  designed to assist the student to keep on improving his speaking ability. Any counsel given to the speaker who delivers the instruction talk or Bible highlights, however, is offered privately after the school. Particularly would this speaker be counseled if he ran over the allotted time. The instruction talk speaker should strive to give a model talk in all respects, and private counsel may not be needed.
7 The points on which counsel is to be given will usually be those on which the student was previously counseled to work. Of course, if some other aspect of the talk is particularly good, the counselor may certainly include it in his commendation, but he will not mark the counsel slip on that point. The marks to be used are as follows: “W” (Work on this) when further work on the particular speech quality would be advantageous; “I” (Improved) when a student has already worked on a point at least once before and gives evidence of improvement but could advantageously work on it another time; “G” (Good) when the quality under consideration was demonstrated well enough to warrant moving on to a study of other speech qualities when preparing the next assignment in the school. When a student has a reading assignment, the counselor will offer points of counsel that best fit this type of assignment.
 8-10. In marking the counsel slip, what should the school overseer have in mind so as to encourage progress?
8 Considerable discernment should be used by the school overseer to accomplish the most good by the counsel given. If a speaker is very new, what is needed more than anything else is encouragement. Other students, longer in the school, may be diligent in preparing their talks, giving attention to the speech qualities on which they are assigned to work, but they may have limited ability. In such cases, if a certain speech quality is manifested even to a limited extent, the school overseer may mark it “G” on the counsel slip, and allow the student to move on to another quality needing attention.
9 On the other hand, another speaker may have greater experience or more natural ability, but, perhaps due to the press of other work, he may not have taken the time to make a study of the speech qualities assigned and as a result he may not have done as well as he could. In such a case as this it will actually hinder the progress of the student if the school overseer marks “G” on the counsel slip and tells him to go on to something else. If the talk was of such a type that the assigned quality could have been manifested, the counselor will mark it “W” (Work on this) and kindly offer some personal assistance to the student to help him to progress. In this way students will be encouraged to make each talk, not merely the fulfillment of an assignment, but a marker in their progress as speakers.
10 Keep in mind that this speech training is progressive. Do not expect to become an accomplished speaker overnight. It is a gradual process, but one that can be speeded up with diligent effort. If you will ponder over the suggestions given in this program of speech training and become absorbed in the preparation of your assignments, your advancement will soon become manifest to all observers.—1 Tim. 4:15.
11-16. What guidelines does the counselor endeavor to follow so as to be upbuilding in his counsel?
11 Counselor. The school overseer should make a careful study of each week’s study material so that he will be able to determine if the material assigned is well covered and to be in position to correct any inaccuracies. He should never get to the point, however, that he cannot enjoy the talks because of being overly critical of the way the material is delivered. He too should gain benefit from the fine truths expressed.
12 In counseling he usually opens with a word of commendation for the effort on the part of the student. Then he proceeds to comment on the points from the counsel slip on which the speaker is working. If a point needs continued attention, emphasis should be placed, not so much on the weakness of the speaker, but on how improvement might be made. Thus the counsel will upbuild the speaker and others in the audience.
13 It is not enough merely to tell a speaker that he did well or that he needs to work again on a particular speech quality. It will be helpful to everyone present if the counselor will explain why it was good or why it needed improvement and how to improve. In addition, it will be beneficial for him to highlight reasons why the speech quality under discussion is so necessary in the field ministry or in the congregation meetings. This will stimulate appreciation for the point on the part of the entire congregation and will encourage the student to continue giving it attention.
14 It is not the counselor’s duty to give a review of the student’s talk. He should be brief and to the point with his counsel, carefully limiting it to two minutes for each student talk. In this way the counsel and suggestions will not be obscured by too many words. Also, it is appropriate to refer the student to the pages in this book where he can find additional information on the matter that was discussed.
15 Minor errors in pronunciation or grammar are not the big things to be watched. Rather the counselor should be concerned about the general effect of the speaker’s presentation. Is the material worth while and informative? Is it well organized and easy to follow? Is the delivery sincere, earnest, convincing? Do his facial expression and his gestures show that he believes what he is saying and that he is more concerned about getting the fine truths across to his hearers than he is about the impression he is making? If these vital matters are well cared for, a few mispronunciations and grammatical errors will hardly be noticed by the audience.
16 Counsel given in the ministry school should always be given in a kindly, helpful manner. There should be a keen desire to aid the student. Consider the personality of the one to be counseled. Is he sensitive? Does he have a limited education? Are there reasons for making allowances for his weaknesses? Counsel should make the one counseled feel helped, not criticized. Be sure he understands the counsel and its reasonableness.
17-19. To make the greatest improvement with each talk, what should a student do before preparing each talk and after delivering it?
17 Benefiting from counsel. When assigned a talk in the Theocratic Ministry School keep in mind that the reason for your giving the talk is not only to cover instructive material for the congregation, but also to improve your speaking ability. To succeed in this aspect, it is important to spend some time analyzing the speech qualities on which you have been asked to work. Read over carefully the Study in this book that deals with the point being worked on, so as to know how it should affect your preparation and how to demonstrate the speech quality in your delivery. To aid you, principal aspects of each speech quality are set in bold type in this book. These are the main factors to consider.
18 After you deliver your talk, listen carefully to the oral counsel offered. Accept it appreciatively. Then work on the points that need attention. If you want to hasten your progress, do not wait until you have another talk. Study over the material in this book that discusses the points on which you need to work. Endeavor to apply the suggestions in your daily conversation. And by the time you give your next student talk you may well have mastered them.
19 Every student should aim for improvement with each succeeding talk he gives on the school program. True, this will mean continuous effort, but it will surely bring Jehovah’s blessing. For those who would gain the greatest benefit from the training of the Theocratic Ministry School, there is a particular significance in the words of Proverbs 19:20: “Listen to counsel and accept discipline, in order that you may become wise in your future.”
[Chart on page 104, 105]
                  SPEECH COUNSEL
Speaker ․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․
                   (Full Name)
Marks: W - Work on this
       I - Improved
       G - Good
                                              Date  Talk No.
Informative material (21)*
Clear, understandable (21)
Introduction roused interest (22)
Introduction appropriate to theme (22)
Introduction of proper length (22)
Volume (23)
Pausing (23)
Audience encouraged to use Bible (24)
Scriptures properly introduced (24)
Scriptures read with emphasis (25)
Scripture application made clear (25)
Repetition for emphasis (26)
Gestures (26)
Subject theme emphasized (27)
Main points made to stand out (27)
Audience contact, use of notes (28)
Use of outline (28)
Remarks: ․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․
․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․
․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․․
* Each number in parentheses refers to the Study in Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook that discusses the designated speech quality.
S-48   6/71                               Printed in U.S.A.
                                              Date  Talk No.
Fluency (29)
Conversational quality (29)
Pronunciation (29)
Coherence through connectives (30)
Logical, coherent development (30)
Convincing argument (31)
Audience helped to reason (31)
Sense stress (32)
Modulation (32)
Enthusiasm (33)
Warmth, feeling (33)
Illustrations fit material (34)
Illustrations fit audience (34)
Material adapted for field ministry (35)
Conclusion appropriate, effective (36)
Conclusion of proper length (36)
Timing (36)
Confidence and poise (37)
Personal appearance (37)
NOTE: For each talk the counselor will check the student on the next points in order on the Speech Counsel form, covering whatever is grouped together in a single Study in Theocratic Ministry School Guidebook. Whenever there are adjustments made in that procedure the counselor will note that in advance under “Remarks.” The blank spaces on the form may be used for counseling students on points not listed, such as accuracy of statement, articulation, bearing, choice of words, grammar, mannerisms, relevancy, teaching techniques and voice quality when the need arises.
[Chart on page 106, 107]
SUMMARY OF SPEECH QUALITIES
Informative material (21)
  Specific material
  Informative to your audience
  Material of practical value
  Accuracy of statement
  Additional clarifying material
Clear, understandable (21)
  Simply stated
  Unfamiliar terms explained
  Not too much material
Introduction roused interest (22)
Introduction appropriate to theme (22)
Introduction of proper length (22)
Volume (23)
  Loud enough to be comfortably heard
  Volume to fit circumstances
  Volume appropriate to material
Pausing (23)
  Pause for punctuation
  Pause for change of thought
  Pause for emphasis
  Pause when circumstances require it
Audience encouraged to use Bible (24)
  By suggestion
  By allowing time to find the text
Scriptures properly introduced (24)
  Anticipation for scriptures aroused
  Attention focused on reason for using text
Scriptures read with emphasis (25)
  Right words stressed
  Effective method of emphasis used
  Texts householder reads
Scripture application made clear (25)
  Words to be applied isolated
  Point of introduction driven home
Repetition for emphasis (26)
  Repetition of main points
  Repetition of points not understood
Gestures (26)
  Descriptive gestures
  Emphatic gestures
Subject theme emphasized (27)
  Appropriate theme
  Theme words or idea repeated
Main points made to stand out (27)
  Not too many main points
  Main ideas developed separately
  Sub-points focus on main ideas
Audience contact, use of notes (28)
  Visual contact with the audience
  Audience contact by direct address
Use of outline (28)
Fluency (29)
Conversational quality (29)
  Conversational expressions used
  Conversational style of delivery
Pronunciation (29)
Coherence through connectives (30)
  Use of transitional expressions
  Coherence adequate for your audience
Logical, coherent development (30)
  Material in reasonable order
  Only relevant material used
  No key ideas omitted
Convincing argument (31)
  Foundation laid
  Sound proof given
  Effective summary
Audience helped to reason (31)
  Common ground maintained
  Adequate development of points
  Application made for audience
Sense stress (32)
  Thought-conveying words in sentences stressed
  Principal ideas in talk stressed
Modulation (32)
  Variety in power
  Variety in pace
  Variety in pitch
  Modulation to fit thought or emotion
Enthusiasm (33)
  Enthusiasm shown by animated delivery
  Enthusiasm appropriate to material
Warmth, feeling (33)
  Warmth evident in facial expression
  Warmth and feeling evident in tone of voice
  Warmth and feeling appropriate to material
Illustrations fit material (34)
  Simple
  Application made clear
  Important points emphasized
Illustrations fit audience (34)
  Drawn from familiar situations
  In good taste
Material adapted for field ministry (35)
  Expressions made understandable for the public
  Appropriate points selected
  Practical value of material highlighted
Conclusion appropriate, effective (36)
  Conclusion in direct relation to theme of talk
  Conclusion shows hearers what to do
Conclusion of proper length (36)
Timing (36)
Confidence and poise (37)
  Poise manifest in physical bearing
  Poise shown by controlled voice
Personal appearance (37)
  Proper attire and grooming
  Proper posture
  Neat equipment
  No inappropriate facial expression

