Study 10
Developing the Art of Teaching
 1-3. What does teaching involve, and what opportunities to teach do we have?
1 As true Christians we look to Jehovah God and Jesus Christ as our Great Teachers. We join with the psalmist who prayed to Jehovah: “Teach me to do your will.” (Ps. 143:10) We are also of the same mind as those first-century disciples of Jesus who addressed him as “Teacher.” And what a teacher Jesus is! After he gave his Sermon on the Mount, “the crowds were astounded at his way of teaching; for he was teaching them as a person having authority.” (Matt. 7:28, 29) These are the Greatest Teachers, and we seek to imitate them.
2 Teaching is an ability that needs to be developed. It involves explaining the whats, hows, whys, wheres and whens of a matter. Every Christian has need to improve his teaching ability, especially in view of Jesus’ instructions to his followers: “Make disciples of people of all the nations, . . . teaching them.” (Matt. 28:19, 20) That this is a work requiring skill can be seen from the admonition of the apostle Paul to Timothy: “Exhort, with all long-suffering and art of teaching.”—2 Tim. 4:2.
3 Many indeed are the opportunities to teach others. Parents need to teach their children. Proclaimers of the good news need to teach newly interested persons by means of home Bible studies. Often there are opportunities to instruct new publishers. And many brothers are privileged to give edifying discourses, either on the service meeting or as public talks. All students in the Theocratic Ministry School should be anxious to demonstrate their progress as teachers. As you develop your ability to share in this teaching aspect of the ministry, you will find it truly satisfying and richly rewarding. There is nothing quite as enjoyable as teaching someone from God’s Word and then seeing him make fine spiritual advancement.
 4, 5. Upon whom and what should we rely in giving instruction?
4 Reliance on Jehovah. A vital requirement to be effective as a teacher of the good news is to rely on Jehovah, taking notice of him, leaning upon his guidance and asking for his help. (Prov. 3:5, 6) Even Jesus said, “What I teach is not mine, but belongs to him that sent me.” (John 7:16) He regularly referred to God’s Word, quoting from or alluding to about one half of the books of the Hebrew Scriptures in his recorded conversations. So when teaching others, rely on God’s Word of truth as Jesus did. Get your answers from it, for there is but one primary textbook for teaching people to become disciples of Jesus, and that is the Holy Bible.—2 Tim. 3:16.
5 If you truly rely on Jehovah, you need not feel incompetent. God gives us an understanding of his purposes as set forth in his Word of truth. If you share your knowledge of these truths with others, Jehovah will back you up. There is no need to hold back, saying, “I am not a teacher.” You can be if you prayerfully rely on Jehovah.—2 Cor. 3:5.
 6-8. What part does preparation play in effective teaching?
6 Preparation. There is, of course, no substitute for getting to know your subject. You need a clear grasp of the material before you can teach someone else. (Rom. 2:21) As your scope of knowledge increases, you will obviously become a better teacher. But even though you know only a few basic truths, you can still be a teacher. Talk about what you know. Even young children can teach schoolmates truths they have learned from their parents. The Theocratic Ministry School will help you to develop your teaching ability.
7 If you are going to conduct a Bible study or give a talk, first get the arguments supporting the material clearly in mind. Try to determine why a thing is so. See if you can put the ideas in your own words. Get a good understanding of the Scriptural proofs. Be prepared to apply the scriptures effectively.
8 Another aspect of preparation is to consider beforehand the questions that may arise in the student’s mind due to his religious background. This will help you to be prepared with information that will particularly fit that student. Having in mind the understanding he has already will aid you in laying the foundation for new material and assisting him to progress. Another student may need a different set of arguments because of his background. So knowing your student helps you to prepare.
 9. How can you encourage students to answer in their own words?
9 Questions. Questions are especially helpful in effective teaching, as Jesus Christ often demonstrated. (Luke 10:36) So when conducting a Bible study you can follow his method, using the printed questions in the publications. But if you are a thorough teacher, you will not be satisfied if the student simply reads the answer from the book. In such a case you need additional questions that stimulate the student to put the thought into his own words. Sometimes all you need to say is: “That is right, but how would you explain it in your own words?”
10. Explain the use of leading questions.
10 You will also find leading questions to be helpful in teaching. These are questions that aid you to direct the mind of the person, on the basis of what he already knows, to a conclusion that perhaps he has never thought about. (Matt. 17:25, 26; 22:41-46) In effect you say to yourself: ‘I know this student has knowledge of this and that, so if I ask some questions in a logical sequence, he can arrive at the right conclusion. But if I skip the leading questions and outrightly ask him the main question, he may jump to the wrong conclusion.’ In other words, the student has information with which he can arrive at the answer. But he needs help. The easy way, of course, is to tell him the answer. But if you use leading questions, you not only make the answer more acceptable because the student states it himself, but also help him to develop thinking ability. Your questions will lead his mind along the steps of logical thought to the right conclusion. This will be of immeasurable value to him later.
11. How may viewpoint questions be employed?
11 At times you will find it desirable to ask viewpoint questions. By means of them you seek to find out what the student personally believes on a matter. For example, you might ask him what God’s law is on fornication. He may be able to quote a scripture that shows it is wrong. But does the student really agree with the answer he gave? Is that his personal view? You may wish to ask a question to find out what he actually thinks about fornication. You might ask, “What difference does it make whether we live that way or not?” You may then discern areas where more help is needed and you can follow through. Viewpoint questions help you to reach the heart of the student.
12, 13. Why are questions beneficial to use both in the house-to-house ministry and when giving a talk from the platform?
12 Questions are also helpful in the house-to-house ministry. For example, you want to find out what the householder is thinking so you can better help him to understand Bible truths. You also ask questions and invite his comment because you know that if he is given the opportunity to express his view, he will be more inclined to listen to what you say.
13 Even when giving a talk from the platform, there are times when you ask questions to which you want an answer. So you invite the audience to respond. But there are also times when you use rhetorical questions—questions asked to stimulate thinking, with no answer expected from the audience. (Luke 12:49-51) You supply the answers yourself. At times you may wish to use a series of questions, not giving an answer till you get to the concluding one. The kind of question you use depends on your audience and what you are teaching.
14, 15. What purposes are served by illustrations and repetition?
14 Illustrations. These formed an important feature of Jesus’ teaching. Similarly, Christian teachers today can draw upon the affairs and experiences of life for illustrations that will help to impress fine teachings on the minds of their listeners. (Matt. 13:34, 35) Work to make your illustrations simple, as complex or involved ones may be difficult to follow and may even detract from your arguments. The letter of James contains many illustrations—the wave of the sea, rudder of a ship, bridle of a horse, a mirror, and so forth. All were taken from the common things of life. An alert teacher will seek to make the illustration applicable to his learner’s circumstances, age, religion, culture, and so forth. Illustrations, of course, can be used in discourses, as well as when you are teaching an individual.
15 Repetition. This technique is vital for successful teaching, no matter whether you are on the platform or teaching an individual at home. Seek to impress key words and phrases, and especially scriptures, on the mind of your student. If you have a student talk with a householder, you could ask review questions, thus emphasizing points by repetition. By this means you can be sure that the student got the thought. In effect you will be asking as Jesus did: “Did you get the sense of all these things?”—Matt. 13:51.
16. If a speaker is a good teacher, what will you be able to remember after hearing his talk?
16 Talks that teach. You remember with appreciation talks from which you learn the most. So take note why it is that some speakers are good teachers. Notice what makes their talks easy to remember. Their delivery is not hurried. They may use questions, whether for the audience to answer or rhetorical questions to stimulate thinking. They will ask you to look up the key scriptures and follow along as they are read, reasoning on them, elaborating on them and highlighting the main thoughts. Some may use visual aids. But in all cases you will note that it is much easier to recall a few points well explained than many briefly touched on. When the art of teaching is used, those who hear the talk should readily be able to state the theme, the main points and perhaps an outstanding scripture or two that were used.
17, 18. How and why should we direct attention to the Great Teachers?
17 Directing attention to the Great Teachers. As a Christian teacher you should always be conscious of the importance of directing attention to Jehovah God as the Source of life and to Jesus Christ as God’s channel through whom life and blessings come. (John 17:3) Endeavor to develop in others a warm appreciation for these truly Great Teachers.
18 As you master the art of teaching you will also appreciate the part played by love. If a student really comes to love Jehovah God, then he will serve him faithfully. So, in the course of the study, at appropriate points, draw attention to the significance of what God has done and is doing for sinful men. Highlight the wisdom, justice, love and power of God, those attributes that always blend so wonderfully for the benefit of obedient humans. If a student’s heart is right, in time he too will feel a deep loyalty to Jehovah and a desire to share in magnifying his name.

