Study 35
Material Adapted for Field Ministry
 1-3. Why is it valuable to learn to adapt our material for field ministry?
1 A large part of our work as Christian ministers today involves preaching and teaching God’s Word to persons who know very little about the Bible. Some of them have never had one in their possession; others merely have a copy on the shelf. This means that, if they are going to get the full benefit from what we tell them, we need to adapt it to their circumstances. Not that we change the message, but we put forth a special effort to express it in language that they will understand. Actually, being called on to adapt our material in this way is a test of how thoroughly we understand it ourselves.
2 To adapt means to modify to meet new conditions, to conform. It means to reconcile something to one’s own or to another’s satisfaction. Consideration of the matter of adapting material for the field ministry should emphasize the need to make presentations in the field ministry or any other talk simple and understandable to a specific audience and particularly to newly interested persons met in the field ministry. In working on this quality in the school, therefore, you should always view your audience as you would those persons that you meet in house-to-house witnessing.
3 This does not mean that your talk must take the form of a door-to-door presentation while you are working on this quality. All talks will be the same in manner of presentation as outlined in your current instructions for the school. What it does mean is that, regardless of the type of presentation you are making, the arguments you develop and the language you use will be the kind that you would use with persons met in the field. Since most of our speaking is done in the field ministry, this should help you to become aware of the need to speak simply, on a level that most persons met in the field service could understand. You have had some preparation for this quality in Study 21. Now it is to be treated separately because of its outstanding need and importance.
 4, 5. Explain why our expressions must be made understandable for the public.
4 Expressions made understandable for the public. The need for this quality is demonstrated by the expressions some of the brothers use in the house-to-house ministry and on new studies. Our understanding of the Scriptures has given us a vocabulary that is not commonly known. We use such words as “remnant,” “other sheep,” and so forth. If we use them in our speaking, such expressions usually convey no meaning whatsoever to those persons we meet in the field service. They must be clarified by the use of a suitable synonymous expression or explanation to be understandable. Even allusions to “Armageddon” and “the Kingdom’s establishment” convey little meaning without some explanation as to their significance.
5 In considering this aspect, your counselor will be asking himself, Would a person unacquainted with the Bible truth understand that point or expression? He will not necessarily discourage you from using such theocratic terms. They are a part of our vocabulary and we want newly interested persons to become acquainted with them. But if you do use any of these terms, he will observe whether they are explained.
 6-8. In preparing our talks, why must we be careful to select appropriate points?
6 Appropriate points selected. Your selection of ideas to present in the field service will vary just as the terms you use vary, depending upon the setting. That is because normally there are some things we would not select to discuss with a newly interested person. In such circumstances the choice of material is entirely up to you. But when you are given an assignment in the school, the material you are to cover is preselected for you. The only choice you have is from what is contained in the assignment. What should you do?
7 First of all, since you are limited in the points you can use, you should decide upon a setting for your talk that will allow for the largest selection of appropriate points. Your counselor will be interested in the points you select and how they fit the circumstances of your talk. That is because you are demonstrating, in this quality being considered, that different features of field service call for different kinds of material. For example, you would not use the same material in inviting a newly interested person to a meeting as you would in giving a door-to-door presentation. So, whether your assignment calls for a discussion with a householder or is to be a regular platform talk, identify the particular audience you are addressing by the things that you say and by the points that you select from the assigned material.
8 In order to determine whether points are appropriate or not, your counselor will consider the objective of your talk. In a house-to-house visit your purpose generally is to teach and to stimulate the householder to study more. On a return visit your objective is to develop the interest and, if possible, start a home Bible study. If it is a presentation following a study, then it is to get the householder to attend a meeting or to engage in field service, and so forth.
 9, 10. How can we determine if the points we selected are appropriate?
9 Of course, even in the same feature of service, your selection of points might vary due to your audience. So this should be taken into consideration too. Those points in your assigned material that are not appropriate to your objective should not be brought into your talk.
10 In view of these factors the setting must be selected before the talk is prepared. Ask yourself: What do I want to accomplish? What are the points needed in order to accomplish this purpose, and how must these points be modified in order to suit the circumstances of the talk? Once you have decided these matters, appropriate points can be selected without difficulty and presented in such a way as to adapt the material for field ministry.
11-13. Why is it important to point out the practical value of the material we have presented?
11 Practical value of material highlighted. Highlighting the practical value of the material means to show the householder clearly and unmistakably that it concerns him, that it is something he needs or can use. From the very beginning of the talk the householder must realize that “this involves me.” This is necessary to gain audience attention. But, to hold that attention, it is necessary to continue that same personal application of the material consistently throughout the talk.
12 This involves more than just audience contact and helping your audience to reason. Now you must go farther and actually fit your householder into the application of the material. Our purpose in the field ministry is to teach persons the truth of God’s Word and to help them learn the way to salvation. So, with tact and consideration, you must show your householder the practical benefits to him of listening and of acting on what you have to say.
13 Although this aspect of the quality is mentioned last, it is not because it is the least important. It is a vital point and should never be overlooked. Work on it, because it is important in the field ministry. Seldom will you be able to hold the attention of a householder for any length of time unless he can clearly see that what you are saying is of some value in his own life.

