Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
It is a privilege to serve at Bethel, the hub of theocratic activity world wide. The big new press we have been expecting was delivered for erection and testing. It will help us to provide the needed literature for you brothers.
Recently Brother Knorr gave us a report on the progress of the work in six countries he visited, starting in Guatemala. The brothers have been well cared for following the earthquake there, as far as food and clothing are concerned. Small homes are being built for them and Kingdom Halls repaired. Some work is also being done to expand the branch building. And at his last stop in Venezuela, Brother Knorr found the new branch construction nearly finished.
Expansion is also continuing in Brooklyn with the renovation of the Towers building. This work is being done by a crew of 175, including many skilled volunteers. The top four floors already have been wholly renovated and four more are being remodeled. Two dining rooms, a new kitchen, laundry, and an assembly hall are also being prepared in that building. The dining rooms will accommodate 1,000 persons, and the assembly hall over 500 when completed. At present we have over 1,700, including construction workers, as members of the Brooklyn Bethel family.
The Bethel family also enjoy some fine association from visiting brothers at times. By the time you receive this, brothers will be here helping to prepare for the district assembly this summer, and it is always a pleasure to fellowship with the ones caring for the various departments. Even as this is written, students for Gilead are here from as far away as Australia, Morocco and South Africa. There are 26 students from six countries.
If some of you brothers between 19 and 35 years of age would like to share in the theocratic activities of this family, you are welcome to write in and request an application. Many have enjoyed a year or so of pioneer service or other activity after finishing school, and then have taken another step forward in their theocratic career by coming to Bethel.
If you have not visited the Brooklyn Bethel home and factory, it is our hope that you will have the pleasure of doing so in coming months. It will give you a good opportunity to get acquainted with our family and the fine work that is done here to Jehovah’s honor.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

