Presenting the Good News—As a Teacher and Disciple-Maker
1 The foremost way to help people gain an accurate knowledge of the truth is by conducting Bible studies. Not all our efforts in this regard will be effective, as not all hearts respond to the truth, as Jesus explained in the parable of the sower. However, the more effort we put forth, the greater the results that will be obtained.—Matt. 13:18-23; Eccl. 11:6.
2 If you would like to conduct a Bible study, ask yourself, When did I last offer to study with someone? How many times have I suggested it in the past month? If you did suggest a Bible study, did you try to start it right at that time, or did you say you would demonstrate it at some later time? The more we talk about the possibility and try to demonstrate it NOW, the more likely we are to have the joy of starting a Bible study.
3 Since some of us will be presenting the Truth book this month and since many people have it already, consider how you might start a study using this publication. Most people are pleased to talk about or discuss a subject that is of interest to them. Is it “Building a Happy Family Life”? Then chapter 20 would provide fine material and scriptures to discuss. If they are interested in the prospects for the future, you could use chapter one, “Grand Blessings from God Near at Hand!” Or they may be interested in the question in chapter 8, “Why Has God Permitted Wickedness Until Our Day?” Whatever it is, let us discuss what is of interest to them.
4 Some find that rather than offering a Bible “study” it sounds more acceptable to the householder if we offer to demonstrate how interesting a “Bible discussion” on a subject of their choice can be. Then they let them pick the topic that appeals most to them. You may wish to inquire what their understanding of the subject is, asking them, in the words of Jesus, “What do you think?” You can invite them to use their own Bible to see what the Scriptures say on the subject, going on to discuss the chapter.—Matt. 18:12.
5 In conducting a study, be patient. See if you can draw out the right understanding from the student by considering the scriptures instead of telling him what the answer is. Try to reason with him so he puts the point in his own words rather than simply finding the answer in the paragraph. Do not worry about trying to cover a certain amount of material in an hour. Not all learn at the same pace. Understanding the material is the first step, but imbedding it in the heart is essential and this often takes a little longer.—Matt. 22:37.
6 Some brothers report that many persons who have studied and are desirous of baptism still have much to learn about the truth. They may have covered the Truth book without really understanding some things too well. Patience, repetition and review will be helpful. It may likely be that they would appreciate your continuing to study with them even after their baptism.
7 The need to get the truth well in mind applies also to those attending family studies. Our children are potential teachers and disciple-makers. Do you encourage your children to put what they learn in their own words, helping them to think about it and talk about it, or are you content if they can find a line or two that answers the question? Do you review with them things you have studied before? Can they tell you the answer at the end of the study without looking at the material? Just because you know the point and have studied it with them does not mean they know or remember it. Patience, repetition and review are helpful.
8 A well-conducted study will include preparation for service. Help the person to see how he can share with his friends, neighbors and relatives the things he is learning, and encourage him to do so. Discuss the need to be firm for what he believes even though others do not respond favorably. (Matt. 10:36, 37) Plan to take him along with you in the disciple-making work when you feel he is ready. By doing these things we will show that we truly are teachers and disciple-makers, and Jehovah will bless our efforts.—1 Cor. 3:7.

