Reaching Everyone with the Truth
1 How many people turn you away without even listening to what you would like to say? Might they respond with interest in the truth if a different approach were used? If you come by with the magazines time after time, they may get the impression that our goal is simply to distribute magazines.
2 However, what would be the response if you came to them with a Bible in your hand and began your conversation by discussing a scripture? Many have reported favorable results as a result of their doing this and have had enjoyable conversations with people who might otherwise just say they are not interested in the literature. By trying this you may find persons who will be pleased to talk with you about the Bible, and as you draw them out with questions you will find that you are reaching with the truth persons who showed little interest before.
3 Some persons in territory we cover often may still not be reached with the truth due to their work schedule. For this reason it is most helpful to keep house-to-house records so that if you do not find people at home when you call, you can try again, perhaps at a different time, until you find them home. Do you do this? Some publishers even try to get in touch with people by phone and have good results. Street work also helps us to reach people who are hard to find at home or who live in inaccessible apartments. The important thing is to reach people.—Rom. 10:14.
4 Although your congregation territory may be covered quite often, what about the business territories? Would some of the publishers who feel qualified like to visit some of the shops in your area for a change? Or perhaps you have territories that are not worked much during winter months or that are covered infrequently due to being out of the way. Could some of these be reached during July?
5 You will be interested to know that in the entire United States there are only 112 counties or parts of counties that are not currently assigned to any congregation for regular witnessing; however, all of these have been assigned for temporary coverage this year. If your congregation does not have territory that needs more regular coverage, perhaps a neighboring congregation would appreciate your assistance to witness to some area that seldom hears the truth. The elders are free to check with neighboring congregations.
6 In unassigned territory or areas where it is difficult to call often it is especially appropriate to recommend the Watchtower or Awake! subscriptions so some spiritual information will reach interested people regularly. However, you may find that persons who enjoy reading would prefer getting four pocket-size books for a contribution of $1.
7 In territories worked more frequently, after your Scriptural presentation, you may wish to offer one of the pocket-size books, whichever one you think appropriate, and try presenting it with the idea of starting a home Bible study. Either a book or a booklet may be used to start a study. Our objective is not just to cover territory or to leave literature but to reach the people, all of them, with the truth.

