Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 4
12 min: Song 50. Discussion on attributes of Jehovah that make him worthy of our worship. Consider how these affect our lives. See “Make Sure,” page 266.
15 min: “An Enjoyable Vacation.” Discuss with questions and answers. Theocratic activities can be a most satisfying part of our vacation. Get comments from congregation on how they have worked enjoyable theocratic activities into their vacation.
15 min: Talk and demonstrations on how we can share our appreciation for Jehovah with others. Many will be working in unassigned or little-worked territory during the month. We want to use the Bible in talking with the people. Consider what literature would be most helpful for them. It may be the Watchtower or Awake! subscription, or four pocket-size books for $1. It is good to have a variety of these small books with you. In many territories one pocket-size book for 25c would be appropriate. In every case consider starting a home Bible study if possible, whether with a book or a booklet. If a study is started in a distant or isolated territory it can be continued by mail if you cannot return each week. Demonstrate which offer you feel would be most appropriate for your congregation. Have publisher use the Bible and get the householder in the conversation. Discuss fact God has a name and why it is important to know it. If Truth book is being used, one of the scriptures mentioned on pages 17 and 18, such as Acts 15:14, 1 Corinthians 8:5, 6 or Psalm 83:18, might be discussed. Offer demonstration of “Bible discussion” and show the start of it as time permits.
 8 min: Suggest having any announcements for the congregation included in this part. The accounts report may be presented briefly. Encourage worshiping Jehovah by service on the weekend. Consider Matthew 22:37-40.
10 min: Elder interviews several young children, asking questions such as: What do you know about Jehovah? How can you know about him since you can’t see him? What can you do to please him? What is Jehovah doing for his people? Draw out comments from the hearts of the children, making discussion animated, spontaneous and realistic. Song 24. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 11
10 min: Song 68. Discuss fact that all of us are invited to share in Jehovah’s service if we meet certain standards he requires. This is an undeserved kindness on his part. (Gal. 1:15, 16) Mention may be made here of service arrangements or other announcements for the congregation, also of any applicable items in Announcements.
12 min: “Reaching Everyone with the Truth.” To be considered by questions and answers on material. Consult with brother caring for territory. Brief demonstration, with two sisters saying they always get same territory, see same people. Brother discusses with them value of house-to-house record even for magazine work, calling back to find those not at home. Even where territory is limited, there is usually plenty for all to do. Stress paragraphs that best fit local situation.
13 min: Discussion of first part of article “Be All Things to People of All Sorts,” paragraphs 1-4. To help people learn the truth we must be able to talk to them. Objection often arises that people say they are busy. This part of article may be discussed with congregation to get their suggestions on how to meet this objection. One of the suggestions may be demonstrated.
12 min: Talk, with demonstration, in response to question, How can I help? Good to build up activity in congregation book study groups especially with regard to field service and helping new ones to learn to preach. Both brothers and sisters can help others in their own book study group. Can you help someone use the Bible more effectively? Can you help someone start making return visits, or take someone along on your Bible study? You do not have to be assigned to do this but you can invite persons who are newer or who would like a companion in service to come with you. Discuss and demonstrate how sister could help another publisher in book study group in service, especially in using Bible in field. Publisher says she has “been just offering magazines, but would like to do more.” Some would like to serve where need is greater, but there may be a great need in your home congregation to train and build up others spiritually.
13 min: Interview a few publishers, both young and old if possible, as to how they share in the service. Have some in congregation been assisted to progress in service recently? If so, how? Experiences may be included if time permits. Song 57. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 18
Using the Truth to Set Others Free.—John 8:32.
10 min: Song 96. Introduction, discussion of text for July 23, Matthew 13:33. We want to avoid the leaven of Christendom, help others appreciate pure teaching of truth. Mention any announcements for the congregation.
14 min: “Be All Things to People of All Sorts,” part 2, paragraphs 5-8. Discuss how we might reply to people who say they have their own religion. Get suggestions from congregation as to how they handle this. Good to ask several beforehand to be prepared. Perhaps reading or paraphrasing a scripture such as John 13:35, inviting comment, would result in discussion. Also demonstrate how we might answer.
23 min: “Presenting the Good News—As a Teacher and Disciple-Maker.” Question-and-answer coverage. Include demonstration of publisher offering a study using the Truth book and following through with demonstration of study for the householder. Scriptures and points from pages 17 and 18 may be used.
13 min: Interview several publishers who were previously with other religions as to how they were helped to learn the truth and why they accepted it. Song 60. Prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 25
15 min: Song 46. Discussion of Branch Letter and Theocratic News using family setting after a meal. Mention any necessary announcements.
20 min: Scriptural discussion on theme, “Speak Truth with One Another.” Discuss with audience such points as the following: Speaking the truth covers all aspects of life. Why is it necessary for a husband and wife to be honest and frank with each other? (Matt. 19:5; Eph. 5:25, 28, 33; Prov. 31:11) Parents and children should communicate freely and truthfully with one another. (Ps. 34:13, 14; Eph. 6:1-4; Prov. 4:1; 23:22-25) Speaking truth wins Jehovah’s approval. (Zech. 8:16; Ps. 15:1-3; Prov. 6:16, 17) When corrective counsel is given, how do being forthright, kind, not avoiding issue, listening carefully, not jumping to conclusions, and giving Scriptural basis for viewpoint fit into the picture? (Gal. 6:1; Eph. 4:32; 1 Tim. 5:1, 2) When straightforward, appropriate counsel is given, how should it be accepted? Should one be sensitive or try to justify oneself? (Prov. 12:15; Ps. 141:5) All need to be honest with one another, communicating freely. Develop understanding, which deepens Christian relationship. Also speak the words of truth clearly and honestly to those to whom we witness.—Eph. 4:15, 25; 1 Cor. 14:8-10.
12 min: Questions of Interest. Discuss Question Box along with some items from Questions from Readers of general interest. May also use question that has arisen in field service.
13 min: Talk with audience participation on article from April 15, 1976, Watchtower on “Is It Possible to Know About God?” Song 44. Prayer.

