VOL. XXXIV DECEMBER 1 No. 23 
A. D. 1913-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Dedication of "The Temple" 354 

A Race of Slaves 355 

Present Master of Mankind 355 

Principles of Good and Evil Eternal 356 

Little Ways of Doing Good to Others 357 

Kind Words and Smiles Potent for Good 357 

Character Likeness to the Lord 359 

Two Causes of Dissension 359 

Friction Minimized With Maturity 359 

Heights and Depths of Divine Law 360 

Perfection the Christian's Standard 360 

Editor at International Purity Congress 361 

Only God Can Grant Victory 361 

Satan, Sin and Death to Be Overthrown 362 

Seed-Time (Poem) 362 

Jesus and the Children 363 

Seventy Ministers Ordained 364 

Will the Earth Be Burned? 365 

Profitable Bible Study 366 

Some Interesting Letters 367 

page 354 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



R5365 : page 354 

DEDICATION OF "THE TEMPLE" -NEW YORK CITY 



The Contractors promise to have "The Temple" ready for 
our use on Sunday, December 7. The services for the opening 
day will be a little out of the ordinary. So far as the 
building is concerned it will be Dedication Day. As respects 
the Congregation it will be Thanksgiving Sunday. The program 
will include the entire day. The opening service will 
be at 10.30 a.m. The Pastor, Brother Russell, will give 
the address. 

At 2 p.m. there will be a Symposium in which several 
Brethren of the PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION will participate, 
the topic being "THANKFULNESS." Its various phases will be 
considered. 

At 4 p.m. there will be a general Praise and Testimony 
Meeting. 

At 8 p.m. the Pastor, Brother Russell, will give an address, 
closing what, we trust, will be a very pleasant and very profitable 
day of spiritual refreshment. 

As it is anticipated that numbers of THE WATCH TOWER 
readers will want to be present at these services, coming from 
surrounding cities and villages, it is proposed that no public 
advertising be done, so that we may have plenty of room for 
comfort and fellowship. Of course, the Brooklyn Tabernacle 
will be closed for the entire day. 

All WATCH TOWER readers and their interested friends are 
cordially invited to this house-warming. "Seats free and no 
collection." 

When sending remittances please remember to make them 
payable to Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. 

page 354 



BETHEL HYMNS FOR JANUARY 

After the close of the hymn the Bethel Family listens to the 
reading of "My Vow Unto the Lord," then joins in prayer. At 
the breakfast table the MANNA text is considered. Hymns for 
January follow: (1) 151; (2) 217; (3) 165; (4) 144; (5) 299; 
(6) 133; (7) 14; (8) 26; (9) 20; (10) 24; (11) 8; (12) 6; (13) 
Vow; (14) 87; (15) 256; (16) 105; (17) 34; (18) 235; (19) 88; 
(20) 113; (21) 7; (22) 307; (23) 325; (24) 125; (25) 222; 
(26) 100; (27) 208; (28) 173; (29) 145; (30) 38; (31) 273. 



R5355 : page 355 

A RACE OF SLAVES 

"For we know that the Law is spiritual; but 
I am carnal, sold under Sin. "--ROMANS 7:14. 

THE Apostle's statement that we are sold under 

Sin implies that we as a race are slaves. 

And so elsewhere it is expressed that mankind 

are slaves of Sin. (Rom. 6:16,17. 

Diaglott.) We look back to see when we 

became slaves and how this condition came 

about. We find that Adam sold himself 

and incidentally all his race. What price 

was paid by the purchaser? What did 

Adam get when he sold himself and all his 

posterity to become servants of Sin? We reply, He got 

his own will. He got his choice of fellowship with his 

wife for a time in the course of disobedience, thus rejecting 

God and His will, His Law. For this price, this 

self-gratification, this measure of joy, he sold himself 

to Sin and was cut off from being a son of God. Then he 

became a slave of Sin and, as a result, a slave of death.— 

Romans 5:12. 

Sin, the great monarch ruling the world, has enslaved 
the entire human family. None can escape this bondage, 
except in one way. Under this bondage of Sin they get 
disease, sorrow, disappointment, death. Death is the 
great climax of the wages of this great Monarch. And 
so we read, "The wages of Sin is death." "The whole 
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together." 
(Romans 6:23; 8:22.) They are all travailing in this 
slavery, which was pictured in the oppression of the 
Israelites in Egypt under Pharaoh. The whole world is 
in alienation from God, banished from His favor and from 
everlasting life. 

God's promise was that He would provide a Ransom 
for the purchasing back of the slaves. He did this, in 
due time, by providing the Redeemer. Father Adam 
went into slavery of his own volition. His children— all 
mankind— were born slaves, born in sin and slavery, under 
the penalty of death. Christ appeared that He 
might redeem the one who sinned— that He might give a 
Ransom-price, a corresponding price— His own life for 
the life of Father Adam. All these slaves may then be 
set free; may attain absolute freedom, if they will. All 
whom the Son shall set free will be free indeed. 

MAN'S RELEASE PICTURED IN TYPE 

This release of the slaves from Sin and Death was 
pictured in the Law by the release of the fiftieth year 
Jubilee. When the Jubilee arrived, the only ones who 



R5356 : page 355 

remained in slavery were those who preferred to remain 
thus. (Deut. 15:12-17; Lev. 25:39-41.) So the thousand 
years of Christ's Reign— the Millennium— is to be the 
great Jubilee time, in which all the slaves are to be freed 
from slavery to Sin and the power of Satan, and are to 
be lifted up to freedom, if they will. But the legal setting 
free of the slaves will be one thing, and the getting 
back of their privileges will be quite another thing. 
Mankind will be judicially free— they will then all have 
been bought with a price— taken from the taskmaster, 
Sin, and put under the new Master, Christ Jesus, the 
great King of Glory. 

Messiah's Reign will be one in which mankind will 
be uplifted. All things that were lost will be recovered 
during the thousand years. And all will be set free, except 
those who prefer the bondage— and these will ultimately 
go into the Second Death, extinction, never after 
to be awakened to have the privilege of attaining everlasting 
life, or being of the family of God. 

THE PRESENT MASTER OF MANKIND 

Sin became the possessor of our race, which came 
under his control— Sin being allegorically personified as 
a great monarch holding relentless sway over mankind. 
Satan is another name for Sin. As he was called by our 
Lord the father of lies, and "a murderer from the beginning" 
(John 8:44), he very properly stands as the representative 
of Sin, as the representative of all 
unrighteousness. 

Jesus Christ laid down the Ransom-price for all, that 
mankind might, in due time, be redeemed from slavery 
to Sin. The Divine sentence upon Adam was death, and 
Sin was the agent, or channel, on account of which this 
condemnation came. Christ was "made sin for us" 
(2 Cor. 5:21); that is to say, He was treated as the sinner, 
and received the punishment that properly belonged 
to the sinner. This He did that He might free us from 
this great slavery. The Apostle Paul declares that ultimately 
the whole creation shall be set free from the 
slavery of Sin and Death and shall become sons of God. 
-Rom. 8:20,21. -Diaglott. 

When Adam yielded to self-gratification he became 
subject to this death penalty. It was God who imposed 
the penalty— it was God's penalty that must be met. In 
order for Christ to meet this penalty upon Adam, it was 
necessary for Him to renounce all self-gratification and 
to become dead to self, that He might do the Father's 
will. And He gladly yielded Himself to God's will— all 
that is "written in the Book." 

We who have come into covenant relationship with 

R5356 : page 356 



God, have come through Christ. Having become voluntary 
servants of the Lord Jesus Christ we are still in 
slavery; but it is slavery to Christ instead of slavery to 
Sin. The world are slaves of Sin and not of Christ. Before 
Christ will make us free from Sin, the Father requires 
that we shall give up our wills entirely to Him. 
This constitutes us slaves in the most absolute sense. 
The most absolute slavery is slavery of the will to another. 
Ours is such a slavery, but it is one that is beneficial. 
Whether we eat or drink or sleep or work— whatever 
we do— it is all to be done in harmony with the 
Lord's will and for His glory. Yes, ours is a most blessed 
slavery, and we would not become free from it for any 
consideration. 

We see that unless we had this absolute submission 
of our wills to God, we could not be prepared for the 
glorious things to come, to be joint-heirs with our Redeemer 
in His glory, honor and immortality. We were, 
therefore, freed from the service of Sin that we might 
become the bond-servants of another, even Christ. And 
we recognize that in getting free from Sin, we are free 
indeed.— John 8:36. 

It is true that we are still under a measure of bondage 
to Sin— in our bodies— as long as we live. But the 
Apostle urges, "Let not Sin. ..reign in your mortal 
body"— do not allow it to dominate you; refuse to obey 
Sin. (Rom. 6:12.) So then we are to exert ourselves. 
Whoever will not exert himself will remain a bond slave 
of Sin. We are to resist determinedly and persistently 
the attempts of the old master, Sin, to bring us again 
into captivity. We are to strive to maintain the liberty 
wherewith Christ has made us free. (Gal. 5:1.) If we 
are half-hearted in this matter, we are only partially loyal, 
and shall fail to win the prize, unless we arouse ourselves. 
If we are fully loyal, His grace is sufficient, and 
He far more than compensates us for whatever of self-denial 
and sacrifice this loyalty may bring. 

"THE SIN OF THE WORLD" 

The sin of the world was Adam's sin. This original 
sin was disobedience, and this disobedience includes, not 
only the act by which Sin got possession of the world 
and has ever since held possession, but it includes everything 
incident to its penalty. So Jesus came into the 
world that He might take away "the sin of the world." 
(John 1 :29.) And He made possible the release from 
Sin by laying down His life, giving His life a corresponding 
price for Adam's. 

Sin obtained possession of Adam at the very moment 
that he sinned. He became the slave of Sin as soon as 
he obeyed Sin. Here are shown two great principles- 
righteousness and sin. Sin presented the temptation and 
said, Take this course; and as soon as Adam yielded to 
the suggestion he became Sin's slave; and God gave him 
over to the penalty. So the Scriptures represent that 



God merely took His hands off when Adam became the 
voluntary servant of Sin. 

PRINCIPLES OF GOOD AND EVIL ETERNAL 

The great principles of good and evil have always 
been in existence, whether they have been in operation 
or not. Righteousness has always existed. There has 
always been a principle of righteousness, and there has 
always been a principle of unrighteousness. Since the 
creation of beings in God's image began, the wrong 
course has always been open. Satan might have taken 
that wrong course long before he did. Mankind will 
always be open to the privilege of sinning, if they choose. 
But God will so thoroughly teach what is the wages of 
Sin, that mankind and all created intelligences will learn 
that lesson fully. They will not take the wrong course 
—nor love it— they will know that it would be suicide. 
They will not choose the wrong, just as God would not 
choose the wrong. All will have learned to "love righteousness 
and hate iniquity." 

But these two principles will continue to exist. As 
it is right to do one thing, it is wrong to do the opposite 
thing. God's just arrangement is that all who obey the 
principle of righteousness shall live everlastingly. Justice 
sees to it that any one who wanders from the right 
course pays the penalty. The sure consequence of sin 
will fall upon the sinner. This is a broad principle— 
"the wages of Sin is death," and the wages of righteousness 
is everlasting life. Strictly speaking, however, everlasting 
life is a gift, no one could earn it: "The gift of 
God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord." 

THE SELLING PRICE-THE PURCHASE PRICE 

When Adam sinned, it was his life that he sold, and, 
as the Apostle Paul tells us, Adam was not overtaken 
unawares by this sin. He knew that the penalty was 
death if he should sin; hence when he ate the forbidden 
fruit he knew that he was selling his life. In other words, 
he gave his life for an apple— or rather for the woman 
for whom he ate the apple. Therefore, the self-gratification 
cost his life. He came wilfully under the penalty 
of death, into slavery to Sin as the result of eating that 
apple— for he knew the penalty. The selling price was, we 
see, an apple. The purchase price, the corresponding 
price, was the giving of human life. 

The Divine Plan is like a great building which may 
be viewed from different angles. We could take various 
pictures other than those of purchase and sale. But to 
our mind this illustration fits and dovetails. 

The Ransom is the foundation of this Plan. There 
is no other phase of the Divine Plan that is more accurately 
set forth in the Scriptures, and no phase that 
is more fought against— either openly or with subtlety— 
than is the Ransom. The Ransom-price for Adam is to 



be paid to justice. Justice demanded that mankind be 
sentenced to death. Jesus Himself has met this demand. 
Justice says, Give me the price and mankind shall go 
free. Justice remains with its hands full all the time. 
It never lets go of its hold. The penalty stands until 
the price is paid. 

Sin is not a person. It is only the principle of evil 
personified and is sometimes used as a synonym of Satan, 
who is a person. Man sold himself to Sin— Justice did 
not sell him. But Justice has recognized the transaction, 
the sale— so that under the condemnation, Sin can have 
dominion over man. But Divine Love stepped in and 
provided the purchase price for the sinner. All those 
sold under Sin shall be redeemed, or purchased back 
from Sin and Death. This transfer can be made only 
through Christ. He is the Purchaser and Mediator who 
will, in due time, lift all those who will out of the condemnation 
of Sin and Death, and put them into the 
realm of righteousness and life. And Justice will stand 
by and agree that Jesus shall be privileged to restore 
mankind to life, through the merit of His sacrifice. 



"Hail to the Lord's Anointed, 

Jehovah's blessed Son! 
Hail, in the time appointed, 

His Reign on earth begun! 
He comes to break oppression, 

To set the captives free, 
To take away transgression, 

And rule in equity." 



R5357 : page 357 

LITTLE WAYS OF DOING GOOD TO OTHERS 

"As we have therefore opportunity, let us do good unto 
all men, especially unto them who are of the Household 
of Faith."-Gal. 6:10. 

THE Apostle's exhortation here is very comprehensive 

—to do good without limitation, 

whether it be in word or deed. Some can 

be more benefited by words than by any 

other service we could render them. One 

of the great needs of the world is more 

knowledge. And if any one can dispel the 

darkness of this ignorance and let in light, 

he will surely do great good. The implied 

thought of the Apostle, however, 

seems to be that the principles of right and wrong— good 

and evil— are to be discerned by the Lord's people. From 

our standpoint we should recognize what would be a good 



work and what would be an evil work. Many are not 
able to discern between what is good and what is evil. 
Those who do evil are, with very few exceptions, in more 
or less ignorance and blindness. 

Saul of Tarsus, for instance, was doing an evil work 
when he was persecuting the Church. But he did not 
realize this. Hence, the best service to Saul of Tarsus, 
or any one else under like conditions, would be to open 
the eyes of his understanding. 

SOME GOOD WORKS ENUMERATED 

Clothing the needy, feeding the hungry, taking care 
of the imbecile, are all good works— doing good to the 
world of mankind. As we look out into the world, we see 
many efforts being made to do good. Some of these 
efforts are wisely directed, and some unwisely. But we 
are not commissioned to set the world straight. We are 
not to interfere with anybody. Others have a right to 
their judgment, as we have a right to ours. But if any 
one were doing an evil work, thinking it to be a good 
work, we would be quite right to endeavor to stop him, 
using such means as might seem appropriate and wise— 
the law, or our own words, or the words of others. But 
even here we are to take heed lest we should be busybodying 
in other men's matters. 

If we were to further enumerate some of the good 
works which ought to be done, we would say, to care for 
the blind, to organize or put into operation a method by 
which they might be enabled to read, or to get happiness; 
to care for the deaf and dumb would also be a very good 
work. As for slum work, we would not have much sympathy 
with a good deal of this, as reported. We should, 
however, be very much in sympathy with everything that 
aims for good— physical good, mental good, social good, 
good of any kind. There are, besides the foregoing, good 
arrangements provided for the sick, the incurable; such 
as hospitals, sanitariums, etc. 

All who love their fellow men and have sympathy for 
those in distress should be in sympathy with efforts for 
the betterment of their condition, and neither manifest 
nor feel opposition to them. No child of God could feel 
in sympathy with anything evil. God is the Representative 
of everything that is good. Satan is the representative 
of everything that is evil and injurious. If we would 
be children of God we must be out of harmony with 
everything not in line with His original provision for 
man, and out of harmony with everything that is in support 
of Satan. 

Some of the efforts along the line of social uplift are 
not at all bad. Their promoters may be working in an 
illogical way, a way that we feel sure is not in harmony 
with the Bible way; but nevertheless we have sympathy 
with the Socialists. They are trying to do good. But we 
have no sympathy with those who are trying to do evil, 
injury. We have faith in God— that He purposes to 



bring about a great change shortly; but we believe that 
no efforts of humanity can bring about this change. Then 
there is a way of doing good along intellectual lines, the 
lines of instruction. It is a good thing to teach children 
how to sew, how to cook, how to learn the mechanical 
arts that will make them useful. Our public school 
teachers are doing a good work, as they give instruction to 
the youth, and especially if they give the right understanding 
in regard to that which they teach, that which 
is in harmony with God's Word— the proper instruction. 

SPECIAL WORK OF THE LORD'S PEOPLE 

But there is a higher work than all these. And we are 
to give our life and time to this, which we see is the 
most valuable of all. This is the instruction given for all 
who have the ear to hear, respecting the Almighty, His 
will, His purposes, His plan; for these are associated 
with every affair of life. This instruction, to those who 
receive it, becomes the best aid to proper thinking, proper 
living, proper acting, for this is God's way. And this 
way becomes the way of all who are consecrated to do 
His will, to walk in Jesus' footsteps. 

As, therefore, we come more and more in harmony 
with God's Plan, we perceive that no other work could 
be so grand as to make known to others God's character, 
God's Plan and God's will concerning us. As this has 
brought great blessing and sanctification to us, we should 
have the desire to take the Good Tidings to others, refreshing 
them as we have been refreshed, comforting 
them as we have been comforted. 

In doing this work we resort to every lawful means. 
And this is called in the Scriptures, preaching the Gospel 
—whether it is done by the printed page or orally or by 
pictorial representations, it is proclaiming the Gospel— 
that which will do the most good to all mankind. We 
labor under one difficulty in this respect; namely, that 
the world is not able to appreciate the Good Tidings, 
Satan having blinded their eyes, so that they cannot see 
the philosophy of God's Plan— it does not seem reasonable 
to them. Those in this condition are trying, as it 
were, to look around a corner, instead of coming to the 
corner and getting the right angle of vision. But whether 
people believe it or not, we believe preaching the Gospel 
to be the Lord's work and therefore the best. This does 
not hinder us, however, from having sympathy with 
others who are doing what they consider to be the best 
work, so long as the result is good. We should be in 
sympathy with everything that is in harmony with the 
Truth— in sympathy with everything the influence of 
which is beneficial to mankind. 

So then the Apostle is calling to our minds in a general 
way the opportunity of doing good to all men. But some 
may require assistance which we cannot give. For instance, 
we could not give up preaching the Gospel and go 
into the slum work, for the slum work is not preaching 



the Gospel. A godly physician might, however, in connection 
with his practise do good, not only along lines 
physical and mental, but also along spiritual lines. So we 
have opportunities every day with the butcher, the baker, 
the ice man, etc., all of whom are fellow creatures; for 
God made all mankind of one blood. As the Apostle enjoins, 
we should seek to do them good, seek to make them 
better, happier, more comfortable. 

KIND WORDS AND SMILES POTENT FOR GOOD 

It might be argued that in order to do good most 
widely, one's efforts should be associated with using money 
for the purpose. It is true that money represents an 
accumulation of time. It takes time to produce money; 

R5357 : page 358 

therefore whoever gives a dollar to any cause, gives what 
represents so much time; whoever donates one thousand 
dollars gives that which represents so much time, for the 
money will purchase time, comforts, etc. But not many 
of the Lord's people have much money to use. And if 
they had much money, they would feel that this is a talent, 
and that it should be used chiefly for the Household of 
Faith, for the Lord's brethren. 

Since, then, we cannot do much in a material way for 
men as we meet them in the walks of life, day by day, 
how can we do them good? One of the easiest ways is 
to look happy ourselves and thus inspire happiness in 
others. A person who goes about looking miserable is 
not likely to make others feel happy. But if we cannot 
always look very happy, let us look as happy as we can, 
and thus we will be doing good to a great many people 
whom we meet throughout the day. This we can do even 
if we have no money with which to help others. Look 
happy, and try thus to make them happy. And secondly, 
if we have no money, we can give a kind word, a smile, 
a pleasant tone, a little civility, wherever proper. 

All such little courtesies of life are means of doing 
good, and may bring a ray of sunshine into the lives of a 
great many people, the majority of whom are unfavorably 
situated. The light of the knowledge of the glory of 
God does not yet shine into their hearts. They are dark 
within, gloomy, foreboding, fearful. They know not 
God! and what they know of their fellow men is a knowledge 
of selfishness. They feel that they must be on their 
guard lest every one cheat them and get the better of 
them. Now, if our look, our manner, our tone, would be 
helpful, comforting, assuring, to these, then we would 
be doing them good— more good than if we should scatter 
dollar bills all along our pathway. "Kind words shall 
never die"; and the expressions that go with them are 
some of the ways of doing good unto all men as we have 
opportunity. 

We have a special work and therefore have not the 



opportunity to walk the streets and smile all the time. 
Our life-work is for the great King. But as we go about 
our work, we should drop a smile or a kind word— something 
along the line of doing "good unto all men." Our 
work is to be especially for the Household of Faith in 
the sense that while we may be doing missionary work, 
and going among those who are not of the Household of 
Faith, yet our motive in doing thus is the hope that there 
may be some of these who are already of the Faith 
Household, or some who will be amenable to the Message, 
and will wish to serve the Lord when they learn the way. 

R5358 : page 358 

And if we would desire to do good to them, how much 
more would we wish to encourage those who belong to the 
Lord, who have become members of His spiritual family! 

THE HOUSEHOLD OF FAITH 

These words— Household of Faith— are broad enough 
to include not only those who are fully in the way, but 
also those who have made more or less of an approach 
unto the Lord and the Truth. The very fact that any 
one is drawing near to the antitypical Tabernacle is a 
strong reason why we should wish to encourage him to 
press on. He has come a part of the way, even if he has 
not made a consecration. 

In a strict sense, the Household of Faith, of course, 
includes only those who are consecrated. But the words 
of the Apostle justify us in believing that those who are 
considering the matter, counting the cost, would in a 
broad sense be counted as of the Household of Faith. 
And we are to give these special assistance— all in whom 
we see any prospect of consecration. Our constant desire 
and effort should be to point men directly or indirectly 
to the Lord. Thus we shall be showing "forth the praises 
of Him who hath called us out of darkness into His marvelous 
light." 

We are to do these things as we have opportunity. 
This would include the thought of times and seasons and 
ways and means of doing good. So far as we are concerned 
we are to "be instant in season, out of season." 
We are not to consider our own inclinations, tastes, etc., 
but we would be obliged to consider the interests of others. 
A husband must specially regard the interests of his wife, 
and the wife the interests of her husband and children. 

SPIRIT OF A SOUND MIND NECESSARY 

We should be willing to serve anybody in any way as 
we have opportunity. And if there are many opportunities 
for service, we must choose between them, exercising the 
spirit of a sound mind, as to which would be the will of 
the Lord for us. The Lord's people should so order their 
lives as to get the best results— get the most good possible 



out of them. In choosing a means of livelihood, if there 

is a choice of five trades, one would study as to which 

would be the most lucrative, which would be the cleanest, 

which the most honorable, which require the most labor, 

etc. This would be from the natural standpoint. But 

from the Divine standpoint, the Christian's standpoint, 

the decisive question would be, In which of these avocations 

can I best serve the Lord? And this would mean, 

In which can I find the best opportunity for carrying out 

the good intentions of my heart as to the Lord's will respecting 

me? 

If we have made some mistake in this respect and the 
Lord opens wide the door for us to enter in elsewhere, or 
if He makes our present place so tight that we cannot stay 
there, then let us arrange our affairs accordingly, in such 
a manner that we may have the most opportunities for doing 
"good unto all, especially to the Household of Faith." 

There are some occupations which take us away from 
men, where we would have less opportunity of meeting 
people. No doubt it was the Lord's arrangement that 
Moses for a time should be away off in the land of Midian, 
keeping sheep for his father-in-law, Jethro. But as soon 
as the Lord was ready, He called Moses out and gave 
him a place of great opportunity and responsibility. No 
doubt that work in the wilderness was a place of great 
opportunity also; and doubtless before that, while in the 
schools of Egypt, he had great opportunity for learning 
lessons of experience. 

So the Lord's people are to watch for their opportunities. 
And day by day they are to seek, so far as possible, 
to be doing good to others, and especially to those of the 
Lord's Household— giving these always the preference. 

The Christian is to be ready to do good to all men at 
the expense of his own time and convenience, but he is to 
be ready to lay down his life for the brethren. He is 
to seek opportunities for laying down his life day after 
day, in the sense of giving his time to the communication 
of the Truth, or helping the Lord's brethren in any manner 
to put on the "whole armor of God," that they may 
stand in the evil day. 



"The world would be a desolate place, 

But for one here and there, 
Whose heart with self hath not been filled, 
Whose love for God hath not been killed, 
Whose thankful praise hath not been stilled- 

There's one such here and there. 

"But oh! the grandeur of the work, 

For this one here and there, 
To join in lifting up our race, 
To wipe away of sin each trace, 
To make of earth a perfect place, 

Put glory everywhere!" 



R5358 : page 359 

CHARACTER-LIKENESS TO THE LORD 

"I pray for them. ..that they may be one,. ..that they may 
be made perfect in one,. ..that the world may know that 
Thou hast... loved them as Thou 
hast loved Me."-John 17:9,20-23. 

THESE WORDS, we remember, were uttered 

by our Lord on the night of His betrayal, 

supposedly while on the way from the 

"upper room" where the Memorial was observed 

to the Garden of Gethsemane. The 

ones He evidently prayed for were the 

twelve Apostles, or rather the eleven, by 

this time; for in conjunction He says, "I 

have lost none of them, save the son of perdition." 

But the context shows that His 

prayer includes His faithful followers all the way down 

the Age. He says, "Neither pray I for these alone, but 

for all those who shall believe on Me through their 

word." He prayed that His followers might be one, 

even as He and His Father were one— the same kind of 

oneness, a oneness of mind. 

This text is one of the best proofs that the Lord Jesus 
and the Father are not one in person. He could not have 
prayed for all of the Church to be one in person. It is 
a oneness of will, a full harmony of will, a oneness of 
purpose. The Lord said, "Not My will, but Thine be 
done." He thus came into full oneness, harmony with 
the Father— with the Father's will, the Father's Plan. 
It is not a mutual concession, where each gives up some 
of his rights in order to become one. 

His first work for dealing with the world of mankind 
—before He would become the world's Savior and the 
Mediator of the New Covenant— was the election of the 
Church. This was the work which He had now begun, 
and He was committing to them the testimony. He desires 
that all the Church have a oneness of purpose, a 
oneness of will with His will. And we can see that this 
could be obtained only in the one way— by fully surrendering 
our will. And this, the Scriptures declare, is 
done by becoming dead. 

TWO CAUSES OF DISSENSION 

A man or woman is merely what his will is and what 
that will can make out of the body and its circumstances. 
And so at the very beginning of our discipleship, the first 
thing is to see that we are dead as respects our will, and 
alive toward the Lord Jesus Christ. All who do this He 
calls New Creatures. He grants them the Holy Spirit, 



that the new mind, the new will, may be theirs. In proportion 
as they obtain the new mind, the new will, in that 
same proportion will the oneness with one another exist. 

That which causes dissension amongst the Lord's 
people is either a lack of loyalty or a lack of knowledge. 
If it is a lack of loyalty, they will gradually drift away. 
The Lord does not choose to force any of His family. 
He is choosing such as worship Him in spirit and in 
truth, such as are in every respect loyal. He has set 
aside for the purpose of selecting this class the entire 
Gospel Age. This work of selecting has been in progress 
for nearly nineteen centuries. And this company will be 
a Little Flock. They will, evidently, be a very select 
class. They are required to walk by faith, not by sight. 

Not many have the loyalty to God and to righteousness 
to walk that way and to count the world as loss and 
dross— as nothing, with all its projects. As the disloyal 
ones leave the ranks, more and more the loyal ones will 
find themselves drawn together, and more and more of 
oneness will be found among those who are faithful. 
This would necessarily be true in every time and in every 
country. All who are thoroughly loyal would desire to 
do the Father's will, desire to lay down their lives in the 
Father's service. And this desire would make them one. 

FRICTION MINIMIZED WITH MATURITY 

The Lord speaks of their being perfected in one. As 
each individual member makes progress, he becomes more 
worthy to fill the place or use the opportunity provided 
for him. And thus the Body becomes more efficacious. 
But the thought that our Lord here expresses is rather 
that of completeness. He is referring to the end of the 
Age, when the work will be completed, perfected, when 
they will all be one. But the grand consummation will be 
effected by something which the Lord will Himself do. 

R5359 : page 359 

We find that, necessarily, because of the differences of 
our flesh, we cannot in everything see exactly alike. Now 
we can only see more or less obscurely. 

At present we cannot see fully and completely. Consequently 
there will always be more or less friction, even 
amongst those who are fully consecrated to do the 
Father's will. This friction should become minimized, 
as we become mature. But we cannot see eye to eye 
until the glorious consummation, when we shall have experienced 
the resurrection change, "in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye." "Flesh and blood cannot inherit 
the Kingdom of God." We are to have our trial in these 
imperfect bodies. And those who show their loyalty 
in fighting against the world, the flesh and the Adversary, 
to the end, will be joint-heirs with Christ, sharers in His 
Kingdom, executors of the Divine Program for the blessing 
of the world of mankind. 



AN ASTOUNDING STATEMENT 

At the Epiphania, or bright shining, of the Lord's 
manifestation, God will have completed His present work 
of directing the Church, and the world will be informed 
that they are under a different Dispensation. When the 
world shall have come to understand the matter fully, 
they will know the truth of our Lord's words, in His last 
prayer with His disciples, that the Father loves the 
Church as He loves the Lord Jesus Christ. This is a 
very astounding statement. It shows that there is nothing 
selfish in our Lord. He did not say, "They will always 
be inferior to Me. They will never have the glory that 
I shall have." 

On the contrary, the Lord Jesus knows that the 
Heavenly Father will exercise His Love along the lines 
of principle, character. And all who will be members of 
the same glorious company must have the same glorious 
character that our Lord had; that is to say, they must be 
loyal to the core. They must have demonstrated that they 
loved righteousness and hated iniquity. We read, "Thou 
hast loved righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore 
God, even Thy God, hath anointed Thee with the oil of 
gladness above Thy fellows." (Hebrews 1:9.) So He 
was anointed to be the Head of the Church class. But 
the Church class are declared in this Scripture to be His 
associates— not of inferiority, but of common fellowship, 
being on one plane. And the world will then know that 
the Father loved the Church as He loved Jesus. We 
understand that the Church will be on the same plane 
with her Lord Jesus. Nevertheless, we are to keep in 
mind that God "made Him to be Head over all— God 
blessed forever!" The Church will never be on an equality 
of position with Christ. 

This is very wonderful to us, that our Heavenly Father 
should love us as He loved Christ, that the Lord would 
love the jewel, in the mire or wherever it might be 
found! The Lord Jesus has been selecting these characters 
out of the mire of human sin. And those who 
prove to be of the "more than conqueror" class— loyal as 

R5359 : page 360 

the Lord Jesus was loyal— the Father will love as He 
loved the Lord Jesus, and will glorify them with His Son. 
'"When thou passest through the waters, 

I will be with thee!' 
Sure and sweet and all-sufficient 

Shall His presence be. 
All God's billows overflowed Him 

In th' great Atoning Day; 
Now He only leads thee through them— 
With thee all the way." 



R5359 : page 360 

THE HEIGHTS AND DEPTHS OF DIVINE LAW 

"Whosoever therefore shall break one of the least of these 
commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the 
least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whosoever 
shall do and teach them, the same shall be called 
great in the Kingdom of Heaven. "--MATTHEW 5:19. 

THERE is prevalent amongst Christian people 
quite an erroneous view respecting the Divine 
Law. It is generally considered that, 
because the Apostle said that we are not 
under the Law, but under grace, he meant 
that the Law is done away with. We believe 
that this thought is incorrect. Our 
Lord said that till Heaven and earth pass 
away, not one jot or tittle of the Law should 
pass away till all be fulfilled. All written 
therein shall be accomplished. 

The Divine Law has always been in existence. It 
was plainly expressed in Adam; the various parts of his 
organism were expressions of the Divine law. The Law 
of God was written in his heart. He was in full harmony 
with the Divine Mind, and therefore in full harmony 
with the Divine Law. But when sin came in, the 
Divine Law in his being was measurably obliterated. 
There is still some of the Divine Law in all who are appreciative 
of right and wrong, but not sufficient to make 
right living possible. 

In God's dealing with the nation of Israel He gave 
them a Law. This Law, written in the Ten Commandments, 
is a brief summary of man's obligations— a text, 
as it were, from which many lessons might be drawn. In 
our knowledge of the Ten Commandments, we are still 
aware of what is God's Law. God never abrogated that 
Law. It is still in force upon the Jews, as also is the Law 
Covenant. But Gentiles never were under the Law 
Covenant. 

God offered the Jews everlasting life if they would 
keep the Law. They were bound by the Law; hence the 
Apostle points out that they would need first to die to 
the Law Covenant before they could come into Christ, 
the Life-Giver. (Rom. 7:4.) This did not mean that 
they must die to the Law of God, but merely to the Law 
Covenant. It would mean to give up all hope of attaining 
everlasting life through keeping the Law Covenant. 

The new hope into which Gentile Christians entered 
does not abrogate God's Law, nor does it release them 
from the obligations of His Law. But God has made a 
provision that notwithstanding our imperfection, our inability 
to keep the Law perfectly, He will accept us in 
Christ, our imperfections being covered by Christ's merit. 
Of these the Apostle said, "The righteousness of the Law 



is fulfilled in us, who walk, not after the flesh, but after 
the Spirit." We must needs be perfect beings to live up 
to the spirit of the Divine Law, it being the requirement 
for a perfect man. 

PERFECTION THE CHRISTIAN'S STANDARD 

This thought, then, is the key to our Lord's words in 
the text under consideration. He who would violate this 
Law of God, and teach others to do so, either by example 
or precept, should be considered as the least. And he 
that would keep the Law of God, and by example or precept 
help others to keep this Law, should be called greatest 
in the Church, the incipient Kingdom, the embryotic 
Kingdom. Those who would be of this Kingdom class 
must forsake father and mother and all things to take 
up their cross and follow Christ. In other words, Christ 
must be first. Amongst these followers of His there 
would be differences. Some through weaknesses of 
heredity, or what not, would be less faithful— others 
would be more faithful. Those who would keep the 
Divine Law most perfectly in heart and life would be 
most nearly copies of God's dear Son. 

And so it is with us today. We esteem highly those 
most diligent in service, those most zealous. Those who 
walk somewhat disorderly, who are vacillating, we esteem 
less. We take notice of ignorance and weaknesses in the 
Church. We must sympathize with these; nevertheless, 
one who would not overcome his weaknesses would not be 
so highly esteemed in the Kingdom class as one who 
could, and who would, walk more closely in the Master's 
footsteps. In other words, we understand the Master 
to be teaching that the Gospel is not out of sympathy with 
the Jewish Law. He said, "Be ye perfect, even as your 
Father which is in Heaven is perfect." There is no lower 
standard than that of perfection. It would not do for 
the Lord to say, Be ye slightly like the Father, or, Be ye 
nearly like Him. He must present the perfect standard. 

The Jew is striving for perfection, striving to get 
everlasting life. The Christian is striving for perfection, 
and expecting to get eternal life— not by perfectly 
keeping the Law, which he cannot do, but through the 
merit of Christ, which makes up for his deficiencies- 
covers his blemishes. 

THE OUTER SHELL OF DEEPER SENTIMENTS 

The Divine Law is briefly summed up, not only in the 
Old Testament, but also by our Lord Himself in the 
words, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and 
with all thy strength. And thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself." (Deut. 6:5; Lev. 19:18; Matt. 22:37-39.) 
This is still more briefly summed up by the Apostle Paul: 
"Love is the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 13:10.) Love 
to God would lead us to do all those things which are 



inculcated in His Word; and love for our neighbor would 
lead us to fulfil all our obligations toward them, as 
inculcated. 

If we come to apply the commands of the Law to 
ourselves as Christians, we can easily amplify them all. 
For instance, our Lord's definition of adultery is much 
more searching than the statement as contained in the 
tables of the Law. The New Testament definition of 
murder is much deeper than that commonly accepted. 
The Apostle John declared that to hate a brother 
is murder. God could see that there was murder in the 
heart of the hater of a brother. The All-Seeing Eye perceives 
if there is disloyalty present in any degree— or anything 
contrary to the Divine will. From this standpoint, 
then, we see that the Ten Commandments are but 
the outer shell, as it were, of deeper sentiments. 

It was the custom of the Jews to do nothing whatsoever 

R5360 : page 361 

on the seventh day of the week. We presume that 
the significance of this commandment is, to the New 
Creature in Christ, that the rest of the seventh day typifies 
the perfect rest into which he has entered through 
Christ. 

All New Creatures in Christ are to keep Sabbath 
every day. And so the Apostle says, "We who have 
believed do enter into rest"— have entered into rest. It 
is not that our muscles or our brains are necessarily resting, 
but that we have the rest of heart, the rest of mind, 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding. It 
is important that we maintain this peace at all times, 
and do not let anything come in which would interfere 
with it and take us out of harmony with God. If it 
does, we should consider that we have broken the Sabbath 
command. 

The New Creature could not kill. It has no weapon 
except the Sword of the Spirit. Whoever hates his 
brother is a murderer. To cultivate a spirit of hatred 
would be a very serious matter. One who would do so 
should not be considered a true brother or sister in the 
Body of Christ, which is the Church. 



R5360 : page 361 

EDITOR AT THE INTERNATIONAL PURITY CONGRESS 

A FEW weeks ago, Governor Glynn, of New 
York, appointed the Editor of THE WATCH 
TOWER a delegate to represent New York 
State at the seventh International Purity 
Congress, to convene in Minneapolis, 
Minn., November 7th to 12th. 
We attended the Purity Congress and 



there met a number of noble men and 

women, who are fighting valiantly to stamp 

out the various forms of disease and vice 

which are vitiating mankind with alarming rapidity. 

On Sunday, November 9th, we were appointed by the 
Purity Congress Arrangements Committee to speak at the 
Schubert Theatre, Minneapolis, under the auspices of the 
local class of the INTERNATIONAL BIBLE STUDENTS ASSOCIATION. 
The house was crowded. Our topic was, THE 
WAGES OF SIN AND THE REWARDS OF PURITY, from the 
text: "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is 
eternal life, through Jesus Christ, our Lord."— 
Romans 6:23. 

ONLY GOD CAN GRANT THE VICTORY 

We did not enter into statistics to prove that sin is in 
the world and manifesting itself in many forms— in political 
corruption, physical corruption, or disease, moral 
corruption, or impurity, and their various ramifications. 
We endeavored to probe deeper, to show why human 
beings are born into the world with sinful propensities 
or tendencies. After finding the cause, the source of 
sin, we discussed the remedy, and pointed out why all good 
people should be united in their opposition to sin and in 
their endeavor to stamp it out; although experience has 
proved that none of the world's panaceas really cure. 

Humanity must continually combat, only to find that 
sin, impurity, breaks out in other places or in other forms. 
It is like fighting fire or a plague. To cease fighting is to 
be overwhelmed. However, in the midst of the battle for 
purity, while convinced that eternal vigilance is necessary, 
and then only partially effectual, it is interesting to know 
that all on the side of purity are fighting on God's side, 
and that in His own time and way He will come to our 
rescue and grant a complete victory. So complete will be 
the victory that there will be no more sighing or crying 
or dying; no more sorrow or pain, because there will be 
no more sin, no more impurity. Heavenly conditions will 
have come to earth, which then will be a world-wide 
Paradise.— Isaiah 35. 

We admitted that this view of the situation is the very 
reverse of the popular theory of Evolution. Thinking 
people are more and more coming to realize that the wonderful 
blessings of our day, material and intellectual, do 
not uphold the theory of the Survival of the Fittest, and 
of general progress, physically and intellectually. The 
trend is downward. Imbecility, insanity and moral degeneracy 
are on the increase, and especially manifest in the 
families of the rich and the educated. The progress of 
our day must be accredited to God, and should be considered 
as marking the inauguration of the New Era, 
Messiah's Kingdom, so long promised. 

GOD IS NOT RESPONSIBLE 



The Bible alone explains the present situation. It 
alone tells us why so many go astray. Children are born 
with evil, immoral instincts, against which themselves 
and society must continually war. In Psalm 51:5 we 
read, "Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my 
mother conceive me." Here is the explanation. We inherit 
our tendency toward sin, and some inherit more of 
it than others. Few have realized the sacredness and 
responsibility of parentage. Few parents have realized 
how much they have to do with the moral and physical 
status of their children, not merely in the training of them 
after they are born, but in the qualities which are given 
to them at the time of their begetting and during the 
period of gestation. 

Let none get the thought from what we have said that 
any child can be born perfect, either physically, mentally 
or morally. The seeds of sin and degeneracy were implanted 
further back than our immediate parents. As 
physical likeness persists from grandparent to grandchild, 
so do moral traits and tendencies, impurities of blood and 
of ideals. The Bible takes us away back to the first man 
and the first woman, tells the story of their disobedience 
to God, and explains to us that when Adam and Eve became 
sinners, they thus cut themselves off from fellowship 
with God and came under the sentence, "Dying, thou 
shalt die." Then started the downward trend, which has 
been increasing in momentum ever since. 

God created man perfect, in His own image and likeness, 
the Bible assures us, and everywhere we see corroboration 
of this fact. In nearly every human being a 
certain amount of moral character still persists, notwithstanding 
the 6,000 years since the fall. In some more and 
in some less the Creator's character likeness is observable; 
but all are sinners, all come short of the glory of 
God— short of the Divine likeness originally granted to 
our race. God is not responsible; for as the Scriptures 
declare, all His work is perfect. (Deuteronomy 32:4.) 
He was fully justified in separating from Himself our 
disobedient first parents and sentencing them as unworthy 
of His favor and everlasting life, under the decree, 
"Dying, thou shalt die." 

Ever since, the race has been under the reign of Sin 
and Death. More and more has sin gained control. And 
the natural tendency of all sin is death-ward. It has not 
been improper that mankind should seek through medicine 
and surgery and in every manner imaginable to relieve 
himself of the burdens of Sin and Death. The effort has 
developed noble characters in the world. 

R5360 : page 362 

The fight against Sin and Death is still being prosecuted. 
Nevertheless, our physicians realize that the 
mental and physical ailments of the race are increasing, 
multiplying; and that their study, knowledge and skill 
are unable to keep pace. Our Purity Congress assures us 



of the same things along the lines of immorality. We 
must not relax our efforts for an instant. Every good 
man and every good woman should be alert to counteract 
as wisely and forcefully as possible, the influence of this 
reign of Sin and Death. As we contemplate the work 
which is being done in this direction, we rejoice to see so 
noble an army battling for the general good. We admire 
all sincere laborers for reform in any direction. 

IS NOT GOD INTERESTED? 

As we realize our own deep interest in the welfare of 
humanity, it would seem strange if our Almighty Creator 
were not Himself interested in the race which He 
made and which He justly condemned to death. The 
Bible points out that God still loves the world; and that 
He has a great plan for human recovery from sin, sorrow 
and death. The perplexity of Christians in the past has 
arisen from not taking a sufficiently broad view of the 
Divine character and Plan. Once we wondered why God 
did not more particularly bless reformers and use His 
power for the overthrow of the vicious and the corrupting 
elements of society. But now the light of the Millennial 
Morning is dawning. The Bible explains why God has 
permitted the reign of Sin and Death; and the understanding 
of this mystery is a blessing. 

The Bible teaching concerning the penalty of sin is 
not what was taught us in the creeds of the Dark Ages. 
The teachings of the Bible show that there is indeed a 
terrible penalty upon sin, but not the penalty of eternal 

R5361 : page 362 

torture, which we once supposed. The wages of sin is 

death; and everlasting life is a gift of God, to be bestowed 

only upon believers, through Christ. Hence the wicked 

cannot get everlasting life. "They shall perish;" "All the 

wicked will He destroy." But how many are really 

wicked? is the question. How many prefer sin to righteousness? 

How many would rather be right than wrong, 

were it not for the depraved tendency which prevails in 

themselves and the influence from others to which they 

are susceptible? 

SATAN, SIN AND DEATH TO BE OVERTHROWN 

With considerable elaboration of Scripture we pointed 
out that God loves His creatures deeply— not merely the 
Church, but the world. He loved mankind "while we 
were yet sinners." God is proceeding with a great Plan 
of Salvation, which will reach every member of the race 
and bring to each an opportunity of full recovery from 
sin and death— either in this life or in the next. To this 
end Christ died for all. Since Pentecost the work of God 
has been the calling, testing, proving of a select class, a 
very loyal and very faithful class, to be joint-heirs with 



Jesus in a glorious Kingdom of Righteousness. This 
Kingdom is to be established in the earth, and is not only 
to overthrow Satan, Sin and Death, but to restore to 
human perfection all who will prove willing and obedient, 
under the light and opportunity then to be granted. 

In the meantime, the reign of Sin and Death has not 
been valueless. It has given most instructive lessons, both 
to angels and to men, respecting God's holiness and the 
reasonableness of His requirements. It has demonstrated 
that all of God's creatures must be holy, pure, in order to 
enjoy His blessings, which He provides for no others. 
Those who have some knowledge and appreciation of 
righteousness should be on the alert to serve righteousness, 
purity, Truth, in proportion as they perceive these 
and see the terrible results of sin and impurity. The 
whole world should know that only the earnest followers 
of Christ will gain the great prize of joint-heirship with 
Him in His Kingdom. Nevertheless, of the whole world 
it is true that "Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he 
also reap." 

In other words, as any serve sin, and debauch themselves 
and others, they degrade themselves in proportion 
to their knowledge and wilfulness in the matter. And in 
proportion as any seek to live justly, purely, soberly, in 
that same degree do they benefit others, and prepare 
themselves for a more favorable condition in the Resurrection. 
Although all fall asleep in death, each will come 
forth in the great Day of Resurrection, which will last a 
thousand years. They will come forth in more or in less 
favorable conditions, with more or with less shame and 
contempt, to receive few or many stripes, or punishments, 
according as they knew or did not know the Master's 
will— the way of righteousness. 

URGES DILIGENCE IN BIBLE STUDY 

If the Bible story were more fully understood, its reasonableness 
would appeal to larger numbers, and its influence 
would be a blessing, physically, morally, in every 
way. Let us be diligent in Bible study, along unsectarian 
lines. Getting near to God means to come in touch with 
the power of God, which gives the victory over sin in the 
heart, and which will fit and prepare true Christians for 
the great work of the future when they will be heirs of 
God and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, their Lord, in that 
Kingdom which is to bless all mankind, and for which we 
pray: "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth, 
even as it is done in Heaven." 

In the meantime, those in preparation for the work 
of the future, and co-laboring with God in the work of 
grace in their own hearts at the present time, should be 
glad to participate according to their opportunities in all 
moral reforms of the present time, or at least sympathetically 
to uphold the hands of those who are engaged in 
these reforms; as, for instance, the International Purity 
Federation. 



SEED-TIME AND HARVEST 

We are sowing, ever sowing, 

Something good or something ill 

In the lives of those around us— 
We are planting what we will. 

Not a word we say falls fruitless, 

Not a deed we do decays; 
Every thought and word and action 

Will be found in future days, 

When perhaps the hand that sowed them 
Shall itself have ceased to be; 

Still the record of their being 
Will live on eternally. 

Grant, then, Lord of all the harvest, 
That the seeds we daily sow 

May refresh the hearts of others, 
Spreading blessing as they grow. 

May each thought and word and action 
Be the growth of Christian love, 

To be found in coming ages 
In Thy garner-house above! 

Treasured there, in Thine own keeping, 
Just to prove our love was true; 

For the motive gives the value 
To the meanest thing we do. 

Charlotte Murray. 



R5361 : page 363 

JESUS AND THE CHILDREN 

-JANUARY 4.-MARK 9:30-41; 10:13-16.- 

"Gird yourselves with humility, to serve one another; 
for God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace 
to the humble. "-1 Peter 5:5. R.V. 

THE Master knew that the time of His death 

drew near. He wished to break the information 

gently to His loving disciples. 

Therefore He passed hastily through Galilee, 

en route for Capernaum, as stated in 

our lesson, rather seeking to avoid the curious. 

He desired this opportunity for 

breaking to His disciples the news of His 



soon-to-be-completed sacrifice. While He 

had previously declared that none could 

touch him because His hour had not yet come, now He 

declared that He would be delivered up into the hands 

of men, and that they would kill Him, and on the third 

day He would rise from the dead. 

But the disciples understood not and feared to ask 
explanation. They were only natural men; for none 
were begotten of the Holy Spirit until Pentecost. (John 7:39; 
Acts 1:8.) As Jews, they had the thought of the 
Messianic Kingdom uppermost in their minds. Jesus had 
authorized them to preach the Kingdom at hand, and had 
promised them a share in the Kingdom. Until now they 
were not ready for the further information that the 
Jewish nation would fail to accept Him, and that thus 
the Kingdom blessings would be put off for centuries. 

The Apostles had heard Jesus utter so many "dark sayings" 
and parables that they were bewildered, and wondered 
what interpretation to give to these words about 
His death and resurrection. But their minds naturally 
drifted to the great hopes that were before them— that 
Jesus would soon be the King, and they would then be 
in honored positions as His associates in the Kingdom. 
They even went beyond this, and disputed amongst themselves 
as respects the honorable positions they would occupy 
and as to which would be greatest— the Lord's 
prime minister. So little did they understand the great 
trials and disappointments which were only a few days 
in advance! 

Jesus gathered them about Him and inquired respecting 
their dispute; but they were ashamed to tell the 
topic. Then He gave them advice to the effect that the 
selfishly ambitious who would be seeking honor rather 
than service would be disappointed. In His Kingdom 
self-seekers would have the lowest place. As illustrating 
the matter He took a child and set him in their midst 
and said, "Whosoever shall receive one such little child 
in My name receiveth Me, and whosoever receiveth Me 
receiveth [not Me alone, but] Him that sent Me." 

By this the Master sought to show His disciples that 
it was not their own greatness that was to be considered, 
but God's favor. The humblest one amongst them, if 
favored by God, would have a high position. They were 
to have the spirit of sympathy and of appreciation of the 
Divine work of grace in each other. They were to receive 
each other as representatives of Jesus; and more, 
as representatives of the Father. If they entertained 
such views of one another, surely they would be kind 
and gentle toward all, and would seek to be helpful— "in 
honor preferring one another."— Romans 12:10. 

R5362 : page 363 

BLESSING THE CHILDREN 

The second part of our lesson recounts that the great 



Teacher was a lover of children even though, so far as 

the record shows, He did not generally give His time 

to them. When fond parents brought their children, 

desiring Him to bless them, the disciples, feeling that the 

Lord's time was too valuable to be thus used, rebuked 

them. But Jesus very earnestly directed that the children 

should be allowed to come. He took them up in 

His arms and put His hands upon them and blessed 

them, thus exhibiting His own sympathetic love and 

humility of heart. He could preach to one Samaritan 

woman by the well or take time to fondle children, notwithstanding 

the weight of the work that was upon Him 

and the fact that His course was nearly finished. 

But as the subject of the Kingdom was uppermost 
in His teachings and in the minds of His disciples, He 
took another opportunity of teaching them a lesson. 
They had, perhaps, been feeling too sure that they would 
be members of the Kingdom class. They had not yet 
learned what crucial tests would be applied to those who 
would be counted worthy to sit with the Redeemer in 
His Messianic Throne of glory and to participate with 
Him in blessing all the families of the earth. He therefore 
said: "Permit the little children to come unto Me, 
for of such is the Kingdom of God." 

We are not by these words to understand that the 
Master meant that His disciples, those whom He usually 
addressed in His discourses, would not be in the 
Kingdom, and that all in the Kingdom would be little 
children. Quite to the contrary. Little children will 
not be in the Kingdom at all. Only developed, tried, 
perfected characters will constitute the overcomers who 
will sit with the Master in His Throne. 

The thought that the Lord would impress here, as 
elsewhere expressed, is that even His twelve Apostles 
would not be in the Kingdom unless they became childlike, 
teachable, plastic, trustful. The proper child, unspoiled 
by its elders, is disposed to be very trustful; and, 
until deceived, it is disposed to believe every word of 
the parent and to trust implicitly to the parent's wisdom 
and power. All who become children of God must reach 
this condition of heart as respects the Heavenly Father. 
Whoever does not attain this condition will not be fit 
for the Kingdom. 

Impressing His subject still further, the Great 
Teacher said: "Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom 
of God as a little child, shall not enter therein." 
This expression clarified the subject. The followers of 
Jesus are not to be little children, but must be childlike, 
because only the childlike followers will ever participate 
in the Kingdom. The receiving of the Kingdom mentioned 
evidently means the receiving of the Message of 
the Kingdom; for manifestly none can receive a kingdom 
until the kingdom has come or has been offered. 

Thus with the Jewish nation: The offer of the 
Kingdom came at the close of Jesus' ministry, when, 
after the manner of the kings of Israel, He rode into 



Jerusalem upon the ass, thus offering Himself as their 
King. The worldly scribes and Pharisees were too wise 
to receive Jesus, and plotted for His death. His disciples 
were as trustful as little children, and fully believed 
the Message of God's Word that there would be 
a Kingdom and the further Message that Jesus was the 
appointed King, who in due time would take His power 
and reign for the blessing of the world. 

This was illustrated when Jesus sat upon the ass. 
The multitude, crying "Hosanna to the Son of David! 
Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord!" 
treated Him as the King. The disciples, fully acquiescing, 
as little children, doubted nothing. On the other 
hand, the "wise" scribes and Pharisees called out that the 

R5362 : page 364 

multitude must be stopped from thus shouting. They 

should be told that Jesus was not the Messiah, that they 

were deceived. But Jesus merely answered that what 

they witnessed had been foretold by the Prophet Zechariah (9:9) 

—that there must be a shout. And the Lord 

declared that if the people did not shout the stones would 

be obliged to cry out, in order that the prophecy might 

be fulfilled.-Luke 19:40. 

It seems remarkable that, after all the Bible has said 
respecting Messiah's Kingdom and the work which it is 
to accomplish in the blessing of Israel and all the families 
of the earth, so few seem to believe the Message, 
so few seem to be willing to receive it as little children. 
The majority today, like the scribes and Pharisees of old, 
are too "wise" to believe in the possibility of the establishment 
of Messiah's Kingdom. They realize the 
need of the Kingdom, but they have certain theories of 
their own which blind them to the Truth. 

Some mistakenly hold that the Kingdom of Christ 
was set up at Pentecost and that He has been reigning 
ever since, conquering the world. Alas, how unreasonable 
this seems, when we know that even under the most 
favorable conditions the heathen of the world double 
every century! How strange that some Christians have 
prayed so long that God's Kingdom would come and rule 
the world and put down the wicked and exalt the obedient, 
until finally the Divine will would be done on earth 
as completely as it is now done in Heaven— and yet 
all this without really, properly believing that the Kingdom 
which was offered to Israel, and which they refused, 
is evidently to be established— at the Second Coming of 
Jesus and the resurrection change of His Church! 

Another large body of Christian brethren, Roman 
Catholics, hold still a different theory; namely, that 
Messiah's Thousand- Year-Reign began in the days of 
Pope Leo III, A.D. 800; and that He has reigned in the 
world ever since. This view holds that it was most 
necessary for Jesus to come a second time to establish 
His Kingdom; but that in the year 800 A. D., Jesus established 



His followers in kingly power, and made the 
Pope at Rome His representative and vice-gerent. The 
word vice-gerent, as we all know, signifies one who reigns 
instead of another. The claim is that Christ has been 
reigning for now eleven hundred and thirteen years, 
fully and officially represented by the Pope. 

Neither of these views is satisfactory, and neither 
is Scriptural. Surely the conquest of the world has not 
been going on for the last eleven hundred years, as we 
might have hoped, if God's time had come for Messiah 
to take the long-promised Kingdom. Surely what St. 
Paul said of his day is true now also: "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds of them that believe not" 
—"the children of disobedience"— to hinder the light 
of the glorious Gospel of Christ! 

The glorious Gospel of Christ is, "I will come again, 
and receive you unto Myself." His glorious Message 
further is that His Church shall sit with Him in His 
Throne, a Royal Priesthood; and that in His Day the 
righteous shall flourish and all the evil-doers shall be cut 
off in the Second Death. Well did the Apostle warn us 
not to depart from "the faith once delivered to the 
saints." Well were we told that many would depart from 
that faith, giving heed to spirits that would lead them 
astray and to doctrines of demons (1 Timothy 4:1), 
quite unlike the glorious, loving Gospel of God's Love, 
and His Mercy that endureth forever! 

Our Golden Text assures us that the Church, now 
being called to sit with Christ in His Throne in due time, 
must be girded with humility, as servants one of another; 
for God resisteth the proud and giveth grace to the 
humble. Therefore only the humble will receive the 
great gift of the Kingdom honors and opportunities. 



R5362 : page 364 

SEVENTY MINISTERS ORDAINED 

-JANUARY 11. -LUKE 10:1-24.- 

"It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you."— Matthew 10:20. 

MINISTERIAL ordination has for centuries 

been a bone of contention. Indirectly it 

has led to bloody persecutions in the past. 

Thank God! those days are gone, so far as 

the majority of Christians are concerned. 

And yet, because the masses do not clearly 

understand the subject of ordination, there 

is always danger of a recurrence of persecution 

along this line. Presbyterians, Baptists, 

Methodists, Lutherans, Episcopalians, 

all, have shared in these persecutions based upon misconceptions 



of ministerial ordination— in times past they 
persecuted each other along these lines. 

The claim was that none could be a preacher or 
teacher unless he had a special ordination; that for the 
unordained to preach or teach was a rebellion against 
Divine arrangement; and that all who followed his 
teaching or gave him support were heretics, and, as such, 
deserving of no sympathy, but rather of persecution. 

Ordination does not relate to a ceremony, or form, 
as many suppose. It signifies an authorization, a commission 
to preach. The Baptists commission those who 
agree with their creed to preach it. The Presbyterians so 
commission their disciples, as do the Lutherans, Methodists, 
etc. Roman Catholics and Episcopalians claim an 
ordination from God— that all their bishops are successors 
to the Apostles and armed with Apostolic authority; 
hence that any not commissioned, or ordained, by their 

R5363 : page 364 

bishops have no right to preach, but are heretics. From 
their standpoint, all other Protestants are heretics, 
preaching without authority. 

But the spirit of tolerance is growing; and within the 
last two years Episcopalians have lifted the embargo on 
other Protestants to the extent that an Episcopal minister 
may preach in the pulpit of another denomination, or a 
minister not ordained by the Episcopalians may be permitted 
to preach in their pulpits. But this is a very modern 
concession. 

The right thought of ordination is presented in the 
Study for today. Jesus had already appointed twelve to 
be His special Apostles; and now He ordained, or appointed, 
seventy more, not to be Apostles, but to be general 
ministers or missionaries. There was no ceremony 
connected with their appointment, or ordination, so far as 
the record shows. Jesus simply sent them out, telling 
them what to say. Our Golden Text explains the matter 
saying, "It is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your 
Father that speaketh in you." 

Strictly speaking, the Apostles had not yet received 
the Spirit of the Father directly. The Father's Spirit 
had been imparted to the Son, and it was the Son who 
shared that Spirit with those He sent out to preach in 
His name. The Father did not directly recognize, authorize 
or ordain any to preach the Gospel Message, until 

R5363 : page 365 

Pentecost. St. Peter there explains that the Holy 

Spirit shed forth upon the witnessing disciples was from 

the Father and by the Son. -Acts 2:32,33. 

Elsewhere it is explained that the Holy Spirit was 
not given previously because Jesus had not been glorified. 
It was necessary for Jesus to suffer, and to ascend on 
High and to present His merit on behalf of His disciples, 



before the Heavenly Father recognized them as sons 
of the new order and gave them the begetting of the Holy 
Spirit, the unction from the Holy One, the authorization, 
or ordination, to be His ambassadors and representatives 
in the world and, if faithful, by and by to be associates 
with Jesus in the Heavenly Kingdom, which for a thousand 
years is to bless the earth and roll away the curse. 

Only those whom God has ordained in the sense of 
giving them the Holy Spirit of sonship are in any wise 
commissioned, or authorized, to preach in the Lord's 
name. All the ceremonies on earth and all the hands of 
all the bishops cannot give authority to anybody to speak 
in the name of God. Our Lord Jesus did not begin His 
ministry until He had received God's ordination. At 
the time of His consecration and baptism the Holy Spirit 
came upon Him, anointing Him, consecrating Him, authorizing 
Him, to preach the good tidings to the meek, to 
bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the 
captives, to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord, to 
comfort those that mourn.— Isaiah 61:1,2. 

The same Holy Spirit is authority for anybody who 
has received it to tell all that he understands respecting 
the Plan of God to all who have an ear to hear— especially 
to the meek, the broken-hearted, those who are 
feeling after God. While the Apostle Paul intimates that 
the female members of the Church are not to preach publicly, 
this does not interfere with the fact that all of 
them who have received the Holy Spirit have the anointing 
to preach and to teach according to the limitations 
and opportunities of their sex. And sometimes the private 
teaching is equally as effective as the more public. 

The forty years which closed the Jewish Age, beginning 
with John the Baptist and ending A.D. 70 with 
the destruction of Jerusalem, was the Harvest period for 
typical Israel. It witnessed the gathering into the Gospel 
garner of all the true wheat and the entire setting aside 
of the remainder, the chaff, in a great time of trouble, 
symbolically called fire. The Lord, in Matthew 13, intimates 
that in the end of this Gospel Age there will be a 
similar Harvest. Many believe that it began in 1874 
and will end in 1915. 

All of the Lord's faithful ones at the close of the Jewish 
Age were to recognize the great privilege of being 
engaged in the Harvest work, and the same must be true 
now. The Lord's followers are compared to gentle, inoffensive 
lambs and sheep, while the selfish, unregenerate 
world He pictures as wolves. In the Jewish Harvest He 
would not have them beg their way from house to house, 
but inquire for the most worthy people in every village, 
and, if received, remain there until they had given their 
witness in that village. They were to depend wholly upon 
the Lord, and to make no attempt to provide for their 
needs. This was to be to them a lesson for their future 
benefit. Later, Jesus sent forth His disciples, telling 
them to provide for their wants to the best of their ability 
—implying that the first experience had been a special 



one, to give them confidence and reliance in the Divine 
Power that they represented. 

The Master's Spirit was given to them in such measure 
that they were enabled to do as He did— to heal the 
sick, cast out devils, etc. We are not to understand that 
there is such an authorization of the Lord's people today. 
Conditions have changed. The healing of spiritual 
sickness, blindness and deafness, greater works than 
those, is the privilege of the Lord's people today. 

The one Message of the disciples was that the Kingdom 
of God had come nigh. Whoever could be influenced 
would be influenced by that Message. God's Kingdom 
had been waited for by the Israelites for many centuries. 
But alas, when it was presented, only a comparatively 
small number of the Jews were ready to receive it! 
Thereafter the Kingdom offer was taken away from 
them, and has since been given throughout the whole 
world, gathering the elect class from every nation to be 
Messiah's Bride and Joint-heir, through whom shortly 
the Kingdom will be established in the earth and its 
blessings be bestowed far and near upon all of the race. 

The Master referred to His preaching and mighty 
works in Capernaum, Bethsaida and Chorazin. These 
cities were figuratively said to have been exalted in point 
of privilege; and, as having rejected the Lord's favors, 
they would be cast down to the grave. Examples were 
given of Sodom and Tyre, both of which then were in 
ruins— brought down to Hades, down to the dust. 

Our Lord intimates, however, that the trial, or testing, 
or judgment, which His preaching had given was not 
a finality— there would be a future judgment or trial. 
According to St. Paul the entire Millennial Age is to be a 
thousand-year Judgment Day, in which the whole world 
is to be brought to a knowledge of the Truth, to a full 
opportunity of coming to a knowledge of God. (Acts 17:31.) 
Nevertheless, those who heard Jesus unmoved 
had hardened their hearts, and would be correspondingly 
disadvantaged in the Judgment Day. Jesus put the matter 
very strongly when He implied that it would be tolerable 
for those people, but more tolerable for Sodom, 
because its sin had been against less light and privilege. 
See also Ezekiel 16:48-63. 

Concluding, the Master assured His messengers that 
whoever heard them and despised them despised Him 
and the Father. This same thing is true undoubtedly of 
all whom the Lord has ordained and sent forth as ministers 
of the Gospel— the truly ordained. 



R5363 : page 365 

WILL THE EARTH BE BURNED? 

WE are obliged to antagonize, not only the Second 
Adventist views, but the teachings of 



all the orthodox creeds of Christendom 

when we declare that according to the Bible 

our world is never to be burned up— 

except in a figurative, symbolic sense. The 

Bible teaches that at the close of this Age 

a great trouble will be precipitated, which 

will destroy, consume or figuratively burn 

up, present institutions— ecclesiastical, religious 

and social. The raging fire will be anarchy; and 

its horrible result will be, according to the Bible, the 

ashes of present institutions. 

For six thousand years the world has had its ups 
and downs, individually and nationally. Christianity has 
influenced some, and Churchianity has influenced more. 
The true Christianity has produced the true saints, who 
have followed in the Master's footsteps and, like Him, 
have been treated as the filth and offscouring of the earth 
—while they live— after death to be honored as saints 
and heroes. Churchianity has a form of godliness without 
its power. The form has in many respects helped 

R5363 : page 366 

along to influence and power in the world, leading often 
to the perpetration of horrible crimes in the name of 
Christ and His Church. 

Now, as the Gospel Age is closing and the Messianic 
Age is dawning, the lifting of the curtain of the New 
Dispensation is producing wonderful results amongst men. 
Darkness, ignorance, superstition, are fleeing before the 
light of the New Day. The world is awakening because 
it is Morning. Human thought is quickened; and the 
wonderful inventions of our day— steam power and electricity 
—are carrying the thoughts of men to each other 
the world over. The printing press and the mail are potent 
factors in the awakening. Knowledge is filling the 
earth, as the Lord through His Prophets declared would 
be the case at this time.-Isa. 11:9; Hab. 2:14; Dan. 12:4. 

But this knowledge is coming to people who at heart 
are unprepared for it. The hands of the ignorant and 
unlearned are stretched forth to grasp the throttle of 
power— political, social, religious and financial. Wrongs 
are recognized; but those who seek to remedy them will 

R5364 : page 366 

only make a bad matter worse. All must yet learn that 
the world's only hope is in God's provision— Messiah's 
Kingdom. 

But before this lesson is learned, the spirit of 
discontent stirred up by knowledge will grasp the opportunities 
and gradually and ignorantly, unintentionally, will cause the 
great wreck of our present social, religious, political and 
financial institutions in "a Time of Trouble such as 
never was since there was a nation"— "no, nor ever shall 
be again. "-Daniel 12:1; Matthew 24:21. 



This great cataclysm of trouble, which all intelligent 
people perceive with more or less distinctness, is described 
in the Bible under various symbolic terms. Sometimes 
it is described as a whirlwind; at other times the 
description is that of a storm; again, of a great tidal 
wave— the sea (representing the masses) will swallow up 
the mountains (representing the kingdoms). (Psalm 46:2,3.) 
Again it is described as a fire, which will consume 
the whole earth. (Zephaniah 1:18; 3:8.) Yet in each case 
there is connected with the symbol something to show 
that it is merely a symbol, and that the utter destruction 
of humanity is not meant. As, for instance, after describing 
the storm, the Lord through the Prophet declares 
that He will command the nations to be still and to recognize 
Him as God, and that the result will be a great 
calm. (Psalm 46:8-10.) In the case of the fire, we read 
that after it has consumed the whole earth (the social 
fabric), then the Lord will turn to the people a pure 
language, a pure Message, that they may all call upon the 
name of the Lord to serve Him with one consent— 
Zephaniah 3:9. 

Evidently, the fire which will consume the earth must 
be a symbolic fire of trouble, consuming the symbolic 
earth, or social conditions, because the people still remain 
and are to receive the Lord's blessing. The pure Message 
that will then be given to the world will be in strong 
contrast with the confused messages of the contradictory 
creeds which for centuries have been given to the world, 
and which many of the world's thinking minds have been 
unable to appreciate or receive, and which have perplexed 
Christian minds. 

Let us, therefore, take the Word of the Lord and reject 
the messages of all the creeds of Christendom. Let 
us not for a moment think that the literal earth is to be 
burned up at the Second Coming of Jesus; but, quite to 
the contrary, let us believe St. Peter's statement that at 
that time will begin "the Times of Restitution of all things 
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all the holy 
Prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) Let 
us remember the declaration of Scripture that "the earth 
abideth forever." (Ecclesiastes 1:4); that "God Himself 
formed the earth and made it; He hath established 
it, He created it not in vain, He formed it to be inhabited." 
-Isaiah 45:18. 

Let us remember that the world has never yet been 
inhabited. Vast territories have not yet been explored by 
man. Let us remember that God's promise respecting 
the earth is that, as Heaven is His Throne, so "the earth 
is His footstool," and He surely will make the place of 
His feet glorious. (Isaiah 66:1; 60:13.) Messiah's Kingdom 
will not only uplift humanity, but will also bring 
blessings of perfection to the earth. Eden eventually 
will be world-wide. "The desert shall rejoice and blossom 
as the rose." 



R5364 : page 366 

PROFITABLE BIBLE STUDY 

FROM A.D. 325, the date of the making of 

the first general Church creed, the Nicene 

Creed, down to the Reformation, a period 

of twelve hundred years, there was no 

Bible study except that which was done 

here and there in secret, for fear of persecution. 

The theory prevailed that the 

bishops were apostolic bishops, successors 

to the twelve Apostles of the Lamb; and 

that to ignore them and go back to the 

teachings of the New Testament was heretical, a crime. 

Following those twelve hundred years of no Bible 
study came two or three hundred years in which, under 
compulsion, the bishops allowed the people to have the 
Bible, but forbade them to read it for themselves without 
the interpretations and explanations of the supposed-to-be 
apostolic successors. Thus Bible study was handicapped; 
for the people were given to understand that 
misunderstanding of the Bible would mean heresy, and 
that heresy would mean everlasting torture. 

Only now are Bible students beginning to emerge from 
under the great cloud of false doctrine which for fifteen 
hundred years has misrepresented God and the Bible, 
putting darkness for light. Only now can Bible study 
be prosecuted in its true spirit, without the fear of man, 
which brings a snare. Only now is there general education, 
which permits of Bible study in this true sense. 
Only now have we the convenient Bible, cheap and in 
every home. Only now have we more leisure and opportunity 
for Bible study. Only now have we good light by 
which to study. 

But alas! now that we are ready and fully equipped 
for Bible study, we are handicapped, trammeled by 
wrong doctrines which have become lodged and fastened 
in memory. Some of these came from the creeds, some 
of them from hymn books, some of them from preaching 
and some from tracts. As a result, we are filled with 
misunderstandings and inconsistencies which cause the 
Bible to appear to be self-contradictory. So much is this 
the case that it is counted a fashionable thing in our 
day for intelligent people to laugh at the Bible and to 
deny its Divine inspiration. But the Bible is consistent 
with itself, and is thoroughly opposed to the doctrines of 
the creeds. These facts, however, need to be thoroughly 
learned before we can have full confidence in the Bible 
and fully appreciate it. These blessings are the portion 
of the Lord's people more and more, especially during 
the last thirty-five years. 

R5364 : page 367 



THREE EXCELLENT HELPS TO BIBLE STUDY 

Under all these circumstances the question of how 
to study the Bible so as to get its true meaning and avoid 
the errors of the past is a problem. Many Bible students 
believe that God has come to the rescue of His people 
in a time of need in providing helps for Bible students— 
the six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES. 

These volumes make no pretense of being Divinely 
inspired but, on the contrary, show from the Scriptures 
that no such Divine inspiration beyond the twelve Apostles 
was ever intended. They show, however, that it is 
in full harmony with the Bible to expect that, from time 
to time as necessity demanded, the Lord would raise 
up pastors and teachers for the assistance of the faithful 
in the study of the Scriptures— teachers who, without 
having plenary inspiration, would have, in a special 
manner, the guidance and blessing of the Holy Spirit, 
granted to all the Church. It is the belief of many that 
God has used the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES in the doing 
of such a teaching and pastoral work— guiding His 
people by pointing them to the Scriptures and suggesting 
interpretations which harmonize the Bible from Genesis 
to Revelation. 

The next question is, How can these helps for Bible 
study best be used by the Lord's people? That is a 
question which, in its last analysis, belongs to the individual 
Bible student or the classes of Bible students 
which desire to use them. There is no Divine command 
on the subject. Each individual and each class is at 
liberty to make use of whatever will be of assistance 
in the study of God's Word. In every case, however, it 
is to be remembered that no teacher, or book, takes the 
place of the Bible, but merely points to and expounds it 
as the Word of God. 

Many thousands of the Lord's people have testified to 
great blessings received from the use of these Bible keys 
in their own individual private reading and study. Hundreds 
of Bible students' classes in all parts of the world 
are using them, and, they claim, with great profit. We 
recommend them to all. The Watch Tower Bible and 
Tract Society has issued little booklets of questions on 
the different volumes of this series, and supplies them at 
very small cost. These are not generally necessary for 
individual study, but very helpful indeed in class study, 
because they pick the subject to pieces and stimulate 
the mind and memory in connection with the answers. 
The books are an assistance to the answers, supported 
by the Scriptures. These are styled Berean Bible Studies 
because it is the Bible that is being studied— not the 
question books nor the books that assist in giving the 
answers to the questions. 

We have also suggested another style of Berean 
Bible Studies, provided in the back of a specially prepared 
Bible of the Common Version. These are topical 
studies, and a variety of citations of Scriptures bearing 



upon such subjects is furnished. These are helpful 
studies, but in our judgment not nearly so well adapted 
to the majority of Bible study classes as the first named, 
which are supplemented by the question books. 

TWO METHODS CONTRASTED 

Sometimes opponents seem to make light of these 
methods of Bible study, and tell us that in their Bible 
classes they take up a certain chapter in the Bible and 
have a general discussion on it. Our reply is that if they 
have gotten knowledge, light and truth in this way, it 
proves it to be a good method. If they, on the contrary, 
obtain no satisfactory results, but merely a wrangle 
and a variety of expressions, none of which are very 
satisfactory, then this would appear not so very advantageous 
a course to pursue. 

R5365 : page 367 

To decide the matter we suggest that a Bible study 
class which has been following the usual style of studying 
a chapter be brought in contest with a class which 
has been using our first described method of Berean Bible 
study. Let the two classes take up any Bible topic 
that may be suggested; and it will soon be ascertained 
that those who have been following our Berean Bible 
study plan know ten or twenty times as much about the 
Bible on every subject. 

These STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES have not sought 
to follow any human creed or theory, but merely to 
bring together the various Scriptures on a subject and to 
find the harmonious view reflected from these various 
passages. The method has proved itself so satisfactory 
to those who have tried it, that they would not now think 
of using any other method of Bible study, considering 
that all other methods are of little value in comparison. 
Nevertheless, the matter is purely for the individual or 
the class to determine which is for its own best interests, 
which will serve its purpose best. 



page 367 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 

OUR BELOVED PASTOR:- 

Having felt for some little time the especial and peculiar 
blessing which the Vow brings to those who make it their 

own, we, a few of the young members of the , Canada, 

Ecclesia, at this time take extreme pleasure in signing our 
names and forwarding the record to you. 

There is such entire satisfaction and rest of spirit to the 
New Creature in Christ Jesus who can make such an expression 
of complete immersion into His will as is expressed 



in the beautiful language and inner meaning of the Vow. 

Our hearts are continually full of love and gratitude to the 
dear Heavenly Father, who has sent us a servant to give such 
wonderful and delightful "meat in due season" to the Feet 
members of this Mystical Body, part of which we live daily 
in the Blessed Hope of becoming. 

Our hearts do verily burn within us as we talk over these 
"great and precious promises," and we are glad of the opportunity 
to add our names to the ever increasing list of those 
who are striving in every way to follow in His Steps, and 
who have taken the Vow. 

Your co-laborers in the Master's service, 
NINE SIGNATURES. 



MY DEAR PASTOR AND BROTHER:- 

Much Divine love and peace be thine throughout all eternity! 
I am writing to let you know that I have taken the 
Vow, and also to tell you of the many blessings which I have 
received and enjoyed as the results of your labors (as the 
dear Lord's honored Servant). 

I have been in touch with the Present Truth for three 
years, but have declined to give my all to the Lord and to 
consecrate my entire life to Him until recently. Finally I 
realized that I was receiving the grace of God in vain. Now 
I am continually thanking and praising my dear Heavenly 
Father for His goodness and kindness toward me for opening 
my eyes of understanding to see Him and His wonderful Plan 
of Salvation. 

Dear Brother, I am finding the morning Resolve a wonderful 
help to keep closer to the Lord. Praise His Holy 
Name! I sincerely ask your prayers that I may be more and 
more illuminated with this blessed Truth, and with the Holy 
Spirit, until I shall become one of the rays of the same great 
Fountain of light and Truth, with our dear Lord and all of 
the faithful in Him. 

Now praying God to ever bless and keep you to the end 
of the way, and to grant you an abundant entrance into the 
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, I remain, 

Your Brother in the One Hope of our calling, 
B. C. PALMER. -Okla. 



page 369 
