From Our Readers
Weight  I want to thank you from the bottom of my heart for the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Conquer My Obsession With Weight?” (May 22, 1999) For some time now, all I have been able to think about is my physique and my weight. I am ashamed of myself when I look in the mirror, and I hardly get on the scale anymore. After reading this article, though, I realize that it’s what’s inside that counts.
L. R., France
Disabilities  I spend most of my time in a wheelchair. My wife has chronic fatigue syndrome and suffers from deep depression. The series “Hope for the Disabled” (June 8, 1999) brought out that grieving is a normal reaction to serious loss. Also, the pictures in the article “When All Disabilities Will Disappear” helped make the future repair of our infirmities more of a reality to me.
C. W., United States
I lost my left foot in an accident when I was just four years old. Your series helped me to deal with my frequent bouts of depression. Please keep up the good work of combating prejudice.
A.J.T.P., Brazil
People need to know that disabled individuals have feelings and emotions like everyone else and that we can and do get hurt. People sometimes look at you as if you were a freak and make rude comments, or they act as if you did not even exist. Disabled people are neither stupid nor lazy nor helpless. Given a chance, many of us can cook, clean, shop, raise families, hold a job, and even operate a vehicle. One thing that has helped me to carry on is my learning about Jehovah and his loving and tender ways. I am not one of Jehovah’s Witnesses yet, but I hope to become one in the future.
A. G., United States
Value in God’s Eyes  I often feel depressed and worthless, sometimes thinking that I shouldn’t be a full-time evangelizer because my efforts aren’t good enough. The article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: You Have Value in God’s Eyes!” (June 8, 1999) made me feel a lot better. It helped me to see that Satan tries hard to make us feel that way in order to stop us from serving Jehovah.
L. W., Canada
The article was very comforting. Until now, I have felt as though Jehovah were not listening to my prayers. But since reading your article, I have more confidence in Jehovah and in myself. Please continue printing comforting articles like this.
R.V.T., Belgium
I bear the scars of painful experiences—mistakes that robbed me of my self-esteem. Today my relationship with Jehovah and the knowledge that his love is beyond human comprehension give me a feeling of happiness and security.
V.S.C., Brazil
I have just finished listening to the article on audiocassette. I have been blind for about 44 years, and even after getting baptized as a Christian, I never thought that I was worth very much. This article moved me deeply. I thank God so much that he does not see us the way we see ourselves.
A. K., Italy
I have been plagued with negative emotions. But as I read the article, it was as if Jehovah were gently talking to me. It is very hard to change thinking patterns, but I will try not to forget what the article said: “Jehovah, like a loving parent, ‘is near’—ever watchful, attentive, and ready to help.—Psalm 147:1, 3.”
K. F., Japan

