The Great Designer Revealed
EVEN many scientists would agree that the so-called book of nature leaves a reasonable mind with no doubt that there is a Designer, a Creator. Long ago the Christian apostle Paul wrote that God’s “invisible qualities are clearly seen from the world’s creation onward, because they are perceived by the things made, even his eternal power and Godship.” (Romans 1:20) But the book of nature is not a complete revelation of God and of his will. It does not, for example, reveal the purpose of life. Thankfully, creation’s Author has revealed himself in another book—his inspired Word, the Bible.—2 Timothy 3:16.
Though not a science book, the Bible answers all the vital questions that the natural world does not. It answers one of the first questions most people ask when studying a brilliant piece of handiwork—Who made it? Regarding creation, note what the Bible says at Revelation 4:11: “You are worthy, Jehovah, even our God, to receive the glory and the honor and the power, because you created all things, and because of your will they existed and were created.” Yes, the Great Designer is Jehovah God, and his name appears some 7,000 times in the original manuscripts of the Bible.
About 3,500 years before our scientific era, a man by the name of Job, obviously a keen observer of nature and a thinking person, associated Jehovah’s name with creation. Job said: “Ask, please, the domestic animals, and they will instruct you; also the winged creatures of the heavens, and they will tell you. Or show your concern to the earth, and it will instruct you; and the fishes of the sea will declare it to you.” What do they all teach about creation? Job answers with a question: “Who among all these does not well know that the hand of Jehovah itself has done this?”—Job 12:7-9.
Jehovah’s Purpose for Humans
The Bible also reveals Jehovah’s purpose for humankind. What is that purpose? It is that righteous humans enjoy the gift of everlasting life in Paradise—right here on earth. “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it,” says Psalm 37:29. Similarly, Jesus said: “Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.”—Matthew 5:5, King James Version.
Furthermore, thanks to a special kind of knowledge, the earth will remain a peaceful paradise. Says Isaiah 11:9: “They will not do any harm or cause any ruin in all my holy mountain; because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” In fact, “the knowledge of Jehovah” is the key to endless life, peace, and happiness. Jesus confirmed this when he said: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”—John 17:3.
In gaining everlasting life, humans will at last be able to enjoy the earth as God originally intended. And far from being boring, eternal life will be an endless adventure of discovery and joy.
A Thrilling Challenge!
Ecclesiastes 3:11 says: “Everything [God] has made pretty in its time. Even time indefinite he has put in their heart, that mankind may never find out the work that the true God has made from the start to the finish.” Soon, with the natural human desire to live to “time indefinite,” or forever, completely satisfied, we will be able to try to ‘find out the work God has made from the start to the finish.’ Yes, the whole earth will be our classroom, Jehovah will be our Teacher, and life will be a thrilling, unending voyage of discovery.
Picture yourself in Paradise, perfect in mind and body. You embrace challenges that you would not even dream of accepting now—and you know that you will be able to see them through to the very conclusion, whether that takes a hundred years or a thousand. Perhaps you may even be able to use your perfect faculties to copy some of Jehovah’s designs—but in ways that are far superior to mankind’s present efforts, which often harm and pollute. Yes, like Jehovah, you will be governed by love in all that you do.—Genesis 1:27; 1 John 4:8.
Why do we know that this is not just fanciful dreaming? Because of Jehovah’s two magnificent “books.” Yes, the Bible and creation furnish irrefutable proof that nothing is impossible for our Grand Designer and Creator. So why not get to know him and his Son, Jesus Christ, better now? You could not engage in a more interesting, worthwhile, and promising endeavor.
[Pictures on page 10]
The Bible and the book of nature reveal the Great Designer

