VOL. XXXV APRIL 15 No. 8 
A. D. 1914-A. M. 6042 



CONTENTS 

Who Commits the Sin Unto Death?-Partl 115 

First Step Toward True Conversion 115 

New Creature Handicapped by Flesh 117 

"His Loving Kindness, O How Great!" 118 

"I Love to Tell the Story" 119 

The Great Day of Judgment, Etc 120 

Great Day of the Lord Now Present 1 20 

Church Federation Now Forming 121 

"Rich to Hell— Poor to Heaven" 122 

The Rich Man of the Parable 123 

"A Great Gulf Fixed" 123 

Dives' Five Brethren 124 

We Are Unprofitable Servants 124 

A Forgiving Spirit Necessary 125 

Faith Power— Credulity Power 125 

Christ-Likeness the Evidence of Sonship 126 

Profession Alone Insufficient 126 

How We Can Walk as He Walked 127 

Some Interesting Letters 127 

Berean Bible Studies, Vol. II 127 

page 114 



PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agencies:-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as Follows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



COLUMBUS, OHIO, CONVENTION 

The Ohio Capital city has been selected as a central location 
for a General Convention this year. The dates are almost 
identical with those apportioned to Clinton, Iowa; they 
are June 26 to July 6. Able speakers will attend both conventions. 
Brother Russell expects to be present at both. 



R5451 :page 114 

THE PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION 

We are being swamped with applications for the PHOTO-DRAMA. 
Evidently the whole country wants it. Not only is 
our supply of pictures inadequate, but we would not have 
nearly enough operators to meet the demand; and the rent for 
the theatres would be impossible for us to pay. 

Under these conditions we shall be limited at first to the 
larger places. Later on, the DRAMA can be extended to smaller 
places. But do not expect too much; we cannot work miracles. 
Before the summer is ended we hope to have the work 
so expanded as to be able to reach many more cities and 
towns. Our plan for the present must be to prepare duplications 
of the DRAMA and to offer it free with booth operator 



to such cities as indicate their ability, willingness and desire 
to furnish suitable auditoriums, supply ushers, etc. Please 
exercise a little patience. Be assured the Society is doing all 
in its power to serve you and the Truth. Do not spend money 
going afar to see the DRAMA, but save your dimes to assist in 
getting it to your own town. 

We are pleased to remark that the public is taking a deep 
interest in the DRAMA, recognizing its educational value, the 
beauty of the pictures and the wider scope which it gives of 
human history. Unencumbered brethren of fair education and 
of experience as newspaper writers may be used in the work. 
We shall be glad to hear from volunteers. 



page 114 

BEREAN QUESTION BOOKS 

The six volumes of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES are being 
used as text books in Bible Study quite extensively. This led 
to the preparation of lessons, or questions, on the topics covered 
by the volumes. These are arranged in the form of Lessons 
for Berean Bible Classes. We now have these Question 
Books for all six volumes. Price postpaid, 5 cents (2-l/2d.) 
each, any quantity. 



R5438 :page 115 

WHO COMMITS THE SIN UNTO DEATH7-PART I 

"Whosoever is begotten of God doth not commit sin, for His 
seed remaineth in him; and he cannot sin, because he is 
begotten of God."-l JOHN 3:9. 

PRIVILEGES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND 
DANGERS OF THE NEW CREATURE 

THERE is a certain amount of complexity attaching 
itself to questions relative to the 
Church's change of nature from human to 
spiritual. In order clearly to understand 
the initiatory process of that change, the 
begettal of the Spirit, we should have a 
proper understanding of what constitutes 
the human will; for it is that will which is 
changed. 

We cannot think of anything better as an 
illustration of the subject than a legislative body, such 
as Congress or Parliament. In these assemblies, a large 
number of members sit in session; but they are divided 
into groups known as parties. Some members belong to 
one party, others to another. But the dominating party is 
in control. 



So it is in the human brain. There we have numerous 
organs, representing variously religious sentiments, intellectuality, 
morality, the affections, etc. Then there are 
some that represent energy; others, acquisitiveness; 
others, combativeness. These different faculties, when 
called to consider a question, divide themselves into 
groups, the strongest of which is very apt to sway the 
others. 

When, for instance, any matter involving the interests 
of self comes up for consideration, acquisitiveness being 
strong, may lead combativeness to fight for possession of 
the thing desired. It may also lead destructiveness to 
help in the fight. And it may to some extent drown the 
voice of justice, or conscience, and offset the quality of 
love; for acquisitiveness may have schemes which would 
interfere with the operation of love. 

On the whole, the organs which dominate the world 
are the organs of self-protection, self-gratification, etc.— 
all the organs whose names begin with the word SELF. 
Even if the religious organs— veneration, hope, benevolence, 
spirituality, etc.— are strong, the selfish propensities 
generally overpower them, so that they co-operate with 
selfishness. For example, benevolence overpowered by 
the selfish propensities, will say, I will give some money 
to this project, in order that it may show a large return; 
but I will not give it unless it show such return. Thus the 
quality of acquisitiveness and others pertaining to self 
will go into agreement with benevolence, by bending it to 
the service of self. 

It is the usual thing to see such combinations in 
worldly people today. There are generous men with 
naturally noble impulses which they like to gratify. But 
in all that they do, SELF has become the preponderating 
factor. SELF gets in somewhere— self-esteem, self-interest, 
etc. This combination makes the selfish man; and 
though he may have considerable benevolence, veneration, 
etc., yet these noble qualities are under control of 
the selfish propensities. 

FIRST STEP TOWARD TRUE CONVERSION 

To this selfish man the Gospel comes, and offers a 
proposition which is unique, peculiar. It appeals to him 
through a new set of organs. It shows him that he should 
put God first, not self; that he should begin to see that the 
highest and noblest organs of the brain are those which 
recognize the Creator and man's responsibility as His 
creature. It shows him that he is thinking of self-aggrandisement, 
self-honor, self-everything ! 

Such a person, hearing the Gospel proposition, may 
be influenced to decide the matter either one way or the 
other. He may say, I do not like that thought. Selfishness 
may suggest that if he accepts the Gospel offer he 
must stop his questionable business methods. Then he 
concludes that he does not care to take such a step; for it 
would demand more than he is willing to give, and he 



might have trouble with his conscience. Later on, perhaps, 
something in the nature of adversity or calamity will 
awaken him to take a different view of matters, and he 
will see the subject in a different light and be glad to do 
God's will. Then he may say, I realize that my life must 
be different. I am God's creature. Therefore it is right 
that I should consecrate my all to Him. But I see that 
consecration will work a great transformation in my life. 
I shall be obliged to change my course. I must drop certain 
habits. 

This is the first step of true conversion. This is a 
turning from sin toward righteousness. It does not follow, 
however, that the person who takes this step will come 
up to the Divine requirements of a disciple of Christ. The 
rich young ruler who asked Jesus what he should do to 
gain eternal life was told to keep God's commandments. 
He replied that he had done this all his life. And Jesus 
loved him! The young man was trying to do right in 
everyway. Was he not all right then? No! Jesus said 
to him: "One thing thou lackest. Go and sell all that 
thou hast and distribute unto the poor, and then thou 
shalt have treasure in Heaven; and come, follow Me." 

The young ruler thought this strange advice: for he 
had all along been living a most exemplary life. He was 

R5438 :page 116 

correct in his estimate of himself; but he was merely 
doing his duty in so living. No one has a right to live a 
bad life; no one has a right to do wrong. That he was 
merely doing his duty— no more— was practically what 
Jesus told the young man. 

Continuing, the Master said: I have only one offer 
to make, but it is a very high one— join t-heirship with Me 
in the Messianic Kingdom. The life into which you may 
enter by becoming My disciple is a life of glory, honor 
and immortality— the Divine nature. If you desire this 
high position, you must do more than merely avoid sin. 
God is now calling for sacrificers. If you do not sacrifice 
yourself, you cannot become My disciple; for those only 
who thus sacrifice are received of the Father and begotten 
of the Holy Spirit, and can share My glory. Those only 
will be granted a part in the First Resurrection. And the 
young ruler "went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. 
Alas; how many are likeminded! 

R5439 :page 116 

To turn away from sin is but a step toward conversion. 
That movement is an antitypical going toward the Tabernacle. 
"Draw nigh unto Me, and I will draw nigh unto 
you," is the Father's proposition. The Word of God 
points out to the seeker that only through Christ who 
gave Himself as our Ransom, can any come to the Father. 

He is also instructed that if he would retain God's 
favor he must become a disciple of Christ, by laying down 



his life in the service of the Lord and the brethren, doing 
good unto all men as he has opportunity. In this way he 
may become a member of Christ's Body. Then, after a 
while, if faithful unto death, he will have a share in the 
glory and honor which the Father has given our Lord. 
He will become a joint-heir with Jesus in the Kingdom. 

WHAT CONSTITUTES A NEW CREATURE? 

So this one becomes a New Creature when he has accepted 
the Divine will in this sacrificial sense; or, as the 
Scriptures present it, when he has made a full consecration 
unto death. "Gather My saints together unto Me," 
saith the Lord, "those that have made a covenant with 
Me by sacrifice." (Psalm 50:5.) Those accepting this 
call to enter into sacrifice are received of the Father; 
then they are begotten of the Holy Spirit. Thenceforth 
they are New Creatures: To them "old things are passed 
away, and all things are become new."— 2 Cor. 5:17. 

The question may arise: What part of the individual 
becomes the New Creature? It is the will that becomes 
new. The will is the determination, or decision, of the 
majority of those organs of the brain which form the 
mentality. The will considers the matter: Shall I continue 
to sin? No; I will abandon sin. Shall I go further 
and make a full consecration of myself to God? Yes; I 
will make this consecration. 

When he does so, God accepts him and begets him of 
the Holy Spirit, thus making him a New Creature. He 
makes up his mind— he determines the matter. He 
changes the direction of his will. At one time his will 
was inclined to sin. That was wrong. Then his will 
turned toward righteousness. This was right, so far as 
it went; but it did not make him a New Creature. Then 
he came to the place where He said, Lord, I consecrate 
my life to Thee— myself, with all my aims, hopes and 
ambitions. Thenceforth he is counted as dead to the 
world, and reckoned alive toward God, as a spirit being. 
This new will, this new mind, then, with its Heavenly 
hopes and aspirations, constitutes the New Creature. 

THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE NEW CREATURE 

To be begotten of one signifies to be a son of that 
father. The Only Begotten of the Heavenly Father— the 
only one directly so begotten— was our Lord Jesus— God's 
Son. And all the Church are also recognized as being 
sons of God; "and if sons, then heirs, heirs of God and 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ." The first One of the spirit-begotten 
class was our Lord Jesus. When the Holy Spirit 
was given Him at Jordan, in this begetting sense, He was 
no longer counted of God as the Man Jesus. But He had 
this treasure of the new nature in an earthly body, an 
earthen vessel, until He finished His sacrifice at Calvary. 
Then, in the resurrection, God gave Him a perfect spirit 
body of the Divine nature. 



So it is with all of Jesus' disciples: They are invited 
to surrender themselves to God, consecrating their earthly 
interests to become followers of the Master. Jesus states 
the conditions: First, faith in Him as the Messiah, the 
Redeemer; and second, denial of self and the taking up 
of the cross and following Him. These New Creatures 
are all sons of God, though the world does not understand 
that they are in any way different from others in their 
relationship to God. "The world knoweth us not, because 
it knew Him [the Master] not." (1 John 3:1.) This 
new mind must increase. This New Creature must grow 
in knowledge and capacity. 

All of this makes the individual now very different 
from what he was as the old creature. If by nature he 
was depraved, and had violent passions prevailing in his 
flesh, he will now, having a better mind, be guided in the 
way of the Lord, and gradually become a copy of God's 
dear Son. This copy is primarily a heart-copy, though the 
change by degrees affects his life, bringing his body more 
and more into conformity to the new mind. 

THE NEW CREATURE ON TRIAL 

Since this new mind, the new will, the spirit-begotten 
New Creature, has its present residence in the old body, 
and since this body, the New Creature's only instrument 
of operation, has still its old tendencies toward sin— its 
weaknesses, its depravities— therefore there is a continual 
struggle between the New Creature and the old. It is a 
daily warfare, and either one or the other must perish. If 
the New Creature be not alert, thoroughly active, thoroughly 
loyal to God, the weaknesses of the flesh will 
gradually assert themselves, and the New Creature will be 
in danger of death. 

If, on the contrary, the New Creature remain loyal to 
God, the old creature will perish. The one or the other 
must die before the conflict is over. It is a fight to the 
finish. And this conflict is a test of the New Creature— 
not of the old creature. The New Creature has been 
called to glory, honor and immortality. In order to attain 
this state, it must prove unquestionably its loyalty to God. 
In proportion as the new mind controls, and we love righteousness 
and hate iniquity, in that same proportion shall 
we have strength in battling with the forces outside, with 
the conditions of the present time; and the greater success 
shall we have in battling with our own flesh. 

In this warfare there may be sometimes more and 
sometimes less success. But not until the victory is won 
will the Lord grant the reward. "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with Me in My Throne." The thing to 
be demonstrated is loyalty to God, loyalty to the principles 
of righteousness, and to our covenant. Those who are 
most loyal and most devoted to God will come off "more 
than conquerors" and will gain the highest reward, will sit 
with Jesus in His Throne. 

Some will come off overcomers, but not on so high a 



plane, needing the special tribulations to assist them. But 
even though they fail to come to the highest standard, they 
will, nevertheless, come off overcomers; else they would 
never get any share in the Heavenly reward, nor life at 

R5439 :page 117 

all. These will form the Great Company, who come up out 
of the great tribulation and wash their robes and make 
them white in the blood of the Lamb. (Revelation 7:14.) 
They will be greatly favored in that they will be the honored 
servants of the glorified Bride class, who are to constitute 
the "more than conquerors." 

FALLING INTO TEMPTATION NOT SIN 

During this time of battling between the New Creature 
and the imperfections of the body in which the New 
Creature resides, the new mind should be developing and 
growing gradually stronger. The will of the body was 
reckoned entirely dead before the individual could be 
counted a New Creature. But the body has the old brain, 
which has the same tendencies as formerly. The work 
of the new mind is to bring this body into full subjection 
to the will of Christ. The child of God may, however, be 
attracted by business or pleasure, which may lead him as 
a New Creature into more or less of stupor. In such 
stupid condition of the New Creature, the flesh, wide 
awake, might get the advantage, not because the child of 
God has wilfully sinned, or because he has been intentionally 
negligent, but because he has yielded more or less to 
temptation. But it is one thing to yield thus under temptation, 
and another thing to go deliberately into sin. Whoever 
sins wilfully is counted a child of Satan, because he 
has Satan's spirit instead of God's spirit. 

If any of those who were once begotten of God should 
get into that attitude where they would wilfully desire to 
commit sin, it would indicate that they had ceased to be 
sons of God and had become sons of Belial. It would 
signify that the spark of the new life to which they had 
been begotten had become extinguished. "He that is begotten 
of God sinneth not." If he sin— deliberately, wilfully— 
he ceases that moment to be a son of God. Sons 
of God do not love sin. Any one, therefore, who would 
thus intentionally go into sin would give evidence that his 
new mind had entirely passed away, and that he had become 
dead to God, even as previously in consecration he 
had become dead to the flesh. 

We believe that not very many have ever taken this 
step of bold opposition to God, wilfully and intelligently; 
and we hope that there will not be a great many to go 
into the Second Death. However, it is for God's people 
to keep as far away as possible from this disastrous condition. 
This condition is reached by a gradual process, 
step by step. When we come to God we first repudiate 
sin. Later we come to the point of presenting our bodies 



living sacrifices, and are accepted. So, contrariwise, those 
who repudiate righteousness usually go back gradually. 
Step by step of indulgence in sin gradually leads away 
from God, until the New Creature ceases to exist. 

NEW CREATURE HANDICAPPED BY FLESH 

When the Apostle John, in our text, says that those 
who are begotten of God sin not, he means that the sin is 
not wilful. Is there, then, any other way to sin than to 
sin wilfully? We answer, Yes. It is wilful sin that is 
unto death. The Scriptures tell us that "all have come 
short of the glory of God"— there is none perfect, "none 
righteous, no, not one." The righteousness which is imputed 
to the members of the Church, is imputed to their 
flesh. The New Creature itself is perfect. But as a New 
Creature the disciple of Christ desires to put off from its 
flesh all the former things of sin and death and to be 
fully conformed to the image and likeness of God. Yet 
he is more or less handicapped, not only by the imperfections 
of his own fleshly body, but also by the imperfections 
of others. He has to contend with the evil tendencies in 
his fallen nature, and also with those around him. 

R5440 :page 117 

The same Apostle declares that if any shall say he 
has no sin, the truth is not in him, and he is making God 
a liar. (1 John 1:8-10.) And these two statements of 
the same writer are in harmony. The statement of our 
text applies to the New Creature itself, and the other 
applies to his fleshly body. He cannot fully avoid sin in 
his flesh, on account of its weakness, and the deceptiveness 
and unfavorable conditions surrounding him. 

These New Creatures, however, can maintain themselves 
in the love of God and as sons of God. "We have 
an Advocate with God, Jesus Christ, the Righteous." (1 John 2:1.) 
God knows our weaknesses, and has made this 
very provision for us. The Apostle says we may keep 
ourselves in the love of God by keeping ourselves clean. 
"If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive 
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness." 
(1 John 1:9.) Our daily trespasses are to be acknowledged 
to the Lord, and forgiveness sought and obtained. 
Thus we pray daily, "Forgive us our trespasses as we 
forgive those who trespass against us." 

STRIPES FOR PARTIALLY WILFUL SINS 

If these trespasses are merely weaknesses of the flesh, 
or of ignorance or stupidity, they are sins which will be 
fully forgiven of the Lord on application. If they be sins 
in which the new mind has been slack, in which it has 
been more or less culpable, through lack of sufficient positiveness, 
then to that extent the New Creature must be 
held responsible. And for all such trespasses, for which 



the New Creature is in any way at fault, there will be 
stripes, or punishments. It is for this partially wilful 
portion of the sin that the New Creature is responsible. 
This does not come under the head of Original Sin and 
its resulting imperfections. 

A Christian might have a natural tendency to anger, 
and it might be impossible for him fully to control this 
tendency. Before he as a New Creature would be able to 
realize the situation, his natural tendency to lose his 
temper would involve him in trouble. The New Creature 
in such case should do everything possible to overcome 
this, through prayer and persistent effort, and if necessary, 
by imposing upon himself a penalty for every failure in 
this direction— some self-denial, perhaps. But if the New 
Creature should say, Well, that is my flesh; I cannot help 
it, he might receive stripes, and an earthborn cloud might 
arise between him and the Lord; and that one would be 
spiritually sick until he should return to the Father and 
make proper amends and be re-instated. If this attitude 
continued, it would seem to make against his ever becoming 
a member of the Little Flock. He would have to 
decide positively for or against the right. 

So, then, there are sins that are not forgivable, but 
punishable. If the transgression should come to the 
degree of full, wilful sin, it would be a sin unto death. 
This means that the New Creature had ceased to be; for 
the Spirit of God, operating in the sons of God, always 
makes for righteousness and hates sin. Whoso loveth 
God "keepeth himself, and that Wicked One toucheth 
him not."— 1 John 5:18. 

THE PURPOSE SERVED BY TRIALS 

But, as the Apostle states, we have this treasure of a 
new mind in an earthen vessel. We are a combination of 
the Heavenly and the earthly— a Heavenly will and an 
earthly body. Sometimes the body will put the New 
Creature to the test, urging it to give up this matter of 
consecration. So he has trouble; for the earthly body is 
merely reckoned dead. But God, in harmony with His 
promises, ignores the old nature— the earthly— and recognizes 

R5440 :page 118 

only the Heavenly, so long as the will is loyal; and 
He has promised grace sufficient for every time of need. 
As before stated, there may come a time when the new 
will temporarily becomes drowsy, dormant. This is a 
cause for serious concern; for then the New Creature 
is in grave danger. There must be a determined will, a 
positive will for God, which will keenly regret any temporary 
deflection; otherwise there is no New Creature. 
As the battling goes on between the new will and the old 
body, the new will becomes stronger and stronger, if it is 
properly awake to the situation. Yet God may permit 
the flesh to have more and more severe temptations. He 



allows the world and the Adversary to bring pressure to 
bear upon the flesh, so that He may test, prove, the loyalty 
of the New Creature. It was because our Lord was found 
faithful "unto death, even the death of the cross," that He 
was counted worthy of the Divine nature. So it is to be 
with His footstep followers. The Father knows just how 
much we can stand, and will never suffer us to be tempted 
beyond what we are able to bear, but with every temptation 
will provide a way of escape.— 1 Corinthians 10:13. 

WHY SOME FAIL TO OVERCOME 

So the experiences of the way go on. As the Apostle 
suggests we are risen to walk in newness of life— our resurrection 
is already begun. (Rom. 6:4; Col. 3:1.) And 
this new walk will become more and more courageous, 
more and more successful, in proportion as we respond 
to the Lord's touch— the disciplinary experiences. And 
if we allow Him to mould us as He wills, we shall finally 
finish our course and be brought forth in full resurrection 
from earthly, human nature to Heavenly, Divine nature. 
Then the new will that has all along been progressing in 
an earthly body will thereafter make progress in a spiritual 
home; it will have a body like unto that of the risen and 
glorified Jesus.— 1 John 3:1,2. 

In the case of those not overcoming fully, we find this 
condition; they yield more or less to the besetments of 
the Adversary, and strive to avoid being too peculiar, to 
avoid giving any offense to their friends. Thus they become 
more or less overcharged with the cares of this life, 
or with the deceitfulness of riches, pleasures, etc. The 
Apostle urges that these lay aside all such weights, and 
run with patience the race set before them. Such a class 
never for a moment think of giving up the race; but in 
due time they will be put through fiery tribulations, which 
will destroy their flesh. Nevertheless, they will fail of 
the reward of the High Calling, which the more faithful 
will receive. 

(TO BE CONCLUDED IN OUR NEXT ISSUE.) 



R5440 :page 118 

"HIS LOVING-KINDNESS, O HOW GREAT!" 

"Because Thy loving-kindness is better than 
life, my lips shall praise Thee."— PSALM 63:3. 

GOD has a kindness of nature and disposition, 
a loving-kindness, that is general, that goes 
out, in one sense of the word, to all of His 
creatures— not only the intelligent, but the 
unintelligent creatures of His hand. He 
bestows His kindness, His favors, upon the 



just and the unjust. He sends His sunshine 

and His rain upon the good and the 

evil. But there is a special loving-kindness, 

a special love which He reserves for those 

who have lovable qualities of heart— those who have such 

traits of character as permit Him thus to love them— just 

as every good person loves every other person who is 

good and noble-hearted. 

God has such a love for the holy angels. He had such 
a love for Adam before he sinned. And since the sin, 
He has a sentiment of loving-kindness toward those of 
Adam's race who, realizing their sin, desire to turn back 
to Him and to do His will. His loving-kindness has led 
Him to make a wonderful provision for these. He has 
provided that some shall be of the earthly nature, to receive 
the blessing of life everlasting here upon earth, after 
it has been brought to Edenic perfection. He has provided 
for others to be of the spiritual nature. Truly, 
"There's a wideness in God's mercy 
Like the wideness of the sea!" 

But God does not love the wilful sinner. This is 
in harmony with righteousness. We may love the 
ignorant, who violate the Law of God because of a lack 
of knowledge, of proper information; but we could not 
rightly love one who is wicked, whose intention of heart, 
of will, is to do wrong. God has no love for the incorrigibly 
wicked. "All the wicked will He destroy." He has 
arranged that only those who shall come into accord with 
His righteousness may enjoy the blessing of eternal life. 
These shall have an eternity of happiness; they shall be 
the recipients of His loving favor everlastingly. 

The Psalmist had a taste of the loving-kindness of 
God in his own experiences. When he was anointed to be 
king of Israel, he knew that he had found favor in God's 
sight. And later, when he did things that were wrong, 
God chastised him, punished him in love, because David 
was a man after the Lord's own heart— had a desire to 
do right— to do God's will. As the needle of a compass 
may under certain circumstances be detracted from its 
normal condition of pointing toward the pole, just so some 
attraction at times influenced David and led him into a 
wrong course. But as soon as the besetment was past, 
or he was led of the Lord to see his sin, his heart returned 
fully to Jehovah, as the needle of the compass returns 
and again points to the pole. Therefore King David 
declared that life without God's loving-kindness would be 
worth nothing to him; he would not appreciate his life 
if cut off from the favor of the Lord. This being the case, 
his lips would always confess the Lord— tell forth His 
loving-kindness, show forth His praises. 

R5441 :page 118 

OUR ANOINTING FAR SUPERIOR 

And this is still more true of us who are now the 



Lord's truly consecrated children, who are daily striving 
to serve Him and to follow the Master. We who by 
the grace of God have come into covenant relationship 
with Him since the Atonement for sin has been made have 
become sons of God, and have been begotten of the Holy 
Spirit. We have come thus into the anointed Body of 
Christ. We have not been anointed to an earthly throne, 
as was David, but our anointing does more: it anoints us 
to a Heavenly Throne, to share in the rulership of the 
entire earth. 

No king or emperor on any earthly throne can hope to 
reign for more than a few brief years. But those who shall 
be accounted worthy to reign with Messiah, to share His 
Throne, shall reign for a thousand years. And this is 
only the beginning of their glory. Our Father in Heaven, 
who is now training and preparing us for this glorious 
exaltation through His Only Begotten Son, with whom 
we are to reign, gives us the assurance that He will be 
with us to guide our way; that all things shall work together 
for good to us, because we love Him and are called 
according to His purpose. 

So we, above all other people in the world's history, 

R5441 :page 119 

have the loving-kindness of God manifested toward us. 
We have His exceeding great and precious promises. We 
are the recipients of His special love. And the more we 
appreciate this love and these glorious promises and the 
bountiful provisions of His grace, the more our hearts respond 
in gratitude, the more His loving-kindness becomes 
a reality to us, and the more are we ready to lay down 
our lives in His service. 

It was thus with Jesus. He preferred the Father's 
favor above all else. And He, through the Father's arrangement, 
opened up this new and living way for us, 
that we, by becoming His disciples, may share with Him 
God's special loving-kindness and matchless promises, 
granted only to those "who follow the Lamb whithersoever 
He goeth." Surely our lips shall praise our God! And 
not only so, but our pocketbooks, our bank accounts, and 
our influence shall praise Him! All that we have shall 
praise the Lord; and all that we ever hope to have! 

"I LOVE TO TELL THE STORY!" 

We who have come to realize our Father's unspeakable 
favor to us as better than this present life with all it could 
have to give, we who have joyfully laid upon His altar 
every earthly good thing, every hope and ambition, every 
power of our being, rejoice to tell the Good Tidings of 
Salvation to others. We rejoice to sound forth the praises 
of Him who hath called us out of darkness into His 
marvelous light. The Message is too good to keep! If 
we could not proclaim it, it would be as a burning fire 
shut up in our bones; so we must tell it. And we are 



willing that the telling of it shall cost us trouble, cost us 
money, cost us the misunderstanding and persecution of 
former friends, and possibly the breaking of home ties. 
We are willing that it shall cost us the frown of the 
world and of organized churchianity. 

TEXT APPLICABLE ONLY TO SAINTS 

The Prophet David in our text spoke prophetically of 
the Church of Christ. These words could apply to none 
other than saints of God. None but those who walk and 
talk with God would esteem His favor more precious and 
desirable than their earthly life. If we ask the average 
nominal Christian to weigh this matter, and tell us if he 
would exchange this life for the favor of the Lord— putting 
in one side of the balance all the good things, hopes, 
ambitions, family ties, social position, churchianity, esteem 
of men, and putting in the other side of the scale God's 
favor— he will hesitate, and will eventually decide in favor 
of the things of this life. 

The reason for this is that such do not highly appreciate 
Divine favor. They have heard and believed certain 
things about the Almighty, some of them true and 
some false; but the misrepresentation of God's character 
and Plan, together with the worldly influences surrounding 
them, have largely neutralized and offset and made noneffective 
the truths which they have learned, and they 
lack confidence in the things unseen. Hence worldly interests 
outweigh their appreciation of Divine favor— ten 
to one. 

Those who have, through the Plan of the Ages, come 
to see the loving-kindness and mercy of the Lord are, if 
they are children of God at all, being put to the test. If 
they are merely glad to find out that there is no place of 
eternal torture, and that God's loving Plan includes the 
whole human race, their hearts are not touched to responsiveness 
by this manifestation of His great love. 
They will go on their way, rejoicing that they have been 
delivered from the bondage of error, but will be like the 
nine lepers who were healed by the Master, yet did not 
return to give Him the glory, nor to offer themselves in 
service to Him. And these, alas, are the majority! We 
are now in the great day of proving. Who will be able 
to stand the test in this evil time? 

GOD THE SUN OF OUR SOUL 

This loving favor of God, which is so appreciated by 
the true saints, is not a favor respecting future prospects 
and hopes merely, but it is the blessed possession also of 
the present life. Gradually these come to prize the communion 
and fellowship of the Lord to such a degree that 
any interruption of this communion produces misery of 
soul. It brings an aching void that nothing else can fill. 
This sentiment is beautifully expressed in the hymn we 
often sing: 



"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 

I know no night when Thou art near; 

O, may no earth-born cloud arise 

To hide Thee from Thy servant's eyes!" 
The true child of God will walk so closely with Him 
that nothing, however sweet or precious to the natural 
man, will be permitted to shut from him his Father's face. 
This would be esteemed a calamity with which nothing 
else could compare. He would rather cut off anything 
as dear as a right hand, or pluck out of his life anything 
as precious as an eye, than that it should come between 
himself and his Heavenly Friend, whom He has 
come to love above all else beside. God is truly to these 
the Sun of their soul, without whom life would become 
the blackness of night. 

"THE DARKNESS HATETH THE LIGHT" 

Some professed disciples of Christ may say that a 
Christian life will not cost earthly friendships; that such 
an idea is an exaggeration; that it is an extreme view of 
what is required of a Christian; that a course which produces 
such a result is an unreasonable one. But no! 
Our Master's words are as true today as when they were 
spoken: "If ye were of the world, the world would love 
his own; but because ye are not of the world, therefore 
the world hateth you." (John 15:19.) The declaration of 
the Apostle still holds good: "Yea, and all who live godly 
in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution."— 2 Tim. 3:12. 

Why did the Master suffer the loss of social position 
and of favor with the churchianity of His day? Why 
did the Doctors of Divinity and the notables among the 
religionists hide their faces from Him? Why did they 
finally become so embittered against Him that they 
crucified Him? Was it because of evil-doing on His 
part? Nay; for He went about doing good. It was because 
He told the truth. He declared truths which they 
themselves recognized as such, but with which they had 
so mixed the "traditions of the elders" that they were too 
stupefied, drunken and blinded to take anything but a perverted 
view of our Lord's work and teachings. Their 
hearts were not in the right attitude before God. "The 
darkness hateth the light." 

The Master's persecutions came not from the outside 
world, but from the professed holy people of His time. So 
has it ever been since, and so is it today. Those who 
now oppose the Truth are not worldly people outside of the 
churches, with but few exceptions; but they are zealous 
sectarians, whom Satan has blinded with his false doctrines 
and misrepresentations. We are not to be surprised, 
therefore, that wherever the Truth goes it will be 
a Sword to separate, as our Lord declared. These conditions 
prove a test to the followers of Jesus. Are we 
willing to bear the hatred, the scorn, the contumely, which 
loyalty to the Truth brings? Is our Father's loving favor 
more, far more, to us than the favor and smiles of the 



R5441 : page 120 

whole world— even more, far more to us than life itself? 

THE GLORIOUS HARP OF THE AGES 

If so, we can go forth in His name, rejoicing as we 
go, praising Him with our lips, singing the New Song 
which he hath put into our mouths, "even the loving kindness 
of our God." It costs something to sing this song. 
Only those who have learned to play upon the Harp of 
God, who have all its strings attuned to perfect harmony, 
can properly render this "Song of Moses and the Lamb." 
Never until today has it been possible to produce such 
melody from this wonderful Harp; for never before have 
all its chords been properly placed and attuned. Now its 
music is entrancing! Then let us take this wonderful 
Harp of the Ages, and as we sweep its chords, let us sing 
with the spirit and with the understanding this wondrous, 
glad New Song ! 



R5442 : page 120 

THE GREAT DAY OF JUDGMENT-ITS NATURE AND OBJECT 

"Behold, the Lord cometh with myriads of His saints, 
to execute judgment upon all and to convince all that are 
ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds which 
they have ungodly committed." "Let the sea roar, and 
the fulness thereof, the world and they that dwell 
therein. Let the floods clap their hands; let the 
hills be joyful together before the Lord; for He 
cometh to judge the earth; with righteousness 
shall He judge the world, and the people with 
His Truth. "-JUDE 14,15; PSALM 98:7-9. 

THE above texts relate to the great Day of 
Judgment, which is to end the Gospel Age 
and inaugurate the Millennium. We should 
notice first of all what these texts do not 
say. They do not say that our Lord Jesus 
will come to destroy the earth, to burn up 
the world. They do not say that there will 
be a partial judgment at death, and that 
later all will be brought out of Heaven and 
Purgatory and a Hell of torment, which are 
their proper places, only to be sent back to these same 
places again. Not so. But this is supposed to be stated in 
the Scriptures, and is what we have thought. Our 
prejudices and misunderstandings have attached to the 
words of Holy Writ a wrong meaning. It is the Love of 
God which brings judgment to the world. 
The first judgment, or sentence for sin, was a sentence 



of death. Under that sentence the whole world was to 
perish, to be cut off from life, because of Adam's sin. But 
God had mercy, compassion, on humanity, and has provided 
that mankind shall have another trial, with experiences 
granted to enable them to realize the nature and results 
of sin. The first trial was a trial of Adam and Eve 
alone. Every member of the human family, however, will 
be given an individual trial for life everlasting, to demonstrate 
whether he will under favorable conditions come 
into harmony with God. 

CHARACTER THE BASIS OF JUDGMENT 

All hopes of eternal life for the race, therefore, hinge 
upon the results of that future trial. Men and women 
are in this life forming character— they are either improving 
or degrading themselves. Whoever is trying to 
do his best under present unfavorable conditions will enter 
upon that individual trial, or judgment, in a very much 
better condition than otherwise, and will progress more 
rapidly to perfection in that Day. 

The Church of Christ is an exception to this arrangement 
for the world. They will not have a part in that 
trial, because the Church is a special, called-out class, and 
will receive their trial in advance of the world. They are 
now on trial for life or death everlasting. But their trial 
is for life on the Divine plane. Those who are now 
being dealt with by the Lord will, if faithful, be with the 
Lord the Judges of the world in the next Age; as we read: 
"Know ye not that the saints shall judge the world?" (1 Corinthians 6:2.) 
It will be a time when punishments and 
rewards shall be meted out. 

Every evil-doer shall then be dealt with and receive 
punishment for his evil intent, and stripes for his correction. 
Every well-doer shall receive a reward. The 
work of that thousand-year Judgment Day will show men 
to what extent they are out of harmony with God, and 
will show them how to come into harmony with Him. By 
the conclusion of the Millennial Age none will be in 
ignorance. As it is written: "The earth shall be full of 
the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isaiah 11:9.) Furthermore, the Scriptures tell us that 
the judgments will be graded according to the light previously 
had and sinned against. The wilful sinner, after 
a hundred years' trial, will be cut off in the Second Death. 

All who shall make use of the opportunities of that 
time, making progress in character, will gradually go up 
the Highway of Holiness. They will be blessed more and 
more until they shall attain the full perfection of the 
earthly image and likeness of God which was lost in 
Adam. This will be the glorious outcome of the redeeming 
work of Christ. Then every knee shall bow and every 
tongue confess, to the glory of God. All who continue to 
prefer sin shall eventually be utterly destroyed in the 
Second Death. Then God will have a clean Universe. 



GREAT DAY OF THE LORD NOW PRESENT 

We are now in the beginning of this great Day of the 
Lord. All the forces which are to play a part in this 
mighty upheaval which is to introduce the Reign of Messiah 
are rapidly gathering. The nations of earth and all 
the various elements which form society as at present organized 
—political institutions, financial institutions, ecclesiastical 
systems, etc.— are now before the bar of Judgment, 
and are being found wanting. All Christendom is 
trembling before the mighty forces that are coming in 
today. Morals are at a low ebb. As the glorious Messenger 
of the Covenant is now present to sit as the great 
Judge, we may well ask the question propounded by God's 
Prophet of old: "Who may abide the Day [now present] 
of His Coming? and who shall stand when He appeareth? 
for He is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap. And 
He shall sit as a Refiner and Purifier of silver; and He 
shall purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and 
silver."— Malachi 3:1-6. 

Ah, the world is longing for the blessing ! Men are 
realizing more and more every day their great need of a 
strong arm to deliver them as they face the grave crisis 
which they feel is drawing very near; but they see not to 
what extent the inbred sin of man is incompatible with a 
Reign of Righteousness which is desired and so sorely 
needed. Before the help and the blessing can be realized 
the Day of Wrath must come; the "fire of God's jealousy" 
must burn fiercely, and consume all the giant evils so entrenched 
in the world and in the hearts and minds of men. 
It is not to be a fire merely of destruction, but, thank God, 
also of purification! It will not be a literal fire, but a 
symbolic fire, following which the Lord will turn unto 
the people a pure language, a pure Message, and a clear 
declaration of the Divine will and Plan of Salvation. 

SONS OF LEVI JUDGED FIRST 

The earlier part of the judgment upon Christendom 

R5442:page 121 

will be especially upon the antitypical sons of Levi, the 
silver class. These made a consecration of themselves to 
the Lord, as did the gold class, the faithful overcomers, 
"more than conquerors." This silver class we understand 
to be the Great Company, who are to "come up" out of 
the Great Tribulation, and to "wash their robes [which 
have become spotted and soiled] and make them white in 
the blood of the Lamb." (Revelation 7:9-17.) These will 
be dealt with by the great Messenger of the Covenant, 
not with a view to their destruction or injury as individuals, 
but with a view to the destruction of their flesh, 
which they have failed to sacrifice in harmony with their 
Covenant— "that the spirit may be saved in the Day of 
the Lord Jesus." 



The fire of this great Day shall "try every man's work, 
of what sort it is." It will prove who of the professed 
disciples of Christ have built upon Him as their Foundation 
with the gold, silver, and precious stones of Divine 
Truth, and thus have constructed a true, strong, worthy 
character, unswervingly loyal to the Lord; and it will 
prove who have built with wood, hay and stubble. It will 
likewise discover who have built upon a foundation of 
sand.— 1 Corinthians 3:11-15. 

FLESHLY ISRAEL'S SHARE IN THE JUDGMENT 

A part of the prophecy of Malachi 3 seems to have 
an application to fleshly Israel. The Lord reproves them, 
showing that His course toward them as a people had 
been in conformity to His Covenant with them at Mt. 
Sinai. But they had been unfaithful to their part of the 
Covenant. At the appearing of this great Messenger of 
the New Covenant, which is to supersede the old Covenant, 
He will purge God's ancient people. The time is 
now due for favor to begin to be restored to them; 
but before their full restoration they must experience 
further chastisement for their purification and preparation 
for the great Messiah. 

In the "time of Jacob's trouble," now near at hand, 
Israel will come to see and recognize their King, whom 
they refused when He offered Himself to them at His 
First Advent. "They shall look upon Him [with the eye 
of faith] whom they pierced, and they shall mourn for 
Him as one mourneth for his only son." (Zechariah 12:10.) 
He will then receive them back to favor, under 
the terms of the New Law Covenant. "Then shall the 
offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the 
Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years." 
(Malachi 3:4.) They shall then be used of Messiah as a 
channel of blessing to all the world. 

BLINDED TO THE REAL DIFFICULTY 

In this great Time of Trouble, the Lord will be a swift 
witness against every evil thing and will rebuke it, and 
thus all men will be taught of Him in the ways of 
righteousness. But as yet the poor, blinded world, bound 
by the shackles of Satan, do not know themselves. They 
do not yet see that selfishness is the basis of their every 
move and ambition; that the number who are not thus 
moved and controlled are so insignificantly small as to be 
without weight and influence. 

It is not our thought to deride any efforts toward 
righteousness, even though inspired by selfishness. We 
merely point out that the true, Christian view of matters 
is a much different one. It is the Bible view. It recognizes 
God, the Divine will, purpose, plan, revelation, as 
having to do with all this world's affairs. It sees in the 
present upheaval of politics, the present uncovering of 
financial and social scandals, etc., another force making 



R5443 : page 121 

ready for the great trouble time, the great "earthquake" 
predicted in prophecy, the great cataclysm, now about to 
be precipitated upon the whole world. The Scriptures 
indicate that this Time of Trouble will be upon us in 1915, 
and will be gradually approaching in the meantime. 

In the providence of God the gross superstition and 
ignorance of the Dark Ages has been gradually dissipated 
to a considerable extent, that the minds of the people 
might be set free, not only from religious superstition, 
but also from superstition respecting the Divine right of 
certain families to inherit the kingdoms, the dominions of 
the world, and to live on a higher plane of social privilege 
than others. All these matters are now coming in review 
before the world, and Socialism is rapidly coming 
to the fore as the world's savior, their deliverer from 
priestcraft and superstition, and from political and financial 
autocracy. The world is being invited to look, not to Him 
who redeemed us with His precious blood, and who 
promised to come again and establish His Kingdom in 
righteousness, but it is being called to look to itself, to its 
own affairs and selfish interests, as the only hope, thus 
ignoring God and His overruling providences, and ignoring 
Divine Revelation respecting the future outcome of 
present conditions, in the glorious Millennial Kingdom 
for the blessing of all the world. 

CHURCH FEDERATION NOW FORMING 

From our standpoint, the present gathering of the 
churches into a great Federation is the fulfilment of 
Scriptural prediction; and the Lord's intelligent, faithful, 
consecrated people are warned against having any part 
in any such Church Federation. The Word of the Lord 
regarding the matter is, "Say ye not, A Confederacy, to 
all them to whom this people shall say, A Confederacy; 
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid; but sanctify the 
Lord God in your hearts, and let Him be your fear."— 
Isaiah 8:11-16. 

Dread to displease Him, but fear not men. It is the 
tares which have all along associated themselves with the 
wheat that are to be bundled, to be gathered together for 
a great trouble time. This is in the mighty revolution of 
society shortly to set fire to all the social, religious, and 
financial institutions and arrangements of this present 
time, eventuating in anarchy, which, through God's overruling 
providence, will overthrow all things incompatible 
with righteousness and prepare for the Kingdom of God, 
which will be manifested in power and great glory, for 
the deliverance and blessing of all the human family. 

We remember that as the Jewish Age drew near its 
close, John the Baptist, the forerunner of Messiah, declared 
to the Jews: "One mightier than I cometh, the 
latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy to unloose; He 



shall baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire." 
(Luke 3:16.) We remember the fulfilment of this. The 
"Israelites indeed" were gathered into the garner of the 
Christian Church, and baptized with the Holy Spirit at 
Pentecost. The remainder of the Jewish nation, who 
"knew not the time of their visitation," were burned as 
"chaff," in a great time of trouble, which overthrew their 
nation. This great trouble is shown in Scripture to be a 
picture on a small scale of the conditions which will prevail 
in the closing days of this Gospel Age. 

In that trouble time which came to the Jews, though 
various steps were taken to hinder the destruction of the 
nation of Israel, all efforts failed. Even the Roman Emperor 
was desirous of preserving the nation and of establishing 
order; and the Roman army was sent, not to destroy 
them, but to establish peace in their midst. But the 
Lord had declared that the fire of trouble which He enkindled 
should not be quenched by any power, that it 
should do its work to the full; and it did. 

R5443 : page 122 

Likewise it will be with the great fire of trouble with 
which this present Age will end, and into which the "tare" 
class of Christendom will be cast. It will not be an utter 
destruction of life (although many lives will be lost in the 
awful trouble of this Day of Wrath), but it will completely 
consume all earthly governments and institutions 
and will overthrow Churchianity. These will be consumed 
in the fire of anarchy. Nothing shall be permitted 
to quench that fire, or hinder the utter destruction of 
present systems. But, praise God, when the fire shall have 
devoured the stubble and the falsities and deceptions of 
the present order, it will but have prepared the way for 
the great blessing which God has designed and provided, 
in His coming Kingdom. "When the judgments of the 
Lord are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world 
will learn righteousness." (Isaiah 26:9.) It will be a 
terrible chastisement, but it will be the necessary work of 
the skilful Surgeon, who wounds but to heal. 

"REFUGE OF LIES" SWEPT AWAY 

In our Lord's parable of building a House upon the 
Rock or upon the Sand, He gives a forceful picture particularly 
of the tests to come upon Christendom at the 
close of this Age. Here His figure is that of a fierce 
storm, a flood, with mighty winds beating upon the faith 
structure of His professed followers, overthrowing the 
faith of those not built upon Christ, the Rock, but built 
upon the sand. And so we see it today. A mighty downpour 
of Truth is now in progress throughout Christendom. 
The great storm is now raging. The denominations 
of Churchianity are trembling under the shock. Their 
foundations of human tradition, man-made theories, 
ignorance, "doctrines of demons" (1 Timothy 4:1), are 



realized to be unsatisfactory. They are unable to stand 
before the great searchlight of Truth now being turned 
upon them. Ere long the storm of Truth will wash out 
the quicksand foundation upon which nominal Christianity 
is built, and her utter wreck will follow. Only the 
true people of God will be able to stand the test of this 
great Day— now upon us! 

This is the same storm and flood mentioned by the 
Lord through the Prophet Isaiah: "The hail shall sweep 
away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow 
the hiding places. When the overflowing scourge shall 
pass through, then shall ye [false teachers] be trodden 
down by it. From the time that it goeth forth it shall take 
you; for morning by morning shall it pass through, by 
day and by night; and it shall be a vexation only to understand 
the report [the Message, the Truth]."— 
Isaiah 28:17-19. 

This overwhelming trouble will soon reach the entire 
world. Indeed, it has already begun among all nations 
to some extent. All men must be awakened by the judgments 
of the Lord and brought to a realization of their 
need of the Arm of Jehovah, to deliver them and to uplift 
and save. The whole world is to be judged by The 
Messiah. All will witness that this judgment, trial, could 
not come before the great Judge takes His seat and authority: 
hence none of all those who died before our 
Lord's First Advent could have been judged by Him. All 
should likewise be aware of the fact that the world in 
general has not been on trial since our Redeemer was appointed 
the Judge, that the world has not been on trial 
previous to the present time. Indeed, the great mass of 
mankind neither know the Judge nor understand His Law, 
nor have they any conception of the conditions and requirements 
necessary to life everlasting. This is in harmony 
with the presentations of Scripture on this subject. 

JUDGMENT DAY A TIME OF BLESSING 

The Apostle Paul declares (Acts 17:31), that God "hath 
appointed a day, in the which He will judge the world 
in righteousness by that Man whom He hath ordained 
[The Christ, Head and Body]; whereof He hath given assurance 
unto all, in that He hath raised Him from the 
dead." That appointed Day was future in the Apostle's 
time, and is still future, though now about to dawn. The 
Gospel of Christ, Good Tidings, is to the effect that He 
who bought the world with His own precious blood is to 
become the Judge of all men, the living and the dead. 
"All in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come 
forth," "and they that hear shall live."— John 5:28,29,25. 

A new trial is to be granted to Adam and all his race. 
It will be an individual trial, under the enlightenment and 
uplifting influence of the great Messianic Kingdom. 
Truly, this is "Good Tidings of great joy" to the world, 
the "groaning creation." Even though the great Adversary 
has succeeded in deceiving the vast majority, 



even of Christians, into thinking to the contrary, this Trial 
Day, the Day of Judgment, is to come to all the sons and 
daughters of Adam for their deliverance and blessing, 
if they will. This Great Day, which will be "the desire of 
all nations," is forcefully depicted by the Prophet David. 
(Psalms 96-98.) The saints of the Lord, the faithful followers 
of Christ, those who "follow the Lamb whithersoever 
He goeth," shall be associated with their great Head 
as assistant judges, in His glorious work of human uplift 
and restitution to all that was lost in Adam. 

How glad we are that our eyes have been anointed to 
see all these wonderful arrangements of our God! How 
glad we are that we can understand the significance of 
the dark clouds now hovering over the world and soon to 
break! How we rejoice that we can discern the silver lining 
to these clouds of trouble, and know that the end will 
be glorious— that beyond the yawning chasm just before 
us, beyond the blood and tears of the coming whirlwind 
and tempest, the blessed Sun of Righteousness will rise 
with healing and blessing in His wings, and mankind, 
broken and helpless and despairing, shall be led into the 
light and glory of the Kingdom of God's dear Son! 



R5444 : page 122 

RICH TO HELL-POOR TO HEAVEN 

-MAY 17.-LUKE 16:19-31.- 

"Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also 

shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. "-PROVERBS 21:13. 

DID our Lord mean that all rich men and 

all rich women are to spend eternity 

in misery because of faring sumptuously 

every day, and wearing purple and fine 

linen? Can it be true that in order to get 

to Heaven we must be poor beggars, covered 

with sores, and have them licked by dogs, 

and must eat crumbs from a rich man's 

table? Has character nothing to do with 

future rewards and punishments? Again, 

will it be so that for all eternity the rich, tormented in 

fire, will see the poor in bliss, and the honored poor see 

the rich in eternal misery? Can this be the arrangement 

of an all-wise, all-loving Creator— one who knew the end 

from the beginning? 

For many years this parable has caused distress of 
mind to the more saintly of God's people; both heart and 
head have rebelled. We remembered that Abraham was 
very rich, likewise Isaac, Jacob, King David, King Solomon, 
etc. We remembered that God Himself is very 
rich. Then we looked up the subject in the Hebrew and 
the Greek, and found that Abraham did not go to 



R5444 : page 123 

Gehenna, the hopeless condition, the Second Death, but 
to Sheol, Hades, the tomb, the grave, the state of death, 
where there is no fire. 

Our greater knowledge increased the mystery; for the 
Scriptures declare that Sheol, Hades, the tomb, is to be 
destroyed, that all are to be brought forth from it in the 
resurrection. No other Scripture seemed to agree with 
this parable. It stands in a class by itself, except as we 
might use for its support one text in Revelation which 
speaks of a symbolic beast and a symbolic false prophet in 
torment. Thus have the thinking people of the Church 
been stumbled and perplexed by the story of this lesson. 

NOW ALL IS CLEAR, PLAIN 

Now we see that our lesson is a parable. It is not to be 
taken literally, any more than are the other parables and 
dark sayings of our Savior; such as, "Except ye eat the 
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood, ye have no 
life in you"; or again, "If thine eye offend thee, pluck it 
out...; if thine hand offend thee, cut it off." Indeed, 
we find that Jesus spoke to the people only with parables. 
(Matthew 13:34.) None were ready for the depth of His 
teaching until after the Holy Spirit at Pentecost began 
to give qualification. 

How simple it all seems now! how beautiful! Many 
of God's people are rejoicing that in the light of the present 
understanding of the Bible the Divine character is 
shining forth, beautiful in its Justice, Wisdom, Love 
and Power. 

It is not difficult for us to understand that our lesson is 
a parable. To take it literally, as we have seen, would 
involve the absurdity of supposing that all beggars go to 
Heaven, and that all wealthy go to Hell; for the parable 
says nothing about character— either that the poor man 
was good or that the Rich Man was bad. Viewed as a 
parable, we see that the thing said is not the thing meant. 
Thus in other parables wheat and sheep represent children 
of God; tares and goats represent those dominated by the 
Adversary, the god of this world. 

THE RICH MAN OF THE PARABLE 

In the parable under consideration, the Rich Man represents 
a class, and the poor man, Lazarus, another class. 
Let us see: The Rich Man was the Jewish nation, which 
had been in God's favor for more than sixteen centuries. 
To the Jew had been given the promises, the Prophets, 
the blessings and privileges of the Law Covenant. These 
symbolically were their purple, fine linen and sumptuous 
table. The fine linen symbolized their typical justification 
through typical sacrifices. Their purple raiment symbolized 
royalty; for they were the typical Kingdom. Their 



sumptuous fare represented the Divine promises, as St. 
Paul's words imply.— Romans 11:9. 

In Jesus' day Jewish favor began to wane. They were 
completely cut off in A.D. 70, as all Jews will admit. 
During the interim of forty years the Rich Man, the Jewish 
nation, sickened, died and was buried. Nationally, 
they went to Hades, to the tomb; and their resurrection 
has not yet been accomplished, although Zionism is the 
beginning of it. 

But although nationally dead and buried, the Jews 
individually have been very much alive during the last 
nineteen centuries. They have had anguish of soul, as 
they have received persecutions— sometimes, alas ! from 
those who profess the name of Jesus, but who deny Him 
in their practises. For all these centuries the Jews have 
cried out to God, who in the parable is represented as 
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful. The only answer 
that they have had is that there is a gulf of separation between 
them and God. Thank God, this cannot much 
longer be the case! The New Dispensation dawns, in 
which the Rich Man will return from Hades. Israel will 
be nationally rehabilitated, and God's favor will again 
come to those of them who shall learn needed lessons. 

THE POOR MAN OF THE PARABLE 

The poor man of the parable represents an outcast 
class. It included publicans and sinners, who had alienated 
themselves from God's favor. It also included Gentiles, 
to whom Divine favor had never been extended— 
"aliens and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel." 
(Ephesians 2: 12.) These had no fine linen of typical 
justification, and no purple, representing a share in God's 
favor as part of His Kingdom. None of the promises belonged 
to them. All that they could have would be merely 
such crumbs as would fall from the Rich Man's table. 

The Scriptures illustrate two such crumbs given to 
this class by Jesus. When He healed the Roman centurion's 
servant, it was a concession at the request of the 
Jews, who declared that this man was a friend and had 
done them good, by building a synagogue, etc. The healing 
of this servant was a crumb. Similarly, the Syro-Phoenician 
woman got a crumb when she came to Jesus 
entreating the recovery of her daughter, who was possessed 
of a demon. The Master answered, "It is not 
proper to take the children's bread and give it unto dogs." 
He here used the customary Jewish phraseology respecting 
Gentiles— Gentile dogs. The Syro-Phoenician woman 
was not a Jewess and had no claim on God's favor, but 
she replied: "Yea, Lord, yet the dogs eat of the crumbs 
that fall from the children's table." Jesus noted her faith 
and gave her the crumb which she desired. 

As the Jews died to their favor, so the outcast publicans, 
sinners and Gentiles died to their disfavor; such 
of them as desired the favors of God, hungering and 
thirsting for His Word of promise, were received by 



Him. The early Church was made up of this Lazarus 
class, rejected by the Pharisees as publicans, sinners and 
Gentiles. Instead of being any longer alienated from 
God, these became the children of God and heirs of His 
promises. In the parable they are represented as children 
of Abraham— in his arms. In the type, Isaac was the 
beloved son of promise to the literal Abraham. In the 
antitype, Jesus and His followers are the Spiritual Seed 
of Abraham, received to God's bosom and favor. Thus 
St. Paul writes, "If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
Seed, and heirs according to the Promise"— made to 
Abraham.— Galatians 3:29. 

"A GREAT GULF FIXED" 

The great gulf between Judaism and Christianity has 
been fixed for more than eighteen centuries. During all 
this period no Jew has been permitted to come near to 
God, and no Gentile permitted to take the former position 
of the Jew, or in any manner to claim favor aside 
from Christ. In the Divine Plan the gulf was fixed unalterably. 
"There is none other name given under 
Heaven amongst men whereby we must be saved"— 
whereby we may come into heart relationship with God. 
This gulf dates from the time that Christ came and 
offered Himself to Israel, and was rejected and crucified. 

Thank God, His Word points us to another change of 
dispensation at the Second Coming of Christ! Then the 
Lazarus class, now children of God by faith, will be made 
actually and gloriously His children beyond the veil. In 
association with Jesus their Lord, they will take control 
of the world; for they will be His Bride and Joint-heir 
in the Kingdom. What will happen to the Rich Man 
then? Oh, he is to have a resurrection from Hades ! 

R5444 : page 124 

While God's Kingdom will be represented on the 
spiritual plane by the Lazarus class, it will be represented 
on the earthly plane by another class, which will be Jewish. 
The Jews who crucified Jesus will not be made 
princes in the earth in association with Messiah's spiritual 
Empire, but some of their brethren will be— a class whom 
they have been accustomed to call fathers will be made 
Princes. These Scripturally are known as "Abraham, 
Isaac, Jacob and all the Prophets," and all who during the 
Jewish Epoch proved themselves loyal to God and faithful, 
described by St. Paul in Hebrews 11:32-40. 

St. Paul refers to this recovery of the Jews to Divine 
favor in Romans 1 1:25-33. He there points out that as 
we who are now the people of God were not always so, 
but were received to Divine favor when Israel was broken 
off from God's favor, so in due time those Israelites cut 
off from the favor of God will receive favor through our 
favor. That is to say, when the Church shall have attained 
the prize of glory, honor and immortality, as 



Spiritual Israel, then the gulf separating Natural Israel 
from God's favor will have been passed. Then favor will 
return to Natural Israel. Coming to them through the 

R5445 : page 124 

glorified Spiritual Israel, it will extend through them to 
all nations, peoples, kindreds and tongues of humanity, 
during the Millennial Age. 

This is the Divine Promise, "In thy Seed shall all the 
families of the earth be blessed." The Spiritual Seed of 
Abraham, the Church, gets the first share in this Promise, 
and the natural seed of Abraham gets the second part; 
but both together will be used by the Lord in rolling away 
the curse and pouring out, instead, favors and blessings 
upon humanity, upon whomsoever will accept them. 

DIVES' FIVE BRETHREN 

The parable represents Dives as praying for a drop of 
water to cool his parched tongue. Symbolically, parabolically, 
this represents the Jewish people in great distress, 
asking God to allow Christians to give them some 
help from their troubles. Have the Jews ever appealed 
to God for help? Have they prayed for relief from the 
persecutions which have come to them in the past and 
which to some extent still continue in Russia? Surely 
they have! Moreover, they have appealed to representatives 
of the Lazarus class— representatives of Christianity- 
desiring that their release and relief should come 
through them. 

An illustration of this prayer for relief in our own 
day was afforded in the appeal of the Jews to President 
Roosevelt that he would use his influence with the government 
of Russia for the amelioration of Jewish persecutions. 
Did they get this drop of water? Nay! Mr. 
Roosevelt replied that the comity of nations would not 
permit such a communication from a friendly nation. 

The parable goes further and develops the fact that 
the Rich Man had five brethren in danger of joining him 
in the trouble that was upon him. Who were his five 
brethren? We reply that the Jews of Palestine in Jesus' 
day represented chiefly the tribes of Benjamin and Judah, 
while the majority of the other ten tribes were scattered 
abroad in various lands. The question raised is, Did this 
trying experience affect merely the Jews of Palestine, 
who had enjoyed most of God's favors, or did it include 
also the Jews scattered abroad? The answer is given in 
the parable, "They have Moses and the Prophets; let 
them hear them." This proves that Jews only were referred 
to; for no Gentile had Moses and the Prophets. 
The number five is in full accord, also. Whereas two 
tribes, Judah and Benjamin, were represented by the one 
Rich Man, so proportionately the other ten tribes would 
be represented by five brethren. 

And so it was. The Message of the Gospel, which began 



with the Jews in Palestine, was extended to every 

land; and the Apostle Paul, in going to any cities amongst 

the Gentiles, preached first to the Jews, saying, It is expedient 

that the Gospel should be preached first to you; 

but seeing you reject the grace of God, lo, we turn to the 

Gentiles. (Acts 13:46,47.) In other words, the test upon 

all Israelites was the same. 

Thus we are finding a depth of wisdom in Jesus' teachings 
beyond anything we could even have dreamed. We 
are finding, too, that the horrible nightmare doctrines of 
the Dark Ages poisoned our judgments, crossed our 
spiritual eyesight, and hindered us from seeing the beauty 
of the Lord's Word. Thank God for the New Day and 
the light that it is shedding upon the Bible! 



R5445 : page 124 

WE ARE UNPROFITABLE SERVANTS 

-MAY 24. -LUKE 17:1-10.- 

"He that glorieth, let him glory in 
the Lord."- 1 CORINTHIANS 1:31. 

TODAY'S lesson is in four sections, each apparently 

distinct and separate. Even the 

connection in which these words were uttered 

is not given. Nevertheless, they manifest 

the Wisdom from Above. We shall 

consider them in their order. 

"It is impossible but that offenses will 
come." The word offenses more particularly 
signifies stumblings, or still more 
literally, ensnarement. The consecrated followers 
of Jesus are called little ones, because they are 
New Creatures who have only started in the new way of 
full consecration to God's will. "Babes in Christ," St. 
Paul styles these. (1 Corinthians 3:1.) "Little children," 
writes St. John. This infantile condition, however, 
should not continue. There should be growth in grace, 
knowledge, love. Strength of character should be attained, 
which would not only be wise, strong and difficult to ensnare, 
but able also to assist others less developed. 

Thus in the Church the more developed ones are styled 
Elders— literally, elder brothers. Such more particularly 
represent the Lord amongst the brethren; and Heavenly 
comfort and advice, reproofs, etc., may at times be sent 
through these to their younger fellows. The dangers of 
ensnarement exist because Satan is the prince of this 
Age, and because he has the majority of mankind more 
or less under his influence— blinded by error, superstition, 
sin, etc. "The god of this world hath blinded the minds 
of all those who believe not." (2 Corinthians 4:4.) That 
Jesus did not refer to infants is manifest from the words 



"One of these little ones which believe in Me." 

We may not suppose that Jesus would unjustly condemn 
or punish anybody for ignorantly or unintentionally 
offending His followers, His little ones. We must suppose 
that He meant to caution those who would deliberately 
attempt to deceive and ensnare, entrap, discourage, 
His followers, His little ones. We all have heard 
of instances of deliberate, intelligent plotting against the 
followers of the Lord; and to whatever extent this may 
prevail, it has indicated the Satanic spirit. 

Sometimes true people of God have been thus ensnared 
into the service of Satan, as intimated by the words, "His 
servants ye are to whom ye render service." Saul of 
Tarsus was thus ensnared and used for a time by the 

R5445 : page 125 

Adversary; and he explains that God had mercy upon 
him because he did this ignorantly. Had he done it with 
wilful intelligence, we may assume that God would not 
have had mercy upon him to the extent of rescuing him by 
a miracle, but that he would have continued in his intelligently 
wicked way and that it would have been better for 
him that a millstone had been hung around his neck and 
he had been drowned in the sea. 

This would be because a person thus drowned in the 
sea would lose merely the present life, and not the future 
life during the Millennium, after he had been awakened 
from the sleep of death. He would then have full opportunity 
for enlightenment through obedience and for recovery 
from sin and death. But those who intelligently 
persecute the followers of Jesus and seek to turn them 
aside from the way of righteousness, pervert their own 
conscience and so degrade themselves that it will be much 
more difficult for them to come into accord with the conditions 
of the New Dispensation beyond the grave. In a 
word, whoever sins against light and knowledge is endangering 
his own opportunities for everlasting life. 

A FORGIVING SPIRIT NECESSARY 

Verses 3 and 4 are apparently a part of the same discourse 
recorded in Matthew 18:15-22. The lesson is addressed 
to the followers of Jesus, not to the world. It 
relates primarily to their duty toward the brethren of the 
Household of Faith, but secondarily it has a broader application. 
It may at times be given this broader application; 
but the injunction in Matthew 18, that the counsel 
of brethren be brought in and that ultimately, if necessary, 
the matter come before the Church, proves to us that 
it is in reality not intended for any but the Church. 

The lesson is mercy— boundless mercy. The basis of 
the argument is that all need mercy, Divine mercy, because 
all are imperfect; and in order to assist us in the 
cultivation of this grace, the Lord has arranged that His 
blessings to us, His favor, shall be dependent upon our 



endeavor to exercise this Godlike quality. "Be ye like 
unto your Father; for He is kind to the unthankful." 

It seems strange that our forefathers and ourselves 
were so deceived by the false doctrines which St. Paul 
styles "doctrines of devils." (1 Timothy 4:1.) Once we 
thought of the Heavenly Father as absolutely unforgiving- 
full of hate for His human creatures, because they 
had sinned— instead of forgiving their sin. We insisted 
that the wage, or penalty, of sin must be torment, and that 
to all eternity. How little we understood the real character 
of the God of all grace, the Father of mercies ! 

Some of us, perhaps, endeavored to justify our error 
by assuming that God Himself was all goodness, kindness 
and love, but had behind Him an inexorable Law demanding 
the torture of His creatures— a Law from which He 
could not escape, and which bound Him to the doing 
of things which His own Law condemned in humanity. 

Others of us deluded ourselves into thinking that all 
mankind enjoyed at some time between birth and death 
a full opportunity for turning from sin to righteousness 
and of becoming saints. Only of late years are Bible 
students becoming aware of how absurd is this position. 
Now we are realizing that, for four thousand years, only 
the one little nation of the Jews had any knowledge of 
God, or any promise of eternal life held out to them, or 
any instruction respecting sin and its penalty. And even 
the Jews, to whom the Law was given, Jesus and His 
Apostles declared were blinded by Satan. Jesus, addressing 

R5446 : page 125 

His Apostles, said, "Blessed are your eyes, for they 
see; and your ears, for they hear." The great nation 
of the Jews neither saw nor heard. The same is true of 
nine-tenths of the population of Christendom, not to mention 
heathendom. 

Without the least warrant of Scripture, but in contradiction 
of it, many of us upheld the terrible theory that 
all who do not hear of Christ in the present lifetime and 
also all those who do not become saintly followers in His 
steps will be eternally tortured at the hands of 
devils. We now see that the Bible teaches that only 
a comparatively small class, who now have the hearing 
ear and the seeing eye and who enter into covenant relationship 
with God through Christ, can walk in Jesus' steps. 
For these only does the present life end all opportunity 
of attaining eternal life. For the remainder of mankind 
God purposes a future life by a resurrection of judgment. 

The resurrection is not merely for the Church class— 
the First, or Chief Resurrection— but it is for "the just 
and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The Church class will 
come forth to glory, honor and immortality. The unjust 
will come forth from the tomb to judgments, disciplines, 
rewards and punishments. It is in order to give them 
these judgments and opportunities to obtain everlasting 
life that Messiah's Kingdom will be inaugurated; and it is 



in order that He may appoint proper judges to assist the 
people and to reward and punish justly that He is now 
calling out the Church in the flesh. "Know ye not that 
the saints shall judge the world?"— 1 Corinthians 6:2. 

FAITH POWER-CREDULITY POWER 

A great deal passes for faith which is merely credulity. 
If some one were to swear to us that the moon is made 
of green cheese, it would be credulity to believe him— 
not faith. We should inquire, "Who is it that says this 
thing, and what does he know on the subject more than 
we may know?" The faith commended in the Bible is 
that which relates to things which God has promised. We 
are encouraged to be full of such faith in God— nothing 
doubting— not questioning that He is able to accomplish 
all His good promises. 

Our forefathers had too much confidence in men. 
What they thought was faith was mere credulity. They 
swallowed the creeds of the Dark Ages; and the more 
absurd the proposition, the more faith they thought they 
had. On the contrary, they should have said, "Where 
is the proof? Where has God declared such things?" 
Those who defended the creeds cried out incredulously 
against sober faith, branded it heresy, and many times 
burned the truly faithful at the stake. The lesson is that 
we should accept by faith only that of which the Lord has 
assured us in His Word; and this means that we should 
be particularly careful that we have the pure Word of 
God, sifting out mistranslations and interpolations. 

In our lesson, the disciples of Jesus were evidently 
impressed with the grandeur of His teachings, and the 
difficulties that must lie in the way of the accomplishment 
of all the wonderful things recorded in the Law and the 
Prophets, and told by Jesus— respecting His Messianic 
Kingdom, etc. They therefore asked the Lord to increase 
their faith. Jesus replied in words that are greatly misunderstood 
in our day. He said, "If ye had faith as a 
grain of mustard seed, ye might say to this sycamine tree, 
Be thou plucked up by the root, and be thou planted in the 
sea; and it should obey you." On two other occasions 
Jesus made similar remarks respecting mountains, saying 
that the word of faith would have been sufficient to remove 
them to the midst of the sea. 

WHAT DID HE MEAN? 

Evidently the Master did not mean to encourage the 
Jews to attempt to command the mountain to be carried 
into the sea; but rather He wished them to realize that 

R5446 :page 126 

if they had proper faith in the power of God, and should 
receive a command from God to move the mountain into 
the sea, and should give the command with faith, the results 



would follow. But God gave no such command in 
respect to the mountains nor in respect to the tree. Hence 
faith would have no basis for operation in such cases. 
The colored brother had the proper thought. When 
asked what he would do if God told him to jump through 
a stone wall, he replied, "I would jump at it." In a word, 
we are to have absolute confidence in the Word of God, 
not merely to make sure that we have heard and understood 
His Message. Then we may go forward with 
mountain-moving faith to accomplish His commands. 
But God does not command foolish or unnecessary 
changes. He leaves it for human ingenuity to uproot the 
trees and to tunnel the mountains, and never gives commands 
of this kind. And if some human being told us 
something of the kind, we would be credulous if we believed 
him. God is not working that way. 

NOT PROFITABLE TO OUR MASTER 

Some amongst the followers of Christ, naturally progressive, 
are sometimes too aggressive, self-conceited. Becoming 
His disciples does not change these traits instantly. 
The old things pass away gradually, and the new 
take their place. A lesson for all of His disciples to remember, 
but especially forceful to the classes mentioned, is 
taught in this Study. They must remember that the work 
of God's grace, of which they are subjects, is His favor 
toward them; and that their obedience to His commands is 
primarily for their correction and development, and a 
future life of blessing. They should remember that even 
their service for the Lord is a privilege— that God is not 
profited by their services. 

We are all unprofitable servants in the sense that God 
could just as easily do without us, indeed, could more 
easily do His work otherwise than through us. He could 
use as His messengers the angels or the various providences 
of life. None of us is indispensable to His work 
and to His glory. Quite to the contrary, the opportunity 
for entering into the Lord's vineyard and laboring therein 
is chiefly for our own advantage. The service brings us 
certain joys which we could not otherwise have. It brings 
us certain experiences necessary to our own development 
and qualification for higher services beyond the veil. 

As the Apostle declares, "By grace [Divine favor] 
are ye saved through faith." To some extent the faith 
is a matter of our own development. However, the 
Apostle hastens to add that the faith is not of ourselves, 
that even it is the gift of God— we have not the opportunity 
of glorying even in our faith. What have we that 
we have not received of the Lord? The elemental faith 
was based upon certain knowledge that God's providences 
brought to us, and possibly we were prepared for even 
that by a favorable parentage. 



R5446 : page 126 

CHRISTLIKENESS THE EVIDENCE OF SONSHIP 

"He that saith he abideth in Him ought himself 
also so to walk even as He walked."— 1 JOHN 2:6. 

TO ABIDE in Christ implies that one has first 

come into Him. This gives us the thought 

of a Body. The Scriptures everywhere 

represent the Church as being this Body, 

with Jesus as the Head. "God gave Him to 

be Head over the Church, which is His 

Body." During the Gospel Age an invitation 

has been given to certain persons to be 

of this Body of Christ. There is only one 

door by which these may come into the 

Body. It is the door of sacrifice, baptism into Christ's 

death. We are accepted only by giving up our own will, 

and taking instead the will of God. We pledge ourselves 

to walk in Jesus' steps, to become His followers, His 

disciples. We are buried with Him and rise to walk in 

newness of life.— Romans 6:4. 

But it is not sufficient that we take these steps, not 
sufficient that we have received the Holy Spirit, and have 
been accepted of the Father. We should be sure that we 
continue to abide in Christ. Let us ask ourselves, Are we 
having the experiences common to all who are associated 
with Jesus? One of the ways to be sure that we are abiding 
in Him is to realize that we still love Him. Another 
is to know that we are still in harmony with God's Word. 
A third way is that we have no will but the Lord's will. 
Still another is to have His peace in our hearts and lives 
as the ruling and controlling influence. 

PROFESSION ALONE INSUFFICIENT 

Many have made a profession of being members of the 
Body of Christ who do not give evidence of being His. 
Our text says that any one who professes to be in Christ 
ought so to walk even as the Master walked. And how 
did the Master walk? He lived daily in harmony with the 
will of the Heavenly Father. He was fully submissive to 
the Father's will. And this meant sacrifice unto death— 
the cruel death of the cross. 

Whoever has our Lord's spirit, and is controlled by the 
same will, is a member of the Body of Christ, and will 
seek to walk after this fashion, to do the will of God in 
all things. This will mean a walk of holiness, of full devotion 
to God, and of opposition to sin. Whoever is consecrated 
to God is opposed to every sinful thing; for God 
and sin are in antagonism. God stands for His own 
righteousness, and sin is a violation of that righteousness. 
(1 John 3:4.) Whoever walks as Jesus walked is in harmony 
with the Divine Word and will. We are not to trust 
to our impressions, our own conceptions of what is right 



and advantageous, as many others do; but the Word of 
the Lord is to abide in us, and to govern our lives. Jesus 
said, "I came not to do Mine own will, but the will of 
Him that sent Me"— "everything written in the Book." 
And so it is to be with us. We must abide in Him, walk 

R5447 : page 126 

in Him, and be willing to do "everything written in the 
Book"— not merely forcing ourselves to it, saying, I will 
take this course; but saying, "I delight to do Thy will, O 
my God; Thy law is written in my heart."— Psa. 40:7,8. 

PROOFS OF SONSHIP 

All who have accepted Christ claim, in a general way 
at least, to be sons of God, that Christ is their Elder 
Brother, and that they belong to this great family that 
God is selecting from the sons of men. They consider 
themselves heirs with Christ to the great Kingdom to 
come. But not all who claim to be sons of God are such. 
A great many are making this claim. Statistics tell us 
that there are four hundred millions of professed Christians; 
but we cannot think that many of these four hundred 
millions are sons of God. The Apostle Paul calls our 
attention to the fact that since we cannot read the hearts 
we must go by the professions which others make by 
mouth and by conduct. But professions of the mouth are 
not to be taken as final. We know that those who are 
sons of God will be led by His Spirit. "As many as are 
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." 

But what is the Spirit of God? Primarily it is the 
spirit of Truth, the spirit of holiness, the spirit of justice, 
the spirit of love. And as many as are God's children, 
begotten of His Holy Spirit, will make some manifestation 
of their harmony with this general Spirit of God. 

R5447 : page 127 

If they are, therefore, walking in unrighteousness, making 
no endeavor to stem the tendencies of sin in themselves, 
if they prefer error rather than Truth, their fruits 
condemn them; for God stands for Truth, and was 
exemplified in our Lord Jesus. 

Whoever, therefore, has the Spirit of God, is willing 
to sacrifice himself that he may serve the Truth. He 
loves the Truth, and will manifest this fact by the spirit 
of love and zeal. Satan is the personification of sin, 
envy, hatred, malice, strife. Righteousness, love, joy, 
peace, are fruits of the Holy Spirit. Wherever we see 
the works of the Devil manifested we have reason to 
question that such a one is a child of God. The spirit of 
envy, the spirit of hatred, the spirit of malice, the spirit of 
opposition to the Truth, the spirit of unrighteousness— 
these are to be repudiated and overcome by all who would 
be sons of God. 



Yet despite one's best efforts, he might still find in 
his flesh tendencies to sin which would give him a great 
deal of trouble. He may take courage from the assurances 
of the Scriptures that the Lord looketh on the 
heart. Likewise in regard to others, we should judge according 
to the endeavor, the intention. Wherever the 
Spirit of God is, there is the spirit of love. And this 
spirit will make one wish to make reparation, if he has 
done wrong or been in error. To do so shows that it was 
not his spirit, his will to do wrong, but that he was merely 
entrapped for a time. But one who continues to do according 
to his natural tendencies, with no evidence of 
going in the right direction and of serving the Truth, has 
reason to doubt that he is a child of God. 

HOW WE CAN WALK AS HE WALKED 

The Apostle's thought seems to be that those who profess 
to be the Lord's followers, profess to be Christians, 
should see to it that their walk in life is in harmony with 
their profession. The word disciple signifies one who 
follows— as a pupil follows his teacher. We recognize 
Christ as our Redeemer and also as our Pattern, our Instructor, 
in the glorious things which the Father has invited 
us to share with our Savior. If, therefore, we say 
that we are in Him, this profession should be borne out 
by our walk in life. We should walk as He walked. 

But we are not perfect— how can this be done? The 
answer is that we "are not in the flesh, but in the spirit." 
God does not look upon our imperfect flesh. As New 
Creatures we are not fleshly beings, but spiritual. The 
Apostle is in our text speaking of that walk that the 
Master had after He made consecration. He walked in 
this way three and a half years. It was a walk, not according 
to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. And 
so with us. We are walking, not according to the flesh, 
but according to the New Creature. We reckon ourselves 
dead according to the flesh, and the Lord so reckons us. 
If, then, we are dead to the flesh, we are not to walk according 
to the desires of the flesh. 

We are to walk as our Lord walked, in our general 
deportment. We are to love everything that is good and 
to avoid everything that is evil. We are to walk as nearly 
as possible in the footsteps of our Lord and Exemplar. 
We cannot in an imperfect body walk up to all the perfection 
of Jesus, who was perfect in His flesh as well as 
in His spirit. But we are to walk as He walked— in the 
same path, in the same direction, toward the same glorious 
goal toward which He walked. And so doing, faithful 
day by day, we shall by His grace attain the same exceeding 
great reward. 



R5447 : page 127 



SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
ORDAINED A MINISTER OF CHRIST 



Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society, 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

In view of the fact that on every hand our enemies are 
opposing us on the ground that our public speakers are not 
ordained, and that more opposition may be aroused along 
this line in the future, might it not be well for the Society 
to give some formal recognition of the Lord's ordination of 
the brothers who speak in public? 

The majority of our Pilgrims, when asked, "When were 
you ordained?" do not have a ready answer. They may give 
the date of their consecration, but while we understand the 
matter to our own satisfaction, this is not satisfactory to the 
inquirer, who usually entertains the thought that since we 
have not been regularly (?) ordained, we are not safe teachers 
for them to listen to. 

We realize that here at Bethel, we have by far the strongest 
Theological School, with daily studies and recitations, in 
the whole world. I read only today in the Christian Herald, 
a challenging query as to how many of us were regularly ordained, 
where we got our education, how many of us had any 
understanding of Greek or Latin, etc. Now, all of us understand 
Greek better than most orthodox (?) ministers; and if 
we could have some formal recognition of our ordination, 
perhaps referring it to the date of our individual consecration, 
I believe it would serve to stop the mouths of many, 
and would give the Truth much impetus in the public opinion, 
which would well serve the purpose in gathering the Lord's 
wheat. Even in our newspaper advertising it would be a 
telling point to state the time when our more prominent 
speakers were ordained. It seems to be a question which the 
public mind is always asking, and will never be satisfied till 
answered. In my colporteur work I sold the books twice as 
easily when known to be a minister. Others have had the same 
experience. 

I submit this merely as a suggestion, dear friends, and 
shall know that your decision, whether pro or con, is the 
Lord's will. With continued love and prayers, I am, 

Your brother in the Glorious Harvest work, which we all 
love so much, R. G. JOLLY. 

THINKS PHOTO-DRAMA WONDERFUL 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

My purpose in writing is to let you know of my strong appreciation 
of the PHOTO-DRAMA OF CREATION. Throughout it 
is a wonderful production; surpassing even my most sanguine 
expectations. 



I have met many Truth friends who have seen the DRAMA 
—at Cincinnati, Toledo, and Indianapolis— all of whom were 
delighted with and benefited by it. They expressed the opinion 
that the DRAMA will edify the Truth friends, as well as greatly 
enlighten and favorably influence others. The writer fully 
shares their opinion. 

I wish all who are interested in the Cause we so much 
love could see the production. I feel sure it would increase 
their love for the Truth, and also their interest in the work 
generally. I was very much in favor of the project before 
seeing the exhibition; but I am much more so since. 

It is marvelous to think of the thousands of people who 
are, through the PHOTO-DRAMA, hearing the precious Gospel 
preached, every day and night. I never heard the Gospel 
preached more plainly and impressively than it is for at least 
an hour, at each exhibition of the PHOTO-DRAMA. I presume 
that while the slide pictures are being exhibited, and the 
lecturing is in progress, at least an hour is occupied. And the 
motion pictures are so beautiful, realistic and instructive! 

Apparently, a large majority of those who witness the production 
are very favorably impressed thereby. In my humble 
judgment, the PHOTO-DRAMA is the most successful project 
the Society has ever inaugurated. 

Yours in Christian love and service, FRANK DRAPER. 



I.B.S.A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR MONTH OF MAY 
Questions from Manual on Series Second of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDIES II. AND III., VOL. II. 

Week of May 3...Q. 32 to 38 Week of May 10.. .Q. 39 to 46 

17...Q. 47 to 53 " " " 24.. .Q. 1 to 7 

Week of May 3 1-Q. 8 to 14 

Question Manuals on Vol. II., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 
5c. each, or 50c. per doz., postpaid. 



page 129 
