




Although the entertainment industry presents spiritistic themes and characters in a fascinating way, we need to be aware of the dangers associated with them





COVER SUBJECT | WHAT IS BEHIND THE SUPERNATURAL?
What Does the Bible Teach About Spiritism?




ALTHOUGH many people are skeptical about anything related to the supernatural and spiritism—considering them to be either a hoax or the product of the film industry’s creative scriptwriters—the Bible presents a different view. It provides explicit warnings about spiritism. For instance, Deuteronomy 18:10-13 states: “There should not be found in you . . . anyone who employs divination, anyone practicing magic, anyone who looks for omens, a sorcerer, anyone binding others with a spell, anyone who consults a spirit medium or a fortune-teller, or anyone who inquires of the dead.” Why not? The scripture further states: “Whoever does these things is detestable to Jehovah . . . You should prove yourself blameless before Jehovah your God.”
Why does the Bible so strongly censure all forms of spiritism?



UNSAVORY ORIGINS

The Bible tells us that long before God formed the earth, he created millions of spirit creatures, or angels. (Job 38:4, 7; Revelation 5:11) Each of these angels was endowed with free will—the ability to choose between right and wrong. Some of them chose to rebel against God, and they abandoned their position in heaven to cause trouble on the earth. As a consequence, the earth became “filled with violence.”—Genesis 6:2-5, 11; Jude 6.
The Bible says that those wicked angels wield great influence, misleading millions of people. (Revelation 12:9) They even exploit mankind’s natural curiosity about the future.—1 Samuel 28:5, 7; 1 Timothy 4:1.
True, some supernatural powers seem to help people. (2 Corinthians 11:14) In reality, however, the wicked angels are attempting to blind people’s minds to the truth about God.—2 Corinthians 4:4.
According to the Bible, therefore, contact with wicked spirits is not harmless fun. That is why when potential disciples of Jesus were taught the truth about such activities, “those who had practiced supernatural methods brought their books together and burned them up,” even at a significant financial loss.—Acts 19:19, Byington.





“Growing belief in witchcraft among teenage girls may have been influenced by recent portrayals of glamorous, seductive witches on television, in the movies, and in books.”—Gallup Youth Survey, 2014




Likewise, many today have decided to have nothing to do with activities and entertainment rooted in spiritism. For example, when Mariaa was 12 years old, she seemed to be able to predict certain future events or dangers. She read tarot cards for her schoolmates, and since her predictions came true, she became fascinated with the occult.
Maria thought she had a gift from God that enabled her to help people. “But something disturbed me,” she admits. “When I read the cards, I read them for others. I was not able to read them for myself, even though I wanted to know my own future.”
Perplexed by many unanswered questions, Maria prayed to God and was later contacted by Jehovah’s Witnesses, with whom she began to study the Bible. Maria learned from the Bible that her ability to foretell the future did not come from God. She learned, too, that those who want God’s friendship must get rid of any objects connected with spiritism. (1 Corinthians 10:21) The result? Maria threw away her occult paraphernalia and books. She now shares with others the accurate truths she has learned from the Bible.
When Michael was a teenager, he was an avid reader of fantasy novels about supernatural characters. “I enjoyed identifying with heroes my age who explored imaginary worlds,” he says. Little by little, Michael grew accustomed to reading books about magic and Satanic rituals. “Curiosity made me want to read books and watch movies that dealt with these subjects,” he admits.
However, Michael’s study of the Bible impressed on him the need to examine carefully what he was reading. “I drew up a list of everything that had a link with spiritism and got rid of it all,” he says. “I learned an important lesson. At 1 Corinthians 10:31, the Bible says: ‘Do all things for God’s glory.’ Now I ask myself, ‘Is my reading of this material involving me with something contrary to God’s glory?’ If so, I avoid it.”





The Bible is appropriately described as a lamp. It is a unique source of enlightenment that exposes spiritism for what it really is. (Psalm 119:105) But the Bible does more. It holds out a marvelous promise of a world free of the power of wicked spirits. The effect on humankind will be immense. For example, Psalm 37:10, 11 states: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked will be no more; you will look at where they were, and they will not be there. But the meek will possess the earth, and they will find exquisite delight in the abundance of peace.”



Names in this article have been changed.

What Is Spiritism?
Interest in spiritism is reflected in such activities as astrology, witchcraft, and the occult. In many parts of the world, people try to communicate with wicked spirits with the help of a psychic or a witch doctor. Many use divination to try to find out about the future. They look at the stars, search for omens, use a crystal ball, read the palm of a person’s hand, or have their own palm read.
Books, magazines, and movies present spiritism as harmless or intriguing. Some communication experts suggest that the way TV programs and movies portray the paranormal has strongly influenced what people believe.







We invite you to learn more by reading chapter 10 of the book What Does the Bible Really Teach? It is published by Jehovah’s Witnesses and is available for free download on jw.org.


