Announcements
GETTING FILLED WITH GOD’S SPIRIT
“Keep getting filled with spirit” is the Bible’s counsel at Ephesians 5:18. By what means do we keep filled with holy spirit? By continually going to the source, Jehovah God, in prayer and in study of the Word of God, the Bible. Association with others who also seek the filling of the spirit is coessential, for Ephesians 5:19, 20 says: “Speaking to yourselves with psalms and praises to God and spiritual songs, singing and accompanying yourselves with music in your hearts to Jehovah, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ giving thanks always for all things to our God and Father.” Being continually replenished with the spirit by these means, we are able to go to others with the truths of God’s Word and bring them the spiritual help that is so much needed in these times of world crisis. During May this will be done by Jehovah’s witnesses in offering people two bound books containing Bible-study assistance of great importance, together with two booklets, on a contribution of $1.
YOU CAN SHARE IN THE NEW SONG
Do you feel cheered as you face the future? Do you feel like singing as you consider the nations’ prospects? There is a song that will warm and refresh the hearts of all men of good will, regardless of nationality. It means health and salvation to sing that song. Although previous generations could not sing it, it has already caused thousands today to raise their voices in praise of its Author and Composer. That is because Jehovah God, who is Creator also of new heavens and a new earth, has written the “words and music” of this thrilling song and is now causing it to be sung earthwide for the upbuilding of even further thousands. Now you can share in the singing of the “good news.” It is the song of God’s kingdom come, set up in the heavens in the midst of its enemies in heaven and on earth. If you have not yet read in this issue of The Watchtower the article entitled “A New Song for All Men of Good Will,” do so at once. It will acquaint you with that song and how to sing it. Then, obtain extra copies of this issue and help your friends to rejoice in the hope ahead. Send only $1 for 30 copies.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 25: A New Song for All Men of Good Will. Page 227.
June 1: The Time to Sing the New Song. Page 234.

