
August
Thursday, August 1

A book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah and for those meditating on his name.​—Mal. 3:16.



Can you think of a reason why Jehovah would record in his “book of remembrance” the names of those whose speech shows that they fear him and meditate on his name? Our speech reveals what is in our heart. Jesus said: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matt. 12:34) Jehovah wants those who love him to enjoy life forever in the new world. The way we speak can determine whether Jehovah will accept our worship. (Jas. 1:26) Some of those who do not love God speak in an aggressive, harsh, and proud way. (2 Tim. 3:1-5) We do not want to be like them. We are eager to please Jehovah with our speech. But could Jehovah be pleased with us if we used gracious and kind speech at our Christian meetings or in the ministry but spoke in a harsh and unloving way to family members behind closed doors?​—1 Pet. 3:7. w22.04 5 ¶4-5




Friday, August 2

These will hate the prostitute and will make her devastated and naked, and they will eat up her flesh and completely burn her with fire.​—Rev. 17:16.



God puts the thought into the hearts of the ten horns and the wild beast to carry out the destruction of Babylon the Great. Yes, Jehovah will motivate the nations to use the scarlet-colored wild beast, that is, the United Nations, to turn on the world empire of false religion and completely destroy it. (Rev. 18:21-24) What does this mean for us? We need to maintain “the form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God.” (Jas. 1:27) Never would we want to allow ourselves to be influenced by the false teachings, the pagan celebrations, the lax moral standards, and the spiritistic practices of Babylon the Great! And we would continually call out to people to “get out of her,” so that they can avoid sharing in her guilt before God.​—Rev. 18:4. w22.05 11 ¶17; 14 ¶18




Saturday, August 3

I will mention Jehovah’s acts of loyal love.​—Isa. 63:7.



Parents, create opportunities to teach your children about Jehovah and the many good things he has done for you. (Deut. 6:6, 7) This is especially important if due to a religiously divided household, you cannot study regularly with your children at home. A sister named Christine says: “Opportunities to discuss spiritual things were so few that I took advantage of any moment we had.” In addition, speak positively about Jehovah’s organization and about your brothers and sisters. Do not criticize the elders. What you say about them can determine whether your children will turn to them in times of need. Promote peace at home. Regularly express your love for your husband and your children. Speak about your husband in a kind and respectful way, and train your children to do the same. Thus, you create a peaceful atmosphere that is conducive to learning about Jehovah.​—Jas. 3:18. w22.04 18 ¶10-11




Sunday, August 4

I know your deeds.​—Rev. 3:1.



Jesus’ message to those in the congregation in Ephesus indicated that they had shown endurance and that they had continued without letup to serve Jehovah in spite of various challenges. Even so, they had lost the love they had at first. They needed to rekindle that love​—otherwise, their worship would not be acceptable. Likewise today, we need to do more than endure. We need to endure for the right reasons. Our God is interested in not only what we do but also why we do it. Our motives are important to him because he expects our worship to be based on our deep love and appreciation for him. (Prov. 16:2; Mark 12:29, 30) We must continue to remain awake and alert. The members of the congregation in Sardis had a different problem. Even though they had been spiritually active in the past, they were becoming lax in their service to God. Jesus told them to “wake up.” (Rev. 3:1-3) Of course, Jehovah will not forget our work.​—Heb. 6:10. w22.05 3 ¶6-7




Monday, August 5

There is benefit in every kind of hard work.​—Prov. 14:23.



Solomon called the enjoyment that we can derive from our hard work “the gift of God.” (Eccl. 5:18, 19) Solomon knew what he was talking about. He was a worker! He built houses, planted vineyards, and made gardens and pools. He also built cities. (1 Ki. 9:19; Eccl. 2:4-6) That was hard work, and no doubt it gave him a measure of satisfaction. But Solomon did not rely on those activities alone to bring him happiness. He also engaged in spiritual pursuits. For example, he supervised the construction of a glorious temple for Jehovah’s worship​—a seven-year building project! (1 Ki. 6:38; 9:1) After sharing in all sorts of activities, both secular and spiritual, Solomon realized that spiritual activities are far more important than secular pursuits. He wrote: “The conclusion of the matter, everything having been heard, is: Fear the true God and keep his commandments.”​—Eccl. 12:13. w22.05 22 ¶8




Tuesday, August 6

God . . . by Christ freely forgave you.​—Eph. 4:32.



The Bible is filled with examples of individuals whom Jehovah freely forgave. Who comes to your mind? Perhaps you think of King Manasseh. That wicked man sinned against Jehovah in terrible ways. He took the lead in false worship. He killed his own children, offering them as sacrifices to pagan gods. He even went so far as to place a carved image of a false god in Jehovah’s sacred temple. Of him, the Bible says: “He did on a grand scale what was bad in Jehovah’s eyes, to offend him.” (2 Chron. 33:2-7) Yet, when Manasseh showed heartfelt repentance, Jehovah freely forgave him. (2 Chron. 33:12, 13) Perhaps you also think of King David, who committed serious sins against Jehovah, including adultery and murder. Yet, when David sincerely repented and acknowledged his error, Jehovah forgave him as well. (2 Sam. 12:9, 10, 13, 14) Yes, we can be certain that Jehovah is eager to forgive. w22.06 3 ¶7




Wednesday, August 7

Exercise patience; make your hearts firm.​—Jas. 5:8.



It is not always easy to keep our hope strong. We might become impatient while we wait on God. However, Jehovah is eternal, and his view of time is different from ours. (2 Pet. 3:8, 9) He will work out his purpose in the best way possible, but he may not act when we expect him to. What can help us to keep our hope strong as we wait patiently for God to fulfill his promises? (Jas. 5:7) Remain close to Jehovah, the one who guarantees our hope. In fact, the Bible closely links hope to faith that Jehovah exists and that he is “the rewarder of those earnestly seeking him.” (Heb. 11:1, 6) The more real Jehovah is to us, the greater our confidence will be that he will do all that he has promised. To keep our hope strong, we must pray to Jehovah and read his Word. Though we cannot see Jehovah, we can draw close to him. We can speak to him in prayer, confident that he will listen to us.​—Jer. 29:11, 12. w22.10 26-27 ¶11-13




Thursday, August 8

Job began to speak and to curse the day of his birth.​—Job 3:1.



Imagine the scene. Sitting among the ashes, Job is in constant pain. (Job 2:8) His companions relentlessly attack his character and attempt to destroy his reputation. His trials weigh on him like heavy stones, while his grief over the loss of his children claws at his heart. At first, Job is silent. (Job 2:13) If Job’s companions interpret his silence as a sign that Job is going to turn his back on his Creator, they are sorely mistaken. At one point, Job​—possibly raising his head and looking directly at his false friends—​says: “Until I die, I will not renounce my integrity!” (Job 27:5) What helped Job to be so courageous and strong despite all his suffering? Even when he was at his lowest point, he never lost hope that his loving God would eventually bring him relief. He knew that even if he died, Jehovah would resurrect him.​—Job 14:13-15. w22.06 22 ¶9




Friday, August 9

You must pray, then, this way: “Our Father in the heavens, let your name be sanctified. Let your Kingdom come. Let your will take place.”​—Matt. 6:9, 10.



We have been granted a marvelous privilege​—that of approaching the Maker of heaven and earth in prayer. Just think: We can pour out our hearts to Jehovah at any time and in any language. We can pray to him from a hospital bed or from a prison cell, confident that our loving Father will listen to us. We do not take this privilege for granted. King David treasured the privilege of prayer. He sang to Jehovah: “May my prayer be as incense prepared before you.” (Ps. 141:1, 2) In David’s time, the sacred incense used in true worship by the priests was prepared with great care. (Ex. 30:34, 35) David’s reference to incense suggests that he wanted to give careful thought to what he was going to say to his heavenly Father. That is our earnest desire too. We want our prayers to please Jehovah. w22.07 20 ¶1-2; 21 ¶4




Saturday, August 10

“Vengeance is mine; I will repay,” says Jehovah.​—Rom. 12:19.



Vengeance belongs to Jehovah. Jehovah has not authorized us to seek revenge when someone sins against us. (Rom. 12:20, 21) With our limited and imperfect viewpoint, we are simply not in a position to judge matters correctly, as God can. (Heb. 4:13) And, at times, we allow our emotions to interfere with our good judgment. Jehovah inspired James to write: “Man’s anger does not bring about God’s righteousness.” (Jas. 1:20) We can be certain that Jehovah will do the right thing and make sure that perfect justice will be carried out. Forgiveness shows our confidence in Jehovah’s justice. By leaving matters in Jehovah’s hands, we show that we are confident that Jehovah will undo all the harm that has been caused by sin. In his promised new world, painful emotional wounds “will not be called to mind, nor will they come up into the heart” ever again.​—Isa. 65:17. w22.06 10-11 ¶11-12




Sunday, August 11

You will be hated by all the nations on account of my name.​—Matt. 24:9.



The very fact that we are experiencing such hatred is proof that we have Jehovah’s approval. (Matt. 5:11, 12) The Devil is behind this opposition. But he is no match for Jesus! With Jesus’ support, the good news is reaching people of all nations. Consider the evidence. As Kingdom preachers, we also face the challenge of overcoming a language barrier. In the revelation that he gave to the apostle John, Jesus disclosed that in our day the good news would overcome that obstacle. (Rev. 14:6, 7) How so? We are giving as many people as possible a chance to respond to the Kingdom message. Today, people around the world can read Bible-based material on our jw.org website because it contains information in over 1,000 languages! Approval was given to translate the Enjoy Life Forever! book​—our main study tool for making disciples—​into more than 700 languages! w22.07 9 ¶6-7




Monday, August 12

There is success through many advisers.​—Prov. 11:14.



Jesus felt compassion for people. The apostle Matthew reports: “On seeing the crowds, he felt pity for them, because they were skinned and thrown about like sheep without a shepherd.” (Matt. 9:36) And how does Jehovah feel? Jesus said: “It is not a desirable thing to my Father who is in heaven for even one of these little ones to perish.” (Matt. 18:14) How heartwarming that is! As we get to know Jesus better, our love for Jehovah grows. You can also learn to be more loving and make progress as a Christian by getting acquainted with mature brothers and sisters in your congregation. Notice how joyful they are. They have no regrets about their decision to serve Jehovah. Ask them to tell you about some of the experiences they have had in Jehovah’s service. When you have an important decision to make, ask them for advice. After all, “there is success through many advisers.” w22.08 3 ¶6-7




Tuesday, August 13

The eyes of Jehovah are on the righteous.​—1 Pet. 3:12.



All of us will face some kind of trial. However, we will never have to face a trial on our own. Like a loving father, Jehovah is always watching over us. He is by our side, ready to hear our pleas for help and eager to support us. (Isa. 43:2) We are convinced that we can cope with adversity because he has generously provided us with everything we need to endure. He has given us the gift of prayer, the Bible, an abundance of spiritual food, and a loving brotherhood to help us in times of need. How grateful we are to have a heavenly Father who watches over us! “Our hearts rejoice in him.” (Ps. 33:21) We can show Jehovah that we appreciate his loving care by taking advantage of all his provisions to help us. We also need to do our part to remain under God’s care. In other words, if we continue to do our best to obey Jehovah and do what is right in his eyes, he will watch over us forever! w22.08 13 ¶15-16




Wednesday, August 14

The very essence of your word is truth.​—Ps. 119:160.



Many today are suffering from a lack of confidence. They do not know whom they can trust. They wonder whether people they look up to​—politicians, scientists and businessmen—​really have their best interests at heart. In addition, they do not have high regard for Christendom’s clergy. So it is not surprising that they view with skepticism the book those religious leaders claim to represent​—the Bible. As servants of Jehovah, we are convinced that he is “the God of truth” and that he always wants what is best for us. (Ps. 31:5; Isa. 48:17) We know that we can trust what we read in the Bible. We agree with what one Bible scholar wrote: “There is no hint of falseness or chance of failure in anything God has said. God’s people can trust what he says because they trust the God who has said it.” w23.01 2 ¶1-2




Thursday, August 15

Let us consider one another.​—Heb. 10:24.



We build up our brothers and sisters when we strengthen their faith in Jehovah. Some are ridiculed by unbelievers. Others are dealing with serious health problems or are struggling to overcome hurt feelings. Still others have been waiting a long time for this system of things to end. These situations can be a test of faith for Christians today. Members of the first-century congregation faced similar challenges. The apostle Paul used the Scriptures to build up the faith of his brothers and sisters. For example, Jewish Christians may have felt at a loss to answer the criticisms of unbelieving family members who claimed that Judaism was superior to Christianity. No doubt Paul’s letter to the Hebrews greatly strengthened those Christians. (Heb. 1:5, 6; 2:2, 3; 9:24, 25) They could use his powerful reasonings to silence their accusers. w22.08 23-24 ¶12-14




Friday, August 16

Blessed is the man who puts his trust in Jehovah.​—Jer. 17:7.



People in Satan’s world do not know whom they can trust. They are constantly disappointed by the conduct of commercial, political, and religious leaders. That feeling extends to friends, neighbors, and even family members. This should not surprise us. The Bible foretold: “In the last days . . . , men will be . . . disloyal, . . . slanderers, . . . betrayers.” In other words, people would reflect the personality of the god of this system of things, who is far from trustworthy. (2 Tim. 3:1-4; 2 Cor. 4:4) As Christians, however, we know that we can put our full trust in Jehovah. We are convinced that he loves us and that he “will never abandon” his friends. (Ps. 9:10) We can also trust in Christ Jesus because he gave his life for us. (1 Pet. 3:18) And we have learned from personal experience that the Bible provides reliable guidance.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. w22.09 2 ¶1-2




Saturday, August 17

Happy is everyone who fears Jehovah, who walks in His ways.​—Ps. 128:1.



True happiness is not simply a lighthearted feeling that comes and goes. It can last throughout a person’s life. How so? Jesus explained in his Sermon on the Mount: “Happy are those conscious of their spiritual need.” (Matt. 5:3) Jesus knew that humans are made with an intense desire to know and worship their Creator, Jehovah God. That is our “spiritual need.” And since Jehovah is “the happy God,” those who worship him can also be happy. (1 Tim. 1:11) Do we need ideal circumstances in our life to be happy? No. In his sermon, Jesus said that even “those who mourn” can be happy. Jesus said the same about “those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake.” (Matt. 5:4, 10, 11) Jesus was teaching us that happiness results, not from having ideal circumstances in our life, but from satisfying our spiritual need and drawing close to God.​—Jas. 4:8. w22.10 6 ¶1-3




Sunday, August 18

The man of true discernment remains silent.​—Prov. 11:12.



Discernment will help a Christian to distinguish between “a time to be silent and a time to speak.” (Eccl. 3:7) “Speech is silver, but silence is golden” is a common expression in some cultures. In other words, there are times when it is better to keep quiet than to speak. Consider an example. One experienced elder is often asked to help other congregations with their challenging problems. Commenting on this, a fellow elder said, “He is always careful never to share sensitive information about other congregations.” The elder’s discernment has earned him the respect of the brothers with whom he serves on the body of elders. They are certain that he will not reveal their confidential matters to others. Honesty is another element of trust. We trust an honest person because we know that he will always speak the truth.​—Eph. 4:25; Heb. 13:18. w22.09 12 ¶14-15




Monday, August 19

There is no wisdom, nor discernment, nor counsel in opposition to Jehovah.​—Prov. 21:30.



Many turn a deaf ear when true wisdom “cries aloud in the street.” (Prov. 1:20) According to the Bible, there are three groups of people who reject wisdom: “inexperienced ones,” “ridiculers,” and “foolish ones.” (Prov. 1:22-25) The “inexperienced ones” are those who are naive, easily persuaded, or deceived. (Prov. 14:15, ftn.) Think, for example, of the millions who are being misled by religious or political leaders. Some are horrified when they learn that they have been fooled by such leaders. But those mentioned at Proverbs 1:22 choose to remain inexperienced because they like it that way. (Jer. 5:31) They do not want to learn what the Bible says or to be held accountable to its standards. We certainly do not want to imitate those who are willfully ignorant!​—Prov. 1:32; 27:12. w22.10 19 ¶5-7




Tuesday, August 20

Subject yourselves to every human creation.​—1 Pet. 2:13.



God’s organization gives us direction to keep us safe. We are regularly reminded to give the elders our current contact information so that they can reach us during an emergency. We may also receive direction about sheltering in place, evacuation, and obtaining relief supplies or about how and when to assist others. If we fail to obey, we could put in jeopardy our life and the lives of the elders who are keeping watch over us. (Heb. 13:17) Many brothers and sisters who were displaced by a disaster or civil unrest have done their best to adapt to their new situation and become involved right away in theocratic activities. Like the early Christians who were scattered by persecution, they continue “declaring the good news of the word.” (Acts 8:4) Preaching helps them to focus on the Kingdom rather than on difficult circumstances. As a result, they have maintained their joy and peace. w22.12 19 ¶12-13




Wednesday, August 21

Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid.​—Ps. 118:6.



Jehovah values us as individuals. Before sending out his apostles to preach, Jesus helped them to overcome their fear of opposition. (Matt. 10:29-31) He did so by talking about one of the most common birds in Israel: the sparrow. Those birds had little value in Jesus’ day. But he told his disciples: “Not one of them will fall to the ground without your Father’s knowledge.” Then he added: “You are worth more than many sparrows.” Jesus thus assured his disciples that Jehovah valued them as individuals, so they had no reason to fear persecution. The disciples surely recalled Jesus’ words when they saw sparrows while preaching in towns and villages. Whenever you see a little bird, remember that Jehovah values you as an individual because you too “are worth more than many sparrows.” With his support, you can face opposition with confidence. w23.03 18 ¶12




Thursday, August 22

You have made Pharaoh and his servants despise us and you have put a sword in their hand to kill us.​—Ex. 5:21.



At times, we face hardships​—such as family opposition or the loss of our job. When we endure adversity for a long time, we may feel hopeless and downhearted. Satan takes advantage of such opportunities and seeks to get us to doubt Jehovah’s love for us. The Devil wants us to question whether Jehovah or His organization is responsible for our suffering. Something similar happened to some of the Israelites in Egypt. At first they believed that Jehovah had appointed Moses and Aaron to deliver them from slavery. (Ex. 4:29-31) But later when Pharaoh made their lives harder, they blamed Moses and Aaron for their problems. (Ex. 5:19, 20) They blamed God’s loyal servants. How sad! If you have been enduring hardships for a long time, pour out your heart to Jehovah in prayer and look to him for support. w22.11 15 ¶5-6




Friday, August 23

Most truly I say to you, the hour is coming, and it is now, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who have paid attention will live.​—John 5:25.



Jehovah is the Life-Giver and has the power to bring people back to life. He empowered the prophet Elijah to resurrect the son of the widow of Zarephath. (1 Ki. 17:21-23) Later, with God’s help, the prophet Elisha restored the life of the son of a Shunammite woman. (2 Ki. 4:18-20, 34-37) Those and other resurrections prove that Jehovah has the power to bring people back to life. While on earth, Jesus proved that his Father had given him that power. (John 11:23-25, 43, 44) Now Jesus is in heaven and has been given “all authority . . . in heaven and on the earth.” Thus, he is in position to fulfill the promise that “all those in the memorial tombs” will be raised to life with the prospect of remaining alive forever.​—Matt. 28:18; John 5:26-29. w22.12 5 ¶10




Saturday, August 24

The house of Israel will refuse to listen to you, for they do not want to listen to me.​—Ezek. 3:7.



By rejecting Ezekiel, the people were rejecting Jehovah. The words of today’s text assured Ezekiel that the people’s rejection did not mean that he had failed as a prophet. Jehovah also assured Ezekiel that when the judgments he proclaimed came true, the people would “know that a prophet was among them.” (Ezek. 2:5; 33:33) No doubt those comforting thoughts gave Ezekiel the strength he needed to fulfill his ministry. We too derive strength from knowing that we have been sent by Jehovah. He honors us by calling us his “witnesses.” (Isa. 43:10) What a grand privilege that is! Just as Jehovah urged Ezekiel: “Do not be afraid,” Jehovah urges us: “Do not be in dread.” (Ezek. 2:6) Why is there no reason to fear our opposers? Like Ezekiel, we are sent by Jehovah and have His backing.​—Isa. 44:8. w22.11 3-4 ¶4-5




Sunday, August 25

The trustworthy person keeps a confidence.​—Prov. 11:13.



Today we deeply appreciate our trustworthy elders and ministerial servants. We are well cared for by these faithful brothers, and we thank Jehovah for them! In what ways, though, can we prove ourselves to be trustworthy? We love our brothers and sisters, and we are interested in their well-being. However, we must be balanced and respect their privacy. Some in the first-century Christian congregation were “gossipers and meddlers in other people’s affairs, talking about things they should not.” (1 Tim. 5:13) We certainly do not want to be like them. But suppose someone shares with us personal information with the understanding that it is not to be repeated. For instance, a sister might tell us about a health problem she is experiencing or some other trial she is facing, asking us to keep the matter to ourselves. We should respect her wishes. w22.09 10 ¶7-8




Monday, August 26

Be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



The Greek expression translated “making your mind over” can be rendered “renovation of your mind.” Therefore, we cannot simply decorate our life with a few good works. Rather, we must examine the person we are deep inside and make any needed changes so that we can bring our life as close as possible to Jehovah’s standards. We should do this, not once, but continually. When we reach perfection, we will always be able to please Jehovah in everything we do. In the meantime, we need to keep working hard toward that goal. Notice the connection Paul made between making our mind over and discerning God’s will, as recorded at Romans 12:2. Instead of passively allowing ourselves to be molded by this system of things, we must first examine ourselves to determine how much we are letting God’s thinking​—not the world’s—​influence our goals and decisions. w23.01 8-9 ¶3-4




Tuesday, August 27

Throw your burden on Jehovah, and he will sustain you. Never will he allow the righteous one to fall.​—Ps. 55:22.



Does Jehovah intervene in every situation we encounter? Does he maneuver every event in our life, so that all bad things that happen are for a good reason? No, the Bible does not support that view. (Eccl. 8:9; 9:11) However, we do know this: When we face a trial, Jehovah is aware of it and he hears our cries for help. (Ps. 34:15; Isa. 59:1) More than that, Jehovah can help us to endure hardships successfully. How? One way that Jehovah helps us is by providing comfort and encouragement, often just at the right time. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4) Can you think of a time in your life when Jehovah sustained you by providing comfort and encouragement just when you needed it most? Often, it is only after we look back on a hardship that we see how Jehovah helped us get through it. w23.01 17-18 ¶13-15




Wednesday, August 28

The wild beast that was but is not . . . goes off into destruction.​—Rev. 17:11.



This wild beast looks almost the same as the seven-headed wild beast with the exception that it is scarlet-colored. It is called “the image of the wild beast” and is described as “an eighth king.” (Rev. 13:14, 15; 17:3, 8) This “king” is spoken of as coming into existence, then going out of existence, and later reappearing. How well this description fits the United Nations organization, which promotes the interests of the worldwide political system! It existed first as the League of Nations. Then it went out of existence during World War II. It later emerged again in its present-day form. By means of their propaganda, the political beasts stir up opposition to Jehovah and his people. Symbolically, they gather “the kings of the entire inhabited earth” together to the war of Armageddon, which is “the great day of God the Almighty.”​—Rev. 16:13, 14, 16. w22.05 10 ¶10-11




Thursday, August 29

How do you read?​—Luke 10:26.



When Jesus learned to read the Sacred Writings on his own, he not only came to know the Scriptures well but also loved them and allowed them to influence his actions. For example, recall the incident in the temple when Jesus was just 12 years old. The teachers who were well-versed in the Mosaic Law were in “amazement at [Jesus’] understanding and his answers.” (Luke 2:46, 47, 52) We too can come to know and love God’s Word as we regularly read the Scriptures. We can learn from what Jesus said to those familiar with the Law, including the scribes, the Pharisees, and the Sadducees. Those religious leaders read the Scriptures often, but they failed to benefit from what they read. Jesus highlighted three ways in which these men were not getting the most out of the Scriptures. His words to them will help us improve in our ability (1) to understand what we read, (2) to find spiritual treasures, and (3) to allow God’s Word to mold us. w23.02 8-9 ¶2-3




Friday, August 30

The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself.​—Prov. 22:3.



Some dangers that we must avoid include flirting, heavy drinking, overeating, engaging in hurtful speech, as well as viewing violent entertainment, pornography, and similar things. (Ps. 101:3) The Devil is constantly looking for opportunities to damage our friendship with Jehovah. (1 Pet. 5:8) If we are not watchful, Satan can plant in our mind and heart seeds of envy, dishonesty, greed, hatred, haughtiness, and resentment. (Gal. 5:19-21) If we do not take immediate steps to uproot them, they will continue to grow like a poisonous plant and cause trouble. (Jas. 1:14, 15) One subtle danger is bad association. We must remember that we will be strongly influenced by those with whom we choose to spend our time. (1 Cor. 15:33) If we pay attention to ourselves, we will avoid unnecessary association with those who do not live by Jehovah’s standards. (Luke 21:34; 2 Cor. 6:15) We will see the danger and steer clear of it. w23.02 16 ¶7; 17 ¶10-11




Saturday, August 31

This is what the love of God means, that we observe his commandments.​—1 John 5:3.



Your love for Jehovah has grown as you have learned more about him. Surely you want to draw closer to him now and forever. And you can. He kindly encourages you to make his heart rejoice. (Prov. 23:15, 16) You can do that not only by words but also by actions. The way you live your life will show that you truly love Jehovah. That is the best goal in life you could ever choose. How can you demonstrate your love for Jehovah? First, you offer a special prayer in which you dedicate yourself to the only true God. (Ps. 40:8) Then, you make that private dedication public by getting baptized. That becomes a happy milestone, a great turning point. You start out on a new life, not for yourself, but for Jehovah. (Rom. 14:8; 1 Pet. 4:1, 2) That may sound like a big step to take, and it is. But it opens the way for the very best life. w23.03 5-6 ¶14-15




