
December
Sunday, December 1

What prevents me from getting baptized?​—Acts 8:36.



Was the court official from Ethiopia truly ready for baptism? Consider: The Ethiopian man “had gone to Jerusalem to worship.” (Acts 8:27) He must therefore have been a Jewish proselyte; he had converted to Judaism. No doubt he had learned about Jehovah from the sacred writings of the Hebrew Scriptures. Still, he was eager to learn more. In fact, when Philip met that official on the road, he found him poring over a scroll of the prophet Isaiah’s writings. (Acts 8:28) He wanted to keep learning. He had traveled all the way from Ethiopia in order to worship Jehovah at the temple in Jerusalem. The Ethiopian learned from Philip some vital new truths, including the identity of the Messiah. (Acts 8:34, 35) His love for Jehovah and His Son grew. He was moved to make the life-changing decision to get baptized as a follower of Jesus Christ. Seeing that the man was ready, Philip baptized him. w23.03 8-9 ¶3-6




Monday, December 2

Let your words always be gracious.​—Col. 4:6.



We cannot please Jehovah if we are untruthful. (Prov. 6:16, 17) Although many people today consider lying to be a normal part of speech, we stick to Jehovah’s view on the matter. (Ps. 15:1, 2) Of course, we avoid telling outright lies, but we also avoid deliberately giving the wrong impression to others. We should also avoid spreading harmful gossip. (Prov. 25:23; 2 Thess. 3:11) If you see that a conversation is turning into harmful gossip, steer the discussion toward something positive. Since we live in a world where bad speech is rampant, we must work hard to ensure that our speech pleases Jehovah. He will bless our sincere efforts to use our speech in a positive way in the ministry, at the meetings, and in our daily conversations. When the influence of this ungodly system of things finally comes to an end, it will be much easier to honor Jehovah with our speech.​—Jude 15. w22.04 9 ¶18-20




Tuesday, December 3

We love, because he first loved us.​—1 John 4:19.



When we consider how much Jehovah and Jesus love us, we are moved to love them in return. (1 John 4:10) We love them even more when we realize that Jesus died for us personally. The apostle Paul acknowledged this and expressed his appreciation when he wrote to the Galatians, saying: “The Son of God . . . loved me and handed himself over for me.” (Gal. 2:20) On the basis of the ransom, Jehovah has drawn you to him so that you can be his friend. (John 6:44) Does it not warm your heart to know that Jehovah has seen something good in you and that he paid the highest price so that you can be counted as his friend? Does it not strengthen your love for Jehovah and Jesus? We do well to ask ourselves, ‘What will that love compel me to do?’ Our love for God and Christ moves us to show love to others.​—2 Cor. 5:14, 15; 6:1, 2. w23.01 28 ¶6-7




Wednesday, December 4

I will change the language of the peoples to a pure language.​—Zeph. 3:9.



The Bible plays a vital role in Jehovah’s purpose to have his worshippers “serve him shoulder to shoulder.” Jehovah had many parts of the Scriptures written in such a way that they would be understood only by humble readers. (Luke 10:21) People everywhere read the Bible. But only the humble truly understand and apply what it says. (2 Cor. 3:15, 16) We discern Jehovah’s wisdom in the Bible. Jehovah uses the Scriptures not only to teach us as a group but also to instruct and comfort us as individuals. All of us can sense Jehovah’s personal interest in us as we read his Word. (Isa. 30:21) How often have you turned to the Scriptures and read a verse that seemed written just for you? Yet, the Bible appeals to millions of people. How can it contain such up-to-date information that is tailored to your personal needs? This is possible only because the Bible is the work of a uniquely wise Author.​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17. w23.02 4-5 ¶8-10




Thursday, December 5

Ponder over these things; be absorbed in them, so that your advancement may be plainly seen by all people.​—1 Tim. 4:15.



As true Christians, we love Jehovah very much. We want our service to him to be of the best possible quality. If we are going to reach our full potential, though, we need to set spiritual goals, such as cultivating Christian qualities, learning useful skills, and looking for ways to serve others. Why should we be interested in making spiritual progress? Primarily, we want to please our loving heavenly Father. Jehovah is happy when he sees us use our talents and abilities to the full in his service. In addition, we want to make spiritual progress so that we can be more helpful to our brothers and sisters. (1 Thess. 4:9, 10) No matter how long we have been in the truth, we all can make spiritual progress. w22.04 22 ¶1-2




Friday, December 6

They will eat up her flesh and completely burn her with fire.​—Rev. 17:16.



The political elements of this world will soon turn on Babylon the Great, the world empire of false religion. This action will mark the beginning of the great tribulation. Will this result in a flood of new ones deciding to turn to the worship of Jehovah? No. To the contrary, Revelation chapter 6 shows that at that critical time, people who are not serving Jehovah will seek protection from the political and commercial systems of this world, which are compared to mountains. Since those people will not take a stand in favor of God’s Kingdom, Jehovah will consider them to be opposers. (Luke 11:23; Rev. 6:15-17) Truly, Jehovah’s faithful servants will stand out as different during that desperate time of tribulation. They will still be the only group of people on earth serving Jehovah God and refusing to give their support to “the wild beast.”​—Rev. 13:14-17. w22.05 16-17 ¶8-9




Saturday, December 7

He had everlasting good news to declare to those who dwell on the earth, to every nation and tribe and tongue and people.​—Rev. 14:6.



The “good news of the Kingdom” is not the only message that God’s people are to declare. (Matt. 24:14) They also need to support the work of the angels who are described in Revelation chapters 8 through 10. These angels announce a series of woes for those who reject God’s Kingdom. Thus, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been declaring a judgment message, likened to “hail and fire,” revealing God’s judgments on the various elements of Satan’s wicked world. (Rev. 8:7, 13) People need to know that the end is near so that they can make drastic changes in their lives and survive Jehovah’s day of anger. (Zeph. 2:2, 3) But this message is not popular. Declaring it calls for courage on our part. During the great tribulation, the final judgment message will become more hard-hitting.​—Rev. 16:21. w22.05 7 ¶18-19




Sunday, December 8

You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart and with your whole soul and with your whole mind.​—Matt. 22:37.



Consider a Christian couple who are about to become parents. Over the years, they may have heard a number of talks on the subject of raising children. But now those principles will take on new meaning for them. They are going to have a child of their own to bring up. What an awesome responsibility! Certainly, new circumstances can change our perspective on well-known Bible principles. This is one reason why Jehovah’s worshippers read the Scriptures and, as Israel’s kings were told to do, meditate on them “all the days” of their life. (Deut. 17:19) Parents, you have one of the greatest privileges a Christian can have, namely, to teach your children about Jehovah. But you want to do more than merely impart information about our God. You want to help your children to love him dearly. w22.05 26 ¶2-3




Monday, December 9

Clothe yourselves with the new personality.​—Col. 3:10.



It is not enough for us to feel sorry about a sinful course or a sin that we have committed. We must also be ready to take action. Conversion is an important factor that Jehovah considers when deciding to extend forgiveness. Conversion means “a turning around.” In other words, a person must change course by leaving his bad way and pursuing the way of Jehovah. (Isa. 55:7) The individual must transform his mind so that he is guided by the thinking of Jehovah. (Rom. 12:2; Eph. 4:23) He must be determined to leave behind his former bad ways of thinking and acting. (Col. 3:7-9) Of course, it is our faith in the sacrifice of Christ that provides the real basis for Jehovah to forgive us and cleanse us from sin. Jehovah will extend the value of that sacrifice to us when he sees that we are making a sincere effort to change our course of conduct.​—1 John 1:7. w22.06 6 ¶16-17




Tuesday, December 10

Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer.​—Rev. 2:10.



Humans have a bad record of harming one another. (Eccl. 8:9) For example, people abuse their authority, criminals commit violent acts, bullies at school insult and threaten their classmates, and some people even treat their family members brutally. No wonder humans fear other humans! How does Satan try to take advantage of our fear of man? Satan uses fear of man to try to force us to make compromises and to stop us from preaching. Under the influence of Satan, governments have banned our work and persecuted us. (Luke 21:12) Various elements of Satan’s world spread misleading information and vicious lies about Jehovah’s Witnesses. People who believe these lies may mock us or even attack us physically. (Matt. 10:36) Are we surprised at Satan’s tactics? Not at all. He was already using them in the first century.​—Acts 5:27, 28, 40. w22.06 16 ¶10-11




Wednesday, December 11

Those bringing the many to righteousness [will shine] like the stars, forever and ever.​—Dan. 12:3.



Who will be among “the many” brought to righteousness? These will include those who are resurrected and also those who survive Armageddon together with any children who may be born in the new world. By the end of the 1,000 years, all living on earth will be perfect. We must remember that being perfect does not in itself mean that a person will automatically gain everlasting life. Think of Adam and Eve. They were perfect, but they needed to demonstrate their obedience to Jehovah God before they would be granted everlasting life. And, sadly, they failed to obey him. (Rom. 5:12) Since all will have gained perfection by the end of the 1,000 years, will all those perfect people fully support Jehovah’s rule forever? Or will some prove to be like Adam and Eve​—who despite being perfect became unfaithful? These questions will need to be answered. w22.09 22-23 ¶12-14




Thursday, December 12

The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord and of his Christ.​—Rev. 11:15.



When you look at world conditions, do you find it difficult to maintain a positive outlook? Family ties are fraying. People in general are becoming more and more violent, selfish, and aggressive. Many find it difficult to trust those in authority. But these very conditions can give you confidence. Why? Because people are acting exactly as was foretold in a remarkable prophecy about “the last days.” (2 Tim. 3:1-5) The fulfillment of this prophecy, which is impossible for any sincere person to deny, provides evidence that Christ Jesus has begun ruling as King of God’s Kingdom. But this is only one of many prophecies concerning the Kingdom. All these prophecies fit together like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle to provide a clear picture of where we are in Jehovah’s timetable of events. w22.07 2 ¶1-2




Friday, December 13

Wisdom is proved righteous by its works.​—Matt. 11:19.



During the COVID-19 pandemic, we received clear direction about how to hold congregation meetings and engage in the preaching work. Almost overnight, we began attending Christian meetings, assemblies, and conventions by means of videoconferencing tools. We also began witnessing almost entirely by letter and telephone. Jehovah blessed our efforts. Many branches reported notable increases in the number of publishers. In fact, many have had encouraging experiences during that time. Some may have felt that the organization was being overly cautious with regard to the pandemic. But time and time again, it became evident that the direction we received was well-founded. And as we meditate on the loving way in which Jesus is leading his people, we are assured that no matter what tomorrow may bring, Jehovah and his beloved Son will be with us.​—Heb. 13:5, 6. w22.07 13 ¶15-16




Saturday, December 14

Pray constantly. Give thanks for everything. This is God’s will for you in Christ Jesus.​—1 Thess. 5:17, 18.



In addition to praising Jehovah in our prayers, we are moved to thank him for the marvelous things he provides. For instance, we can thank him for the magnificent colors seen in flowers, the endless variety of delicious food, and the refreshing company of dear friends. Our loving Father gives us this and much more, just to make us happy. (Ps. 104:12-15, 24) Even more important, we thank Jehovah for the abundant spiritual food he provides and for the marvelous hope we have for the future. It can be so easy to forget to thank Jehovah for all that he does for us. What can help you to remember? You could make a list of specific requests you have made and periodically check it to see how Jehovah has answered them. Then say a prayer to thank him for his help.​—Col. 3:15. w22.07 22 ¶8-9




Sunday, December 15

His delight is in the law of Jehovah, and he reads His law in an undertone day and night.​—Ps. 1:2.



We know that it is not enough simply to study the truth. To benefit fully, we must live the truth, that is, apply what we learn in our life. Only then will the truth bring us real happiness. (Jas. 1:25) How can we make sure that we are living the truth? One brother suggests making a personal examination to identify areas where we are doing well and areas where we want to make improvement. The apostle Paul put it this way: “To the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in this same course.” (Phil. 3:16) Just think of the benefits that come from doing our best to “go on walking in the truth”! Not only do we improve the quality of our own life but we also bring joy to Jehovah and to our fellow believers. (Prov. 27:11; 3 John 4) Really, could we have any greater reasons to love the truth and to live the truth? w22.08 18-19 ¶16-18




Monday, December 16

Shepherd the flock of God.​—1 Pet. 5:2.



How can elders show that they love Jehovah and Jesus? An important way is by caring for the needs of Jesus’ sheep. (1 Pet. 5:1, 2) Jesus made that point clear to the apostle Peter. After denying Jesus three times, Peter was likely desperate to prove that he loved Jesus. Following his resurrection, Jesus asked Peter: “Simon son of John, do you love me?” We can be sure that Peter would have done anything to prove his love for his Master. Jesus told Peter: “Shepherd my little sheep.” (John 21:15-17) And for the rest of his life, Peter tenderly cared for the Lord’s sheep, proving that he had love for Jesus. Elders, how can you demonstrate that the importance of Jesus’ words to Peter is not lost on you? You can show how much you love Jehovah and Jesus by regularly engaging in the shepherding work and by making a special effort to help inactive ones return to Jehovah.​—Ezek. 34:11, 12. w23.01 29 ¶10-11




Tuesday, December 17

God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond what you can bear.​—1 Cor. 10:13.



Avoid the pitfall of thinking that no one else can understand the particular challenge that you are facing. Thinking that way could lead you to conclude that your situation is hopeless and that you are powerless to resist improper desires. The Bible says otherwise. It states: “Along with the temptation he will also make the way out so that you may be able to endure it.” Therefore, even when an improper desire is strong, we can successfully endure it. With Jehovah’s help, we can keep from acting on it. Always remember this: As an imperfect human, you may not be able to keep improper desires from surfacing. But when they do, you can reject them decisively, as Joseph did when he quickly ran away from Potiphar’s wife. (Gen. 39:12) You do not need to act on improper desires! w23.01 12-13 ¶16-17




Wednesday, December 18

There is no partiality with God.​—Rom. 2:11.



Justice is an attribute of Jehovah. (Deut. 32:4) Justice is closely linked with impartiality, and Jehovah is impartial. (Acts 10:34, 35) His impartiality is reflected in the languages that were used to write the Bible. Jehovah promised that in the time of the end, “the true knowledge” found in the Bible would “become abundant.” Many would understand it. (Dan. 12:4) One way that such knowledge has become abundant is through the translating, publishing, and distributing of Bibles and Bible literature. Jehovah’s people have so far translated God’s Word, in whole or in part, into over 240 languages, and anyone can obtain a copy without charge. As a result, people of all nations are responding to the “good news of the Kingdom” before the end comes. (Matt. 24:14) Our God of justice wants to give as many people as possible the opportunity to get to know him by reading his Word. That is because he loves us all very much. w23.02 5 ¶11-12




Thursday, December 19

Stop being molded by this system of things, but be transformed by making your mind over.​—Rom. 12:2.



Do you love righteousness? No doubt you do. But we all are imperfect, and if we are not careful, the world’s view of righteousness can easily affect us. (Isa. 5:20) When people think of a righteous person, many may think of someone who is smug, judgmental, or self-righteous. But God does not like those qualities at all. When Jesus was on earth, he strongly criticized the religious leaders of his day for setting up their own standards of righteousness. (Eccl. 7:16; Luke 16:15) Genuine righteousness is not in any way like self-righteousness. Righteousness is a beautiful quality. Simply put, it means doing what is right in the eyes of Jehovah God. In the Bible, the words for “righteousness” convey the idea of living by the highest of standards​—Jehovah’s standards. w22.08 27 ¶3-5




Friday, December 20

I have called you friends.​—John 15:15.



Jesus trusted his disciples despite their failings. (John 15:16) When James and John asked Jesus for a special position in the Kingdom, Jesus did not question their motives for serving Jehovah or remove them as apostles. (Mark 10:35-40) Later, all of Jesus’ disciples abandoned him on the night he was arrested. (Matt. 26:56) Jesus, however, never lost faith in them. He was well-aware of their imperfections; yet, he “loved them to the end.” (John 13:1) The resurrected Jesus even assigned his 11 faithful apostles the weighty responsibility to take the lead in the disciple-making work and to care for his precious sheep. (Matt. 28:19, 20; John 21:15-17) His confidence in these imperfect men was not misplaced. All of them served faithfully until the end of their earthly course. Certainly, Jesus set a fine example in trusting imperfect humans. w22.09 6 ¶12




Saturday, December 21

Jehovah is on my side; I will not be afraid.​—Ps. 118:6.



When we are convinced that Jehovah loves us​—that he is on our side—​we can defeat Satan’s efforts to make us afraid. For example, the writer of Psalm 118 faced some very distressing situations. He had many enemies, including some in high places (verses 9, 10). At times, he was under great pressure (verse 13). And he had received strong discipline from Jehovah (verse 18). Still, that psalmist was moved to sing: “I will not be afraid.” He knew that although Jehovah had disciplined him, his heavenly Father loved him. The psalmist was convinced that no matter what situation he faced, his loving God would always be ready to help him. (Ps. 118:29) We need to be convinced that Jehovah loves us personally. Our having that conviction will help us to overcome three common fears, namely, (1) fear of not being able to provide for our family, (2) fear of man, and (3) fear of death. w22.06 15 ¶3-4




Sunday, December 22

Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial, because on becoming approved he will receive the crown of life.​—Jas. 1:12.



We must make sure that the worship of Jehovah comes first in our life. As our Creator, Jehovah richly deserves our worship. (Rev. 4:11; 14:6, 7) Thus, we need to give priority to worshipping him in the way that he approves, “with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23, 24) We want God’s holy spirit to guide our worship so that it is in harmony with the truths that are found in his Word. Our worship must come first even if we live in a land where our work is restricted or banned. Right now, over 100 of our brothers and sisters are imprisoned simply because they are Jehovah’s Witnesses. Even so, they happily do whatever they can to pray, study, and tell others about our God and his Kingdom. When we are reproached or persecuted, we can be happy knowing that Jehovah is with us and that he will reward us.​—1 Pet. 4:14. w22.10 9 ¶13




Monday, December 23

Wisdom is a protection.​—Eccl. 7:12.



Throughout the book of Proverbs, Jehovah provides timeless advice that will improve our life if we apply it. Consider just two examples of such wise counsel. First, be content with what you have. Proverbs 23:4, 5 gives this advice: “Do not wear yourself out to gain wealth. . . . For it will surely sprout wings like an eagle and fly off into the sky.” Yet, both rich and poor today are obsessed with making money. This often causes them to behave in a way that harms their reputation, their relationships, and even their health. (Prov. 28:20; 1 Tim. 6:9, 10) Second, think before you speak. If not careful, we can cause great harm with our words. Proverbs 12:18 states: “Thoughtless speech is like the stabs of a sword, but the tongue of the wise is a healing.” We preserve good relationships when we avoid gossiping about the faults of others.​—Prov. 20:19. w22.10 21 ¶14; 22 ¶16-17




Tuesday, December 24

Eat this scroll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.​—Ezek. 3:1.



Ezekiel needed to absorb fully the message he was to deliver. It had to become part of him, as it were, affecting his inmost feelings. Then something surprising happened. Ezekiel discovered that the scroll “was as sweet as honey.” (Ezek. 3:3) Why? For Ezekiel, the honor of representing Jehovah was a sweet, or a pleasant, experience. (Ps. 19:8-11) He was grateful that Jehovah had approved of him to serve as his prophet. Later, Jehovah told Ezekiel: “Take to heart and listen to all my words that I speak to you.” (Ezek. 3:10) With those instructions, Jehovah told Ezekiel to store in his memory the words written in the scroll and to meditate on them. Doing so nourished Ezekiel personally. It also provided him with a powerful message to deliver to the people. (Ezek. 3:11) With God’s message in his heart and on his lips, Ezekiel was ready to take on his assignment and fulfill it. w22.11 6 ¶12-14




Wednesday, December 25

To obey is better than a sacrifice.​—1 Sam. 15:22.



If organizational changes test your loyalty, what should you do? Fully support the organizational changes. During their travels in the wilderness, the Kohathites carried the ark of the covenant before all the people. (Num. 3:29, 31; 10:33; Josh. 3:2-4) What a privilege! However, things changed for them when the Israelites settled in the Promised Land. The Ark no longer needed to be moved regularly. So the Kohathites were assigned other duties. (1 Chron. 6:31-33; 26:1, 24) There is no record that the Kohathites complained or demanded a more prominent role because of their rich heritage. What lesson can we learn? Wholeheartedly support changes that Jehovah’s organization makes, including any that affect your assignment. Find joy in whatever assignment you are given. Remember that your assignment does not reflect your worth as a person. Jehovah values your obedience far more than any assignment. w22.11 23 ¶10-11




Thursday, December 26

He did not become ashamed of my prison chains.​—2 Tim. 1:16.



Onesiphorus searched for the apostle Paul, and when he found him, he looked for practical ways to support him. In doing so, Onesiphorus risked his own life. What is the lesson for us? We must not let fear of man intimidate us or prevent us from supporting our brothers who are being persecuted. Instead, let us defend them and come to their aid. (Prov. 17:17) They need our love and support. Consider how our brothers and sisters in Russia have come to the aid of their dear fellow believers who are imprisoned. When some are put on trial, many brothers and sisters come to the court to support them. What is the lesson for us? When responsible brothers are defamed, arrested, or persecuted, do not become intimidated. Pray for them, care for their family members, and look for other practical ways to show your support.​—Acts 12:5; 2 Cor. 1:10, 11. w22.11 17 ¶11-12




Friday, December 27

They have become a source of great comfort to me.​—Col. 4:11.



Providing spiritual and emotional help is part of the work done by Christian elders. (1 Pet. 5:2) In the face of a disaster, elders should first make sure that each brother and sister is safe and has food, clothing, and shelter. But for many months thereafter, survivors will likely need spiritual and emotional support. (John 21:15) “It takes time to recover,” says Harold, who serves on a Branch Committee and who has met with many brothers and sisters affected by disasters. “They may begin to get over their losses, but memories of a lost loved one, a treasured heirloom, or a narrow escape can persist. These memories may trigger feelings of grief all over again. That is not a lack of faith but a normal human reaction.” Elders take to heart the counsel to “weep with those who weep.”​—Rom. 12:15. w22.12 22 ¶1; 24-25 ¶10-11




Saturday, December 28

Keep walking by spirit and you will carry out no fleshly desire at all.​—Gal. 5:16.



To help us win the fight to do what is right, Jehovah generously provides his holy spirit. When we study God’s Word, we are placing ourselves under the influence of that spirit. We also receive holy spirit when we attend our meetings. At those Christian gatherings, we can spend time with brothers and sisters who, like us, are trying hard to do what is right, and that is encouraging. (Heb. 10:24, 25; 13:7) And when we approach Jehovah in earnest prayer and beg him for help with some weakness, he will give us his holy spirit to strengthen us to keep fighting. While these activities will probably not make wrong desires disappear, they will help us resist the urge to act on those desires. Once we have established a wholesome routine of spiritual activities, it is essential that we maintain that routine and keep cultivating proper desires. w23.01 11 ¶13-14




Sunday, December 29

I will not let myself be controlled by anything.​—1 Cor. 6:12.



Although the Bible is not a health-care book or a dietary manual, it does reveal Jehovah’s thinking in these areas. For example, he exhorts us to “ward off harmful things” that could damage our body. (Eccl. 11:10) Gluttony and drunkenness, both life-threatening, are condemned in the Bible. (Prov. 23:20) Jehovah expects us to exercise self-control when deciding what and how much to eat and drink. (1 Cor. 9:25) We can make decisions that show deep appreciation for God’s gift of life by using our thinking ability. (Ps. 119:99, 100; Prov. 2:11) For instance, we show good judgment in what we eat. If we like a certain food but know that it makes us sick, common sense moves us to avoid eating it. We also prove that we are sound in mind when we get sufficient sleep, exercise regularly, maintain a good routine of personal hygiene, and keep our home clean. w23.02 21 ¶6-7




Monday, December 30

How do you read?​—Luke 10:26.



How can you find spiritual treasures when reading the Bible? Consider what 2 Timothy 3:16, 17 states. Note that “all Scripture is . . . beneficial” for (1) teaching, (2) reproving, (3) setting things straight, and (4) disciplining. You can obtain those four benefits even from Bible books that you do not use often. Analyze the account to see what it teaches you about Jehovah, about his purpose, or about godly principles. Consider how it is helpful for reproving. Do this by noting how the verses help you to identify and reject wrong tendencies or attitudes and to remain on a faithful course. Examine how the passage can be used to set straight, or correct, a wrong viewpoint, perhaps one you have encountered in the ministry. And look for any discipline the verses provide that can train you to reflect Jehovah’s thinking. When you keep these four benefits in mind, you will find spiritual treasures that can enrich your Bible reading. w23.02 11 ¶11




Tuesday, December 31

His kingdom will not be destroyed.​—Dan. 7:14.



A prophecy in the book of Daniel foretold that Jesus would receive his Kingdom at the end of a prophetic period of seven times. Is it possible to know when that joyous event occurred? (Dan. 4:10-17) The “seven times” represent a period of 2,520 years. That time period began in 607 B.C.E. when the Babylonians removed the last king from Jehovah’s throne in Jerusalem. It ended in 1914 C.E. when Jehovah enthroned Jesus​—“the one who has the legal right”—​as King of God’s Kingdom. (Ezek. 21:25-27) How can this prophecy benefit us? Knowing about the “seven times” reassures us that Jehovah fulfills his promises right on time. Just as he set a definite time for the establishment of his Kingdom, he will also see to it that all the other prophecies will be fulfilled according to his timetable. Yes, Jehovah’s day “will not be late!”​—Hab. 2:3. w22.07 3 ¶3-5




