
February
Thursday, February 1

Love one another just as I have loved you.​—John 15:12.



What does today’s text mean? As Jesus went on to explain, this is self-sacrificing love​—love that moves a Christian even to die for a fellow believer if necessary. God’s Word places a lot of emphasis on love. Many people include among their favorite Bible verses the following: “God is love.” (1 John 4:8) “You must love your neighbor as yourself.” (Matt. 22:39) “Love covers a multitude of sins.” (1 Pet. 4:8) “Love never fails.” (1 Cor. 13:8) These verses and others should make it plain to anyone how important it is to cultivate and display this beautiful quality. Genuine love comes from Jehovah​—from having his spirit and blessing on a group of worshippers. (1 John 4:7) Is it any wonder, then, that Jesus said that unselfish love would identify his true followers? Just as Jesus foretold, many have recognized his true followers by the genuine love they show among themselves. w23.03 27-28 ¶5-8




Friday, February 2

Your sins are forgiven.​—Luke 7:48.



Do you need to be more forgiving of others? You might begin by reading about and meditating on Bible examples of those who freely forgave others and those who did not. Consider Jesus’ example. He willingly forgave others. (Luke 7:47) He also looked past their faults and saw their potential. By contrast, the Pharisees in Jesus’ day “considered others as nothing.” (Luke 18:9) After meditating on these examples, ask yourself: ‘What do I see in others? Which of their qualities do I choose to focus on?’ If you are struggling to forgive someone, try writing down as many of that individual’s good qualities as you can. Then ask yourself: ‘How does Jesus view this person? Would he forgive him?’ Such a study project could help to readjust our thinking. At first, we may have to work hard to forgive someone who has offended us. But if we keep working at it, in time we will become more willing to forgive. w22.04 23 ¶6




Saturday, February 3

He sent his angel and presented [the revelation] in signs.​—Rev. 1:1.



In the book of Revelation, God’s enemies are described symbolically. We see a number of wild beasts. For example, there is “a wild beast ascending out of the sea.” It has “ten horns and seven heads.” (Rev. 13:1) That beast is followed by “another wild beast ascending out of the earth.” That beast speaks like a dragon and makes “fire come down out of heaven.” (Rev. 13:11-13) Then we see a different beast, “a scarlet-colored wild beast,” which is being ridden by a prostitute. These three wild beasts represent long-standing enemies of Jehovah God and his Kingdom. Therefore, it is important that we identify them. (Rev. 17:1, 3) We need to understand what this symbolic language means. The key to understanding it is to allow the Bible to explain itself. Many of the symbols found in Revelation are already explained in other books of the Bible. w22.05 8-9 ¶3-4




Sunday, February 4

You must love Jehovah your God with your whole heart.​—Matt. 22:37.



Some of Jehovah’s servants have a hard time adjusting to the limitations brought on by advancing age or poor health. If you are sometimes discouraged by a limitation, ask yourself, ‘What does Jehovah require of me?’ Your best​—whatever that may be right now. Consider this scenario: A sister in her 80’s feels discouraged because she cannot do as much in the ministry as she did when she was in her 40’s. She thinks that even though she is giving her best, it is not pleasing to Jehovah. But is that really the case? Think about it. If this sister gave her best in her 40’s and she is still giving her best in her 80’s, she has never stopped giving her best. If we do our best, Jehovah will in effect say to us: “Well done!” (Compare Matthew 25:20-23.) We will find it easier to be joyful if we focus on what we can accomplish instead of on what we cannot do. w22.04 10 ¶2; 11 ¶4-6




Monday, February 5

I . . . saw the holy city, New Jerusalem.​—Rev. 21:2.



Revelation chapter 21 compares the 144,000 to an extremely beautiful city called “New Jerusalem.” This city is based on 12 foundation stones that have written on them “the 12 names of the 12 apostles of the Lamb.” (Rev. 21:10-14; Eph. 2:20) This symbolic city looks like no other. It has a main street of pure gold, 12 gates of pearl, walls and foundations adorned with precious stones​—and with perfectly balanced measurements. (Rev. 21:15-21) Still, something seems to be missing! Notice what John next tells us: “I did not see a temple in it, for Jehovah God the Almighty is its temple, also the Lamb is. And the city has no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine on it, for the glory of God illuminated it, and its lamp was the Lamb.” (Rev. 21:22, 23) Those who make up the New Jerusalem will have direct access to Jehovah.​—Heb. 7:27; Rev. 22:3, 4. w22.05 17-18 ¶14-15




Tuesday, February 6

Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely . . . Just as Jehovah freely forgave you, you must also do the same.​—Col. 3:13.



Although Jehovah is our Creator, Lawgiver, and Judge, he is also our loving heavenly Father. (Ps. 100:3; Isa. 33:22) When we sin against him and are sincerely repentant, he is not only able but also eager to forgive us. (Ps. 86:5) Through the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah gave this warm assurance: “Though your sins are like scarlet, they will be made as white as snow.” (Isa. 1:18) Because we are imperfect, we all say and do things that offend others. (Jas. 3:2) That does not mean, however, that we cannot enjoy close relationships with them. We can if we learn to be forgiving. (Prov. 17:9; 19:11; Matt. 18:21, 22) When we hurt one another in small ways, Jehovah wants us to forgive. We have good reason to do so. After all, Jehovah freely forgives us “in a large way.”​—Isa. 55:7. w22.06 8 ¶1-2




Wednesday, February 7

Be imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises.​—Heb. 6:12.



Although we should avoid comparing ourselves with others, we can benefit by learning from the examples of faithful ones. To illustrate, let us consider Jesus. Even though he was perfect, we can learn from his beautiful qualities and ways. (1 Pet. 2:21) When we do our best to follow his example as closely as we can, we become better servants of Jehovah. In God’s Word, we find many examples of faithful men and women who despite being imperfect are worthy of imitation. Think of King David, whom Jehovah called “a man agreeable to my heart.” (Acts 13:22) Yet, David made some serious mistakes. In spite of that, he is a good example for us. Why? Because he did not try to justify himself. Instead, he accepted the strong counsel he received and was sincerely sorry for what he had done. As a result, Jehovah forgave him.​—Ps. 51:3, 4, 10-12. w22.04 13 ¶11-12




Thursday, February 8

A man will give everything that he has for his life.​—Job 2:4.



The Bible acknowledges that death is an enemy. (1 Cor. 15:25, 26) We may feel anxious at the thought of death, especially when we or our loved ones are critically ill. Why do we fear death? Because Jehovah created us with the desire to enjoy life forever. (Eccl. 3:11) A balanced fear of death can help us to protect our life. It can motivate us to make good decisions about our diet and exercise routine, to seek the help of physicians and medications when necessary, and to avoid needlessly putting our life in danger. Satan knows that we cherish our life. He claims that we would sacrifice everything we have​—even our friendship with Jehovah—​just to preserve our present life. (Job 2:5) How wrong Satan is! Still, since he is “the one having the means to cause death,” Satan tries to exploit our natural fear of death in order to make us abandon Jehovah.​—Heb. 2:14, 15. w22.06 18 ¶15-16




Friday, February 9

Do not let the sun set while you are still angry.​—Eph. 4:26.



While under ban, we may have to limit our association to smaller groups. So it is more important than ever to maintain peaceful relations. Fight Satan, not one another. Overlook your brothers’ mistakes, or try to settle any differences quickly. (Prov. 19:11) Take the initiative to help one another. (Titus 3:14) The help that one service group gave to a sister in need had a positive impact on the entire group. They became closer, like a family. (Ps. 133:1) Tens of thousands of our Christian brothers and sisters serve Jehovah despite governmental restrictions. Some of them are imprisoned for their faith. We can pray for them, for their families, and for those risking their own freedom to provide these brothers and sisters with spiritual, physical, and legal support. (Col. 4:3, 18) Never underestimate the power of your prayers!​—2 Thess. 3:1, 2; 1 Tim. 2:1, 2. w22.12 26-27 ¶15-16




Saturday, February 10

Do you, . . . the one teaching someone else, not teach yourself?​—Rom. 2:21.



Children often imitate their parents. Of course, no parent is perfect. (Rom. 3:23) Even so, wise parents do their very best to set a good example for their children. One father said: “They are like sponges that absorb everything.” He adds: “They will tell us when our example isn’t consistent with what we try to teach them.” So if we want our children to love Jehovah, our own love for him needs to be strong and evident. There are many ways that parents can teach their children to love Jehovah. A 17-year-old brother named Andrew says: “My parents have always emphasized the importance of prayer. Every night, Dad would pray with me, even if I had already said my own prayer. . . . Now I am very comfortable praying to Jehovah and viewing him as a loving Father.” Parents, never underestimate how much your own love for Jehovah can influence your children. w22.05 28 ¶7-8




Sunday, February 11

Baptism . . . is . . . now saving you.​—1 Pet. 3:21.



In order to get ready for baptism, one of the first things we must do is sincerely repent of our sins. (Acts 2:37, 38) Genuine repentance leads to genuine change. Have you put away any practices that displease Jehovah, such as living immorally, using tobacco, or using foul or abusive language? (1 Cor. 6:9, 10; 2 Cor. 7:1; Eph. 4:29) Keep trying to make changes. Talk to the person studying the Bible with you, or ask the congregation elders for help and guidance. If you are young and are living at home, keep asking your parents for help to break any bad habits that might prevent you from getting baptized. It is also important to follow a good spiritual routine. That would include attending Christian meetings and participating in them. (Heb. 10:24, 25) And once you qualify to engage in the Christian ministry, make that part of your routine as well. w23.03 10-11 ¶14-16




Monday, February 12

Jehovah God said to the serpent: “Because you have done this, you are the cursed one.”​—Gen. 3:14.



The characters in the account recorded at Genesis 3:14, 15 include a “serpent” and the “offspring” of the serpent. A literal snake could not have understood what Jehovah said in the garden of Eden. So the object of Jehovah’s judgment must have been an intelligent creature. Who? Revelation 12:9 leaves no doubt on this matter. There “the original serpent” is clearly identified as Satan the Devil. When the Bible speaks of offspring in a figurative sense, it is referring to those who think and act like their symbolic father. So the offspring of the serpent is made up of spirit creatures and humans who, like Satan, resist Jehovah God and oppose His people. That would include the angels who abandoned their assignments in heaven in Noah’s day as well as wicked humans who behave like their father the Devil.​—Gen. 6:1, 2; John 8:44; 1 John 5:19; Jude 6. w22.07 14-15 ¶4-5




Tuesday, February 13

Make sure of the more important things.​—Phil. 1:10.



The apostle Paul loved his brothers very much. He was no stranger to hardship; thus, he could show compassion and empathy for fellow believers when they were going through trials. One time, Paul ran out of funds and had to find work to support himself and his companions. (Acts 20:34) He was a tentmaker by trade. When he arrived in Corinth, he at first worked with fellow tentmakers Aquila and Priscilla. But “every sabbath” he would preach to the Jews and the Greeks. Then when Silas and Timothy arrived, “Paul began to be intensely occupied with the word.” (Acts 18:2-5) Paul never lost sight of his main purpose in life, to serve Jehovah. Hardworking Paul was in a good position to encourage his brothers and sisters. He reminded them not to allow the pressures of life and the need to provide for the family to cause them to neglect “the more important things”​—all aspects of Jehovah’s worship. w22.08 20 ¶3




Wednesday, February 14

In all the nations, the good news has to be preached.​—Mark 13:10.



Today it is God’s will that the good news of the Kingdom be preached in all the earth. (1 Tim. 2:3, 4) This is Jehovah’s work, and it is so important that he has placed it under the direction of his beloved Son. We can be sure that under Jesus’ capable oversight, the preaching work will be completed to Jehovah’s satisfaction before the end comes. (Matt. 24:14) How can we be sure of that? Shortly before he ascended to heaven, Jesus met with a number of his faithful followers on a mountain in Galilee. He told them: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth.” Note his very next statement: “Go, therefore, and make disciples of people of all the nations.” (Matt. 28:18, 19) So, among other things, Jesus has been given the authority to direct the preaching work. And that preaching work would continue under Jesus’ supervision right down to our day. w22.07 8 ¶1, 3; 9 ¶4




Thursday, February 15

The hour is coming in which all those in the memorial tombs will hear his voice and come out, those who did good things to a resurrection of life.​—John 5:28, 29.



The righteous, who did good things before their death, will receive “a resurrection of life” because their names will already be written in the book of life. This means that the resurrection of “those who did good things” described at John 5:29 is the same as the resurrection of “the righteous” mentioned at Acts 24:15. This understanding is in harmony with the statement made at Romans 6:7, which says: “The one who has died has been acquitted from his sin.” The sins committed by these righteous ones were canceled at death, but their record of faithfulness remains. (Heb. 6:10) Of course, these righteous resurrected ones will need to remain faithful in order for their names to remain in the book of life. w22.09 18 ¶13, 15




Friday, February 16

Everything [Jehovah] does is trustworthy.​—Ps. 33:4.



The prophet Daniel set an excellent example of being trustworthy. Although he had been taken into captivity by the Babylonians, he soon earned a reputation as a man who could be trusted. His reputation grew when, with Jehovah’s help, he interpreted the dreams of Babylonian King Nebuchadnezzar. (Dan. 4:20-22, 25) Many years later, Daniel again proved to be trustworthy when he accurately interpreted a mysterious message that appeared on the palace wall in Babylon. (Dan. 5:5, 25-29) Still later, Darius the Mede and his appointed officials also noticed “an extraordinary spirit in” Daniel. They acknowledged that Daniel “was trustworthy and no negligence or corruption could be found in him.” (Dan. 6:3, 4) We do well to ask ourselves: ‘Am I known as someone who can be trusted?’ We bring praise to Jehovah when we are trustworthy. w22.09 8-9 ¶2-4




Saturday, February 17

Become imitators of God, as beloved children.​—Eph. 5:1.



We benefit by adhering to Jehovah’s standards of right and wrong. Can you see why? Imagine what would happen if every bank came up with its own standards for determining the value of currency or if each construction company followed its own standards of measurements. The result would be chaos. And if medical personnel failed to adhere to consistent standards of care, some patients might die. Certainly, reliable standards are a protection. Likewise, God’s standards of right and wrong protect us. Jehovah blesses those who try to live by his standards. He promises: “The righteous will possess the earth, and they will live forever on it.” (Ps. 37:29) Can you imagine how united, peaceful, and happy mankind will be when everyone follows Jehovah’s standards? Jehovah wants you to enjoy that kind of life. Surely, each one of us has good reasons to love righteousness! w22.08 27-28 ¶6-8




Sunday, February 18

Keep your senses in all things.​—2 Tim. 4:5.



When we face adversities, our loyalty to Jehovah and his organization can be tested. How can we overcome such challenges? We need to keep our senses and stay awake, standing firm in the faith. We keep our senses by remaining calm, thinking clearly, and striving to see matters from Jehovah’s perspective. When we do that, our thoughts will not be controlled by emotions. Perhaps we feel mistreated by a fellow Christian, perhaps someone in a position of responsibility. Likely, the brother did not intend to hurt you. (Rom. 3:23; Jas. 3:2) Still, his actions may have upset you. You may have even wondered, ‘If a brother can act this way, is this really God’s organization?’ That is exactly how Satan wants us to react. (2 Cor. 2:11) Such negative thinking could cause us to separate ourselves from Jehovah and his organization. So we must be careful not to become embittered. w22.11 20 ¶1, 3; 21 ¶4




Monday, February 19

Hope in Jehovah.​—Ps. 27:14.



Jehovah has given us the marvelous hope of everlasting life. Some hope to live forever in heaven as immortal spirit creatures. (1 Cor. 15:50, 53) Most, though, hope to live forever on earth in perfect health and happiness. (Rev. 21:3, 4) Whether we look forward to everlasting life in heaven or on earth, our hope is precious to us. Our hope for the future is guaranteed because it comes from Jehovah. (Rom. 15:13) We know what he has promised, and we know that he always keeps his word. (Num. 23:19) We are convinced that Jehovah has both the desire and the power to accomplish everything that he says he will do. Our heavenly Father loves us, and he wants us to trust in him. When our hope in Jehovah is strong, we will be able to endure trials and face the future with courage and joy. w22.10 24 ¶1-3




Tuesday, February 20

They are a rebellious people, . . . who are unwilling to hear the law of Jehovah.​—Isa. 30:9.



Because the people refused to listen, Isaiah foretold that Jehovah would allow them to suffer calamity. (Isa. 30:5, 17; Jer. 25:8-11) And, indeed, they were taken into captivity by the Babylonians. However, there were some faithful ones among the Jews, and Isaiah told them that one day Jehovah would restore them to favor. (Isa. 30:18, 19) And that is exactly what happened. Jehovah brought an end to their captivity. However, their deliverance would not come right away. The statement “Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor” indicated that some time would pass before the faithful ones would be rescued. In fact, the Israelites spent 70 years in exile in Babylon before a remnant was allowed to return to Jerusalem. (Isa. 10:21; Jer. 29:10) Once the people were back in their homeland, the tears of sorrow were replaced by tears of joy. w22.11 9 ¶4




Wednesday, February 21

Happy are those who have been persecuted for righteousness’ sake.​—Matt. 5:10.



Today, in a number of lands, our brothers and sisters are experiencing what the apostles endured in the first century when they were persecuted for preaching about Jesus. Repeatedly, the judges of the Jewish high court “ordered them to stop speaking on the basis of Jesus’ name.” (Acts 4:18-20; 5:27, 28, 40) But they knew that a higher authority had ‘ordered them to preach to the people and to give a thorough witness’ about the Christ. (Acts 10:42) So their spokesmen, Peter and John, boldly said that they would obey God rather than those judges and declared that they would not stop speaking about Jesus. (Acts 5:29) After being beaten for keeping their integrity, the apostles went out from the Jewish high court, “rejoicing because they had been counted worthy to be dishonored in behalf of [Jesus’] name,” and they kept right on preaching!​—Acts 5:41, 42. w22.10 12-13 ¶2-4




Thursday, February 22

Drawing near to God is good for me.​—Ps. 73:28.



Understandably, learning about Jehovah starts with the basics. In his letter to the Hebrews, the apostle Paul referred to basic teachings as “the elementary things.” He was not belittling “the primary doctrine”; he was comparing it to the milk that nourishes a baby. (Heb. 5:12; 6:1) But he also urged all Christians to keep moving beyond those basic teachings and to learn the deeper truths of God’s Word. Have you developed a hunger for the deeper teachings of the Bible? Are you willing to keep growing, to keep learning about Jehovah and his purposes? For many of us, though, it is a challenge to study. What about you? At school, did you learn to read and study effectively? Did you find study to be enjoyable and rewarding? Or did you conclude that you are not good at learning from books? If so, you are not alone. However, Jehovah can help you. He is perfect and is the best Teacher there is. w23.03 9-10 ¶8-10




Friday, February 23

Accept with mildness the implanting of the word that is able to save you.​—Jas. 1:21.



If we are mild, we will allow God’s Word to take root in our heart. Only if we avoid a critical or proud spirit will the Bible’s lessons about mercy, compassion, and love shape us. The way we treat others can indicate if we are allowing God’s Word to mold us. The Pharisees failed to let God’s Word reach their heart, and as a result, they “condemned the guiltless ones.” (Matt. 12:7) In a similar way, how we view and treat others reveals whether we have let God’s Word mold us. For example, are we inclined to mention the good we see in others, or are we quick to point out their flaws? Are we merciful and ready to forgive, or are we critical and given to holding grudges? Such self-examination can reveal whether we are letting what we read shape our thoughts, feelings, and actions.​—1 Tim. 4:12, 15; Heb. 4:12. w23.02 12 ¶13-14




Saturday, February 24

I, Jehovah your God, am grasping your right hand, the One saying to you, “Do not be afraid. I will help you.”​—Isa. 41:13.



Consider the example of Joseph of Arimathea. He was well-regarded by Jewish society. He was a member of the Sanhedrin, the Jewish supreme court. However, during Jesus’ earthly ministry, Joseph was anything but courageous. John said that he was “a disciple of Jesus but a secret one because of his fear of the Jews.” (John 19:38) Although Joseph was interested in the Kingdom message, he hid from others that he had faith in Jesus. No doubt he was afraid that he would lose his prestigious position in the community. Whatever the case, the Bible tells us that after Jesus died, Joseph finally “took courage and went in before Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.” (Mark 15:42, 43) Joseph’s support of Jesus was now no longer a secret. Can you relate to Joseph’s fear of man? w23.01 30 ¶13-14




Sunday, February 25

Happy are your men, and happy are your servants who stand before you constantly, listening to your wisdom!​—1 Ki. 10:8.



News of the peace and prosperity enjoyed by the Israelites under Solomon’s rule reached the queen of Sheba. That sovereign from a distant land traveled to Jerusalem to see the situation for herself. (1 Ki. 10:1) After inspecting Solomon’s kingdom, she said the words above. But the conditions under Solomon’s rule were just a taste of what Jehovah will do for mankind under the rule of His Son, Jesus. Jesus is superior to Solomon in every way. Solomon was an imperfect man who made serious errors in judgment that eventually brought hardship on God’s people. Jesus, on the other hand, is a perfect Ruler who makes no mistakes. (Luke 1:32; Heb. 4:14, 15) Christ has proved that he will never sin or do anything that would harm his loyal subjects. It truly is an honor to have him as our King. w22.12 11 ¶9-10




Monday, February 26

Be obedient to those who are taking the lead among you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over you.​—Heb. 13:17.



What should we do if a contagious disease is spreading where we live? We should obey emergency regulations, such as those regarding washing our hands, social distancing, wearing a mask, and quarantining. Our diligence in these areas shows how deeply we appreciate God’s gift of life. During emergencies, inaccurate information may circulate among friends, among neighbors, and in the media. Rather than believe “every word” we hear, we do well to listen to the most reliable governmental and medical sources available. (Prov. 14:15) The Governing Body and the branch offices make every effort to obtain accurate information before giving direction regarding congregation meetings and the preaching work. By being cooperative, we protect ourselves and others from harm. We may also enhance the congregation’s reputation in the community.​—1 Pet. 2:12. w23.02 23 ¶11-12




Tuesday, February 27

Listen and learn to fear Jehovah your God.​—Deut. 31:13.



When the Israelites entered the Promised Land, they settled over a wide area. Israelites living in one area could easily have lost interest in the welfare of fellow Israelites living in other parts of the country. But Jehovah arranged for the Israelites to gather together on various occasions to hear his written Word read and explained. (Deut. 31:10-12; Neh. 8:2, 8, 18) Imagine how a faithful Israelite must have felt as he arrived in Jerusalem and saw perhaps millions of his fellow worshippers from every part of the country! Jehovah thereby helped his people to remain united. Later, when the Christian congregation was formed, it was made up of men and women who spoke many languages and who were from many social and economic backgrounds. But they were united in worship of the true God. Those who became believers could understand God’s Word only with the aid of fellow worshippers and by meeting together with them.​—Acts 2:42; 8:30, 31. w23.02 3 ¶7




Wednesday, February 28

This means everlasting life.​—John 17:3.



Jehovah promises that those who obey him will have “everlasting life.” (Rom. 6:23) When we meditate on what Jehovah is offering us, our love for him certainly grows stronger. Just think: Our heavenly Father loves us so deeply that we will never be separated from him. God’s promise of everlasting life helps us to endure our current trials. Even when our enemies threaten us with death, we will not compromise. Why? In part because we know that if we die faithful to Jehovah, he will raise us from the dead with the prospect of never dying. (John 5:28, 29; 1 Cor. 15:55-58; Heb. 2:15) We know that Jehovah is able to keep us alive forever because he is the Source of life and he lives forever. (Ps. 36:9) The Bible confirms that Jehovah has always existed and will always exist.​—Ps. 90:2; 102:12, 24, 27. w22.12 2 ¶1-3




Thursday, February 29

Who will separate us from the love of the Christ? Will tribulation or distress or persecution?​—Rom. 8:35.



As Jehovah’s people, we are not surprised when we have to face trials. We realize that, as the Bible says, “we must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.” (Acts 14:22) We also know that some of our problems will not be completely solved until we are living in God’s new world, where “death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore.” (Rev. 21:4) Jehovah does not shield us from trials. However, he does help us to endure them. Note what the apostle Paul said to Christians living in Rome. He first listed a number of trials that he and his brothers were facing. Then he wrote: “We are coming off completely victorious through the one who loved us.” (Rom. 8:36, 37) This means that Jehovah can make you successful even while the trial is running its course. w23.01 14 ¶1-2




