
January
Monday, January 1

I am sending Timothy to you, because he is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord.​—1 Cor. 4:17.



What made Timothy a useful servant of Jehovah? His outstanding Christian qualities. (Phil. 2:19-22) From the apostle Paul’s description of Timothy, we can see that he was humble, loyal, diligent, and dependable. He cared deeply about the brothers. As a result, Paul loved Timothy and did not hesitate to entrust him with challenging assignments. Similarly, we endear ourselves to Jehovah and are more useful to the congregation when we cultivate qualities that he loves. (Ps. 25:9; 138:6) So prayerfully consider which aspects of your personality need improvement. Select one specific quality that you would like to focus on. Could you cultivate greater empathy? Do you need to be more peaceable and forgiving? You may find it helpful to ask a trusted friend to suggest ways you could improve.​—Prov. 27:6. w22.04 23 ¶4-5




Tuesday, January 2

Let each one examine his own actions.​—Gal. 6:4.



Jehovah wants us to be happy. We know this because joy is an aspect of the fruitage of his holy spirit. (Gal. 5:22) Since there is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving, we feel a deep sense of joy when we are fully engaged in the Christian ministry and are helping our brothers in various ways. (Acts 20:35) As recorded in today’s text, the apostle Paul mentions two factors that will help us remain joyful. First, our goal should be to give Jehovah our best. If we are giving him our very best, we should be happy. (Matt. 22:36-38) Second, we should avoid comparing ourselves with others. Whatever our health, training, or natural ability enables us to accomplish, we should be grateful to Jehovah. On the other hand, if others are more effective in some aspect of the ministry than we are, we should rejoice that they are using their talents to praise Jehovah. w22.04 10 ¶1-2




Wednesday, January 3

Your deliverance is getting near.​—Luke 21:28.



The end of false religion will come suddenly, catching the world by surprise. (Rev. 18:8-10) The destruction of Babylon the Great will be world-shaking and may cause hardships, but God’s people will have at least two reasons to rejoice. This long-standing enemy of Jehovah God will be gone forever, and our deliverance from this wicked system of things will be at hand! Daniel foretold that “true knowledge” would “become abundant.” And indeed it has! We have received insight into prophecies about our time. (Dan. 12:4, 9, 10) The accuracy of these prophecies leaves us in awe of Jehovah and his inspired Word. (Isa. 46:10; 55:11) So continue to fortify your faith by diligently studying the Scriptures and by helping others to develop an approved relationship with Jehovah. He will safeguard all who fully lean on him, and he will give them “continuous peace.”​—Isa. 26:3. w22.07 6-7 ¶16-17




Thursday, January 4

They gathered them together to the place that is called in Hebrew Armageddon.​—Rev. 16:16.



The book of Revelation reveals that God’s heavenly Kingdom has been established and that Satan has been expelled from heaven. (Rev. 12:1-9) That expulsion brings relief to the heavens, but it creates challenges for us. Why? Because Satan’s anger is focused on those who faithfully serve Jehovah here on earth. (Rev. 12:12, 15, 17) How can we remain steadfast in the face of Satan’s attacks? (Rev. 13:10) One thing that will help us is to know what the future holds. For example, in Revelation, the apostle John describes some of the blessings that we will soon enjoy. Among those blessings will be the elimination of God’s enemies. In the very first verse, Revelation tells us that the information we are about to read is being presented “in signs,” that is, in symbolic language.​—Rev. 1:1. w22.05 8 ¶1-3




Friday, January 5

In the final part of the days I will bring you against my land so that the nations may know me when I sanctify myself through you before their eyes, O Gog.​—Ezek. 38:16.



The firm stand of Jehovah’s faithful servants will provoke the rage of those who oppose Jehovah. As a result, a coalition of nations will attack God’s people all over the earth. This act of mad aggression is described prophetically as the attack of Gog of Magog. (Ezek. 38:14, 15) How will Jehovah react to this vicious attack? He tells us: “My great rage will flare up.” (Ezek. 38:18, 21-23) Revelation chapter 19 describes what happens next. Jehovah sends forth His Son to defend His people and to defeat their enemies. Jesus will be joined in this counterattack by “the armies in heaven”​—the faithful angels together with the 144,000. (Rev. 17:14; 19:11-15) What is the outcome of this war? The total annihilation of all humans and organizations opposing Jehovah!​—Rev. 19:19-21. w22.05 17 ¶9-10




Saturday, January 6

I will put enmity between you and the woman.​—Gen. 3:15.



Soon after Adam and Eve sinned, Jehovah gave hope to their descendants by means of a remarkable prophecy. What he said is recorded at Genesis 3:15: “I will put enmity between you and the woman and between your offspring and her offspring. He will crush your head, and you will strike him in the heel.” The prophecy appears in the first book of the Bible. But in one way or another, all the other books of the Bible relate to it. Just as the spine of a printed book binds all the pages together, the words recorded at Genesis 3:15 bind the content of every book of the Bible into one united message, namely, that a Deliverer would be sent to destroy the Devil and all his wicked followers. What a blessing that will be for those who love Jehovah! A study of the Bible will help us see how the prophecy is fulfilled and how we can benefit from it. w22.07 14 ¶1-3




Sunday, January 7

Jehovah himself gives wisdom.​—Prov. 2:6.



Ask Jehovah to give you the wisdom you need to help your children develop love for him. (Jas. 1:5) He is the most qualified Person to give advice. There are a number of reasons why. Consider two. First, Jehovah has the most experience at being a parent. (Ps. 36:9) And second, the wise advice he gives always brings benefits. (Isa. 48:17) By means of his Word and his organization, Jehovah provides an abundance of Bible-based spiritual food that can help you raise your children to love Jehovah. (Matt. 24:45) For example, you can find much practical advice in the article series “Help for the Family,” which appeared in print for a number of years in the Awake! magazine and is now available on our website. Also, many videos published on jw.org feature interviews and dramatizations that can help parents apply Jehovah’s counsel as they raise their children.​—Prov. 2:4, 5. w22.05 27 ¶4-5




Monday, January 8

If errors were what you watch, O Jah, then who . . . could stand?​—Ps. 130:3.



Jehovah is truly the greatest Forgiver in the universe. First, he is always ready to forgive. Second, he knows us through and through. He is perfectly familiar with our makeup, and he is in the ideal position to determine whether we are truly repentant. And third, when Jehovah forgives us, he wipes the slate clean, so to speak. This allows us to have a clean conscience and enjoy his favor. Of course, as long as we are imperfect, we will continue to sin. However, we can gain comfort from the words found in Insight on the Scriptures, Volume 2, page 771: “Since Jehovah mercifully considers the fleshly weakness of his servants, they need not be in a constant state of remorse due to their errors resulting from inherent imperfection. (Ps 103:8-14; 130:3) If they are conscientiously walking in God’s ways, they may be joyful. (Php 4:4-6; 1Jo 3:19-22).” w22.06 7 ¶18-19




Tuesday, January 9

You will be brought before kings and governors for the sake of my name.​—Luke 21:12.



Fear of opposition from governments is not the only weapon Satan uses. For some, fear of how family members will react to the truth is greater than any physical abuse. They love their relatives very much and want them to come to know and love Jehovah. It pains them to hear their relatives speak disrespectfully of the true God and of his worshippers. In some cases, however, relatives who were initially opposed later came into the truth. But suppose our family members cut all ties with us because of our new beliefs? How will we react? We can take comfort from the beautiful truth reflected at Psalm 27:10. When we remember just how much Jehovah loves us, we feel secure in the face of opposition. And we are confident that he will reward us for our endurance. Jehovah will care for our physical, emotional, and spiritual needs far better than anyone else can! w22.06 16-17 ¶11-13




Wednesday, January 10

Christ suffered for you, leaving a model for you to follow his steps closely.​—1 Pet. 2:21.



During his ministry, Jesus was falsely accused of being a man who was a drunkard, a glutton, an agent of the Devil, a Sabbath breaker, and even a blasphemer of God. (Matt. 11:19; 26:65; Luke 11:15; John 9:16) Yet, Jesus did not retaliate with angry words. Like Jesus, we should never retaliate even if spoken to harshly. (1 Pet. 2:22, 23) Of course, showing such restraint is not easy. (Jas. 3:2) What can help? Try to look beyond the response of a householder who speaks negatively. A brother named Sam says, “I try to focus on the householder’s need to hear the truth and his potential to change.” Sometimes a householder is angry simply because we came at a bad time. When we are confronted by someone who is upset, we can say a brief prayer, asking Jehovah to help us remain calm and hold back from saying anything unkind or disrespectful. w22.04 6 ¶8-9




Thursday, January 11

Draw close to God.​—Jas. 4:8.



An important way to help children draw close to Jehovah is by studying the Bible with them. (2 Tim. 3:14-17) Yet, the Bible reveals another way that young ones can learn about Jehovah. In the book of Proverbs, a father evidently reminds his son never to lose sight of Jehovah’s qualities, which are revealed in creation. (Prov. 3:19-21) Parents, you likely enjoy spending time outdoors with your young ones. Use that time to help your children see the connection between “the things made” and Jehovah’s marvelous qualities. (Rom. 1:20) Note how Jesus used creation to teach. On one occasion, he asked his disciples to observe the ravens and the lilies. (Luke 12:24, 27-30) He taught his disciples a powerful lesson about their heavenly Father’s generosity and kindness: Jehovah will feed and clothe his faithful servants as he does the ravens and the flowers in the field. w23.03 20-21 ¶1-4




Friday, January 12

Whatever you ask in my name, I will do this, so that the Father may be glorified in connection with the Son.​—John 14:13.



We thank Jehovah that we can pray to him through his Son. Jesus is the channel that Jehovah uses to grant our requests. Jehovah listens to and answers prayers that are offered in Jesus’ name and forgives our sins on the basis of Jesus’ ransom sacrifice. (Rom. 5:1) The Scriptures describe Jesus as our “high priest [sitting] at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens.” (Heb. 8:1) Jesus is our “helper with the Father.” (1 John 2:1) How thankful we are to Jehovah for providing us with a sympathetic High Priest who understands our weaknesses and who “pleads for us”! (Rom. 8:34; Heb. 4:15) Without Jesus’ sacrifice we would not be able to approach Jehovah in prayer. No doubt you would agree that we can never adequately express our gratitude for the precious gift that Jehovah has given us​—the gift of his dear Son! w22.07 23 ¶10-12




Saturday, January 13

The trustworthy person keeps a confidence.​—Prov. 11:13.



A trustworthy person strives to keep his promises and tells the truth. (Ps. 15:4) People know that they can depend on him. We want our brothers and sisters to feel that way about us. We cannot force others to trust us. Trust must be earned. It has been said that trust is like money. Earning it is hard; losing it is easy. Jehovah certainly has earned our trust. “Everything he does is trustworthy.” (Ps. 33:4) And he expects us to imitate him. (Eph. 5:1) How thankful we are that Jehovah has drawn us to a brotherhood made up of people who are loving and trustworthy! We all have a responsibility to earn the trust of our brothers and sisters. As we individually work at showing love, humility, discernment, honesty, and self-control, we contribute to a spirit of trust in our congregation. May we imitate our God, Jehovah, and keep proving that we are trustworthy. w22.09 8 ¶1-2; 13 ¶17




Sunday, January 14

Jehovah watches.​—Ps. 33:18.



Although we are part of a large family of worshippers, we may occasionally feel alone and may struggle with negative emotions, thinking that we have to deal with these feelings on our own. Jehovah never wants us to feel that way. Consider how he dealt with the prophet Elijah. Jehovah encouraged Elijah to talk. Twice He asked Elijah: “What are you doing here?” (1 Ki. 19:9, 13) Each time, Jehovah listened as Elijah poured out his heart. He also assured Elijah that he had many fellow worshippers. (1 Ki. 19:11, 12, 18) No doubt, Elijah felt relieved after pouring out his heart to Jehovah and hearing His response. Jehovah gave Elijah several important assignments. He asked him to anoint Hazael as king over Syria, Jehu as king over Israel, and Elisha as prophet. (1 Ki. 19:15, 16) By giving Elijah these assignments, Jehovah helped him to focus on positive things. God also provided him with a close companion, Elisha. w22.08 8 ¶3; 9 ¶5




Monday, January 15

Keep encouraging one another and building one another up.​—1 Thess. 5:11.



Has your congregation ever built or renovated a Kingdom Hall? If so, no doubt you remember your first meeting in the new facility. You were so grateful to Jehovah. In fact, you may have been so choked up with emotion that you could hardly sing the opening song. Our well-built Kingdom Halls bring praise to Jehovah. But we bring even greater praise to him when we engage in another kind of building work. That work involves something more valuable than literal buildings. It involves building up the people who come to those places of worship. The apostle Paul had in mind this type of figurative building program when he wrote the words found in today’s text. The apostle Paul is an excellent example of someone who knew how to build up his fellow believers. He had empathy for them. We can imitate him and thus build up our brothers and sisters today.​—1 Cor. 11:1. w22.08 20 ¶1-2




Tuesday, January 16

Walk worthily of Jehovah.​—Col. 1:10.



A Christian who wants to be righteous in God’s eyes will be completely honest in all his business dealings. A righteous man also loves justice​—he hates to see someone treated unfairly. And “in order to please [Jehovah] fully,” a person who is truly righteous considers how He will view the decisions he makes. The Bible describes Jehovah as the Source of righteousness. For that reason, he is called “the dwelling place of righteousness.” (Jer. 50:7) As the Creator, Jehovah is the only one who can properly set the standards for what is right and what is wrong. His sense of what is right and what is wrong is far above our own view. (Prov. 14:12; Isa. 55:8, 9) However, because we are made in God’s image, we are able to live by his standards of righteousness. (Gen. 1:27) And we love to do so. Our love for our Father moves us to imitate him to the best of our ability.​—Eph. 5:1. w22.08 27 ¶5-6




Wednesday, January 17

Keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is.​—Eph. 5:17.



When we are troubled or discouraged, we might feel the need for some sort of diversion to escape our problems. That is understandable, but we must be careful not to be drawn into doing something that Jehovah hates. (Eph. 5:10-12, 15, 16) In his letter to the Philippians, the apostle Paul urged Christians to continue considering things that are “righteous, . . . chaste, . . . lovable, [and] virtuous.” (Phil. 4:8) Although Paul was not writing specifically on the subject of entertainment, what he wrote should influence the pastimes that we choose. Try this: Wherever the generic word “things” appears in the verse, substitute it with the word “songs,” “movies,” “novels,” or “video games.” Doing this can help you to discern which ones may be acceptable in God’s view and which ones may not be. We want to bring our life into harmony with Jehovah’s lofty standards.​—Ps. 119:1-3. w22.10 9 ¶11-12




Thursday, January 18

He knew what was in man.​—John 2:25.



In their former life, some of the “unrighteous” practiced horrible, vile things. They will therefore need to be taught how to live according to Jehovah’s righteous standards. To meet that need, God’s Kingdom will direct the greatest educational program in all human history. Who will teach the unrighteous? The great crowd and the resurrected righteous ones. In order for the unrighteous to have their names written in the book of life, they will need to develop a relationship with Jehovah and dedicate themselves to him. The progress of all these unrighteous ones will be followed with great interest by Jesus Christ and his fellow judges. (Rev. 20:4) Any who refuse to respond favorably to such help will be removed​—even though they may be 100 years of age. (Isa. 65:20) Jehovah and Jesus can read hearts and will see to it that no one will be allowed to cause any ruin in the new world.​—Isa. 11:9; 60:18; 65:25. w22.09 17 ¶11-12




Friday, January 19

Let every person be in subjection to the superior authorities.​—Rom. 13:1.



In this verse, the term “superior authorities” refers to human rulers who have power and control over others. Christians are subject to these secular authorities. These rulers maintain public order, enforce the law, and at times even come to the defense of Jehovah’s people. (Rev. 12:16) Thus, we are commanded to render them the taxes, tributes, fear, and honor that they demand. (Rom. 13:7) However, those secular governments have authority only because Jehovah allows them to have it. Jesus made that principle clear when he was interrogated by Roman Governor Pontius Pilate. When Pilate referred to the authority he had either to spare Jesus’ life or to have him put to death, Jesus told him: “You would have no authority over me at all unless it had been granted to you from above.” (John 19:11) As was the case with Pilate, the authority of all human rulers and politicians today is limited. w22.10 14 ¶6




Saturday, January 20

The wicked will be no more.​—Ps. 37:10.



King David was inspired to write about what life would be like when a future wise and faithful king would sit on the throne. (Ps. 37:10, 11, 29) We often read Psalm 37:11 to others when discussing the coming Paradise. That is certainly justified because Jesus quoted that text in his Sermon on the Mount, indicating that it will have a future fulfillment. (Matt. 5:5) But David’s words also revealed what life would be like in King Solomon’s day. When Solomon ruled Israel, God’s people enjoyed special peace and prosperity in a land “flowing with milk and honey.” God had said: “If you continue walking in my statutes . . . , I will put peace in the land, and you will lie down with no one making you afraid.” (Lev. 20:24; 26:3, 6) Those promises came true during Solomon’s reign. (1 Chron. 22:9; 29:26-28) The words found at Psalm 37:10, 11, 29 had an ancient fulfillment and will also be fulfilled in the future. w22.12 10 ¶8




Sunday, January 21

Those who keep firm hold of [wisdom] will be called happy.​—Prov. 3:18.



As true Christians, we must follow direction. The Bible offers this practical advice for success: “By wise guidance you will wage your war, and through many advisers there is success.” (Prov. 24:6, ftn.) Consider how applying this principle leads to success in our preaching and teaching work. Rather than carry out the ministry in our own way, we try to follow the suggestions we have been given. We receive wise guidance at our Christian meetings, where experienced advisers give Bible-based talks and presentations to train us. In addition, Jehovah’s organization provides useful tools​—publications and videos—​that can help people to understand the Bible. How grateful we are for the sound advice found in God’s Word! Where would we be without it? Let us be determined always to act on the wisdom that Jehovah provides.​—Prov. 3:13-17. w22.10 23 ¶18-19




Monday, January 22

How sweet your sayings are to my palate, more so than honey to my mouth!​—Ps. 119:103.



Just as we are nourished physically when we eat food and digest it, we are nourished spiritually when we study God’s Word and meditate on it. When it comes to God’s Word, Jehovah wants us to absorb it. We can do so by means of prayer, reading, and meditation. First, we pray to prepare our heart to receive God’s thoughts. Then, we read a Bible passage. Next, we pause in order to meditate, to think deeply, about what we have read. What will be the outcome? The more we meditate, the more our figurative heart will absorb God’s Word. Why is it vital to read the Bible and meditate on it? Doing so gives us the inner strength we need to preach the Kingdom message now and to proclaim the hard-hitting judgment message that we may deliver in the near future. Also, when we meditate on Jehovah’s appealing qualities, our relationship with him will grow ever stronger. w22.11 6-7 ¶16-17




Tuesday, January 23

By this all will know that you are my disciples​—if you have love among yourselves.​—John 13:35.



Jesus indicated that not only his followers but also those outside the Christian congregation would recognize his true followers by the unselfish love they have for one another. And the love that exists among those in the Christian congregation is indeed remarkable. Of course, Jehovah’s Witnesses are not perfect. (1 John 1:8) So the more we get to know those in the congregation, the more likely we are to see some of their flaws. (Rom. 3:23) Sadly, some have allowed the imperfections of others to stumble them. How did Jesus demonstrate love toward his apostles? And how is it possible to imitate Jesus’ example today? Witnesses do well to reflect on the answers to those questions. Doing so may help us to display love more fully, especially when dealing with the imperfections of one another.​—Eph. 5:2. w23.03 26-27 ¶2-4




Wednesday, January 24

With someone loyal you act in loyalty.​—Ps. 18:25.



As we get closer to the end of this system of things, we can expect challenges to come from within the congregation. Those challenges could test our loyalty to Jehovah. So we must keep our senses. If you feel mistreated by a fellow Christian, do not allow yourself to become bitter. If you receive discipline, look beyond the embarrassment, accept the counsel, and make the needed adjustments. And when Jehovah’s organization makes changes that affect you personally, wholeheartedly accept them and obey the direction. Maintain your trust in Jehovah and his organization when your loyalty is tested. Stay calm, think clearly, and see matters from Jehovah’s perspective. Pray to Jehovah for help. And never isolate yourself from the congregation. Then, come what may, Satan will not be able to separate you from Jehovah or His organization.​—Jas. 4:7. w22.11 24-25 ¶14-16




Thursday, January 25

Have love for the whole association of brothers.​—1 Pet. 2:17.



Elders help the brothers to be prepared before a disaster strikes. They make sure that all in the congregation know what steps to take to stay safe and to contact the elders. What can you personally do? If a disaster occurs nearby, ask the elders how you can help. Perhaps you can offer temporary accommodations, either for those who are displaced or for construction volunteers. You may be able to deliver food and supplies to publishers in need. If a disaster occurs in a more distant location, you can still help. How? By praying for those affected. (2 Cor. 1:8-11) You may be able to support the relief work financially by donating to the worldwide work. (2 Cor. 8:2-5) If you are able to travel to an affected area to help, ask the elders about volunteering. If you are invited to do so, you will likely receive some training so that you can be used where and when you are most needed. w22.12 24 ¶8; 25 ¶11-12




Friday, January 26

No temptation has come upon you except what is common to men.​—1 Cor. 10:13.



Another translation renders today’s text this way: “No temptation has overtaken you that is unusual for human beings.” That statement was directed to male and female Christians living in Corinth. Some had formerly been adulterers, homosexuals, and drunkards. (1 Cor. 6:9-11) Do you think that after their baptism they never had any improper desires to contend with? That could not be the case. They were all anointed Christians, true, but they were still imperfect humans. No doubt they had to struggle with improper desires from time to time. That should be encouraging to us. Why? Because it shows that whatever improper desire you are battling, someone else has resisted it. Indeed, you can remain “firm in the faith, knowing that the same kind of sufferings are being experienced by the entire association of your brothers.”​—1 Pet. 5:9. w23.01 12 ¶15




Saturday, January 27

In the world you will have tribulation, but take courage! I have conquered the world.​—John 16:33.



Jesus asked Jehovah to watch over his followers. (John 17:11) Why does this give us courage? Because Jehovah is stronger than any of our enemies. (1 John 4:4) Nothing escapes his notice. We are convinced that if we rely on Jehovah, we can overcome our fears and show courage. Do you sometimes feel embarrassed to identify yourself as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses? Are you putting off becoming a publisher or getting baptized because you worry about what others might think of you? Do not let such feelings stop you from doing what you know is right. Pray fervently to Jehovah. Ask him to give you the courage to do his will. As you see how Jehovah answers your prayers, you will become stronger and more courageous.​—Isa. 41:10, 13. w23.01 29 ¶12; 30 ¶14




Sunday, January 28

Have you not read?​—Matt. 12:3.



Jesus asked the question “Have you not read?” to reveal that the Pharisees had a wrong view of the Scriptures. (Matt. 12:1-7) On that occasion, the Pharisees claimed that Jesus’ disciples had violated the Sabbath. In reply, Jesus cited two Scriptural examples and quoted a verse from Hosea to show that the Pharisees had missed the point of the Sabbath law and had failed to show mercy. Why were these men not molded by their reading of God’s Word? Because they read it with a critical and proud spirit. Their attitude kept them from getting the sense of what they read. (Matt. 23:23; John 5:39, 40) Note also Matthew 19:4-6, where Jesus asked the Pharisees this same question: “Have you not read?” Although they had read the creation account, they overlooked what it taught about God’s view of marriage. We learn from Jesus’ words that we need to read the Bible with the right attitude. Unlike the Pharisees, we must be sincere and teachable. w23.02 12 ¶12-13




Monday, January 29

Thinking ability will keep watch over you.​—Prov. 2:11.



Jehovah’s Law to the nation of Israel included guidelines that would help prevent serious accidents from occurring at home and at work. (Ex. 21:28, 29; Deut. 22:8) Fatal accidents had serious consequences for unintentional manslayers. (Deut. 19:4, 5) The Law required that even those who unintentionally harmed an unborn child be punished. (Ex. 21:22, 23) The Scriptures make it clear that Jehovah wants us to be safety conscious. We show that we appreciate God’s gift of life by taking safety measures at home and at work. We dispose of sharp objects, toxic chemicals, or medicines in a safe way, and we keep such items out of the reach of young children. We are cautious when handling open flames, hot liquids, and power tools, not leaving them unattended. We do not drive a car while our judgment is impaired by medication, alcohol, or lack of sleep, or allow ourselves to be distracted by using a handheld device while driving. w23.02 21-22 ¶7-9




Tuesday, January 30

You will see your Grand Instructor.​—Isa. 30:20.



Jehovah is a patient, kind, understanding Teacher. He looks for the good in his students. (Ps. 130:3) And he never expects more of us than we can do. Remember, he designed your brain, a wonderful gift. (Ps. 139:14) Our Creator wants us to keep learning forever​—and to enjoy it. So it is wise to “form a longing” for Bible truths now. (1 Pet. 2:2) Set goals that you can reach, and stick to a schedule of Bible reading and study. (Josh. 1:8) With Jehovah’s blessing, you will come to enjoy reading and learning about him more and more. Knowledge alone is never enough. Its primary value is in how it helps you to learn more about Jehovah and to develop such qualities as love for him and faith in him. (1 Cor. 8:1-3) As you continue learning, keep asking Jehovah to help you gain more faith. (Luke 17:5) He generously answers such prayers. w23.03 10 ¶11, 13




Wednesday, January 31

[Make] the best use of your time.​—Col. 4:5.



Jesus’ disciples were not to be idle while they awaited the conclusion of the system of things. Jesus gave them work to do. He commanded them to preach the good news “in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:6-8) What an enormous assignment Jesus’ followers received! By devoting themselves to that assignment, they made the best use of their time. In order to pay attention to ourselves, we need to consider how we use our time. “Unexpected events” can affect any one of us. (Eccl. 9:11) Our life can suddenly be cut short. We can make the best use of our time by doing Jehovah’s will and strengthening our friendship with him. (John 14:21) We need to “be steadfast, immovable, always having plenty to do in the work of the Lord.” (1 Cor. 15:58) Then when the end comes​—whether it is the end of our life or the end of this wicked system—​we will have no regrets.​—Matt. 24:13; Rom. 14:8. w23.02 18 ¶12-14




