
July
Monday, July 1

Become an example to the faithful ones in speaking.​—1 Tim. 4:12.



Our ability to speak is a gift from our loving God. However, the gift of speech was misused. Satan the Devil lied to Eve, and that lie led to human sin and imperfection. (Gen. 3:1-4) Adam misused his tongue when he blamed Eve​—and even Jehovah—​for his own mistakes. (Gen. 3:12) Cain lied to Jehovah after he killed his brother Abel. (Gen. 4:9) Today, it is difficult to find a motion picture that does not contain some bad language. Students hear profanity at school, and adults are exposed to it in the workplace. If not careful, we might get so used to hearing bad language that we begin to use it ourselves. Of course, as Christians, we want to please Jehovah, and that involves more than avoiding obscene speech. We want to use the remarkable gift of speech in a positive way​—to praise our God. w22.04 4 ¶1-3




Tuesday, July 2

You cannot slave for God and for Riches.​—Matt. 6:24.



Jesus had a balanced view of material things. He enjoyed food and drink. (Luke 19:2, 6, 7) On one occasion, he made wine of the finest quality​—the first of his miracles. (John 2:10, 11) And on the day he died, he was wearing an expensive garment. (John 19:23, 24) But Jesus did not allow material things to become the focus of his life. Jesus taught that if we seek the Kingdom first, Jehovah will make sure that we have what we need. (Matt. 6:31-33) Many have benefited from applying divine wisdom when it comes to money. Consider the example of a single brother named Daniel. He says: “In my teenage years, I decided that I would make spiritual activities the most important thing in my life.” Because he has kept his life simple, Daniel has been able to use his time and skills on many theocratic projects. He adds: “There’s no amount of money that could equal the blessings Jehovah has given me.” w22.05 21-22 ¶6-7




Wednesday, July 3

[Jehovah] called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.​—1 Pet. 2:9.



We can show that we love the truth by regularly studying the Bible and Bible-based publications. After all, no matter how long we have been in the truth, we always have more to learn. Study is hard work, but it is well worth the effort. Not all of us love to read and study. But Jehovah invites us to “keep seeking” and to “keep searching” for a deeper understanding of the truth. (Prov. 2:4-6) When we put forth such effort, we always benefit. Regarding his personal Bible reading, Corey says that he focuses on one verse at a time. He explains: “I’ll read every footnote, look up every cross-reference, and do additional research. . . . I get so much out of my reading with this method!” Whether we use that method or another, we show our appreciation for the truth when we put time and effort into studying it.​—Ps. 1:1-3. w22.08 17 ¶13; 18 ¶15-16




Thursday, July 4

I was beside him as a master worker. I was the one he was especially fond of day by day; I rejoiced before him all the time.​—Prov. 8:30.



While Jesus was on earth, he used creation to teach his disciples about his Father. Consider one of the lessons he taught. Jehovah extends his love to everyone. In the Sermon on the Mount, Jesus drew the attention of his disciples to two aspects of creation that many people take for granted: sunshine and rain. Both of these are essential for the preservation of life. Jehovah could have withheld these from undeserving humans. Instead, he lovingly provides the sun and the rain for all. (Matt. 5:43-45) Jesus used this lesson to teach his disciples that Jehovah wants us to show love toward everyone. Whenever we enjoy a stunning sunset or see a refreshing rain shower, we can reflect on Jehovah’s impartial love. His example can move us to show similar love by preaching to all. w23.03 17 ¶9-10




Friday, July 5

I was greatly amazed.​—Rev. 17:6.



What amazed the apostle John? A woman riding a scarlet-colored wild beast. She is portrayed as a “great prostitute” and is called “Babylon the Great.” She commits “sexual immorality” with “the kings of the earth.” (Rev. 17:1-5) Who is “Babylon the Great”? This woman cannot represent a political organization because she is spoken of as committing immorality with the world’s political leaders. (Rev. 18:9) In fact, she endeavors to control these rulers, symbolically riding them. Additionally, she cannot represent the greedy commercial elements of Satan’s world. These are portrayed separately as “the merchants of the earth.” (Rev. 18:11, 15, 16) Ancient Babylon was a center of false worship. So, then, Babylon the Great must represent all forms of false worship. In fact, she is the world empire of false religion.​—Rev. 17:5, 18. w22.05 11 ¶14-16




Saturday, July 6

Your adversary, the Devil, walks about like a roaring lion, seeking to devour someone.​—1 Pet. 5:8.



A mother may at times wonder if her children will choose to serve Jehovah. After all, parents know how much pressure their children face in Satan’s world. Additionally, many mothers have the challenge of raising their children without a husband or with a husband who does not worship Jehovah. Challenges are not unique to those living in religiously divided households. Even when both parents are in the truth, it can be difficult to touch the heart of young ones so that they will become faithful servants of Jehovah. In any case, do not be overly anxious. Jehovah will help you. Why not consult other experienced parents for fresh ideas on how to use the tools available for family worship? (Prov. 11:14) Jehovah can also aid you in communicating with your children. Ask him to help you draw out what is on their mind and in their heart.​—Prov. 20:5. w22.04 17 ¶4, 7; 18 ¶9




Sunday, July 7

I continue praying, that your love may abound still more and more with accurate knowledge and full discernment.​—Phil. 1:9.



We can grow in our love for Jehovah by getting better acquainted with his Son, who perfectly reflects his Father’s personality. (Heb. 1:3) The best way to get to know Jesus is to study the four Gospel accounts. If you have not yet developed the useful habit of reading the Bible every day, why not start now? As you read the accounts about Jesus, take special note of his qualities. He was approachable; he lovingly took small children into his arms. (Mark 10:13-16) He put his disciples at ease; they felt free to speak their mind when in his presence. (Matt. 16:22) In this regard, Jesus imitated his heavenly Father. Jehovah is also very approachable. We can turn to him in prayer. When we pray, we can pour out our heart to him. We are confident that he will not condemn us. He loves us; he cares for us.​—1 Pet. 5:7. w22.08 3 ¶4-5




Monday, July 8

You, O Jehovah, are good and ready to forgive.​—Ps. 86:5.



As our Creator, Jehovah knows everything about us. Just think! He knows every detail about every person on this earth. (Ps. 139:15-17) So he can see all the imperfections that we inherited from our parents. Even more, he is aware of all the experiences that have molded and shaped our personality. What does this intimate knowledge of humankind move Jehovah to do? It moves him to act mercifully toward us. (Ps. 78:39; 103:13, 14) Jehovah has proved that he is eager to forgive. He understands that because of the actions of the first man, Adam, we all came under the curse of sin and death. (Rom. 5:12) There was no way for us to free ourselves or any other person from that curse. (Ps. 49:7-9) However, our loving God showed compassion and arranged for us to be set free. As John 3:16 reveals, Jehovah sent his only-begotten Son to die in our behalf.​—Matt. 20:28; Rom. 5:19. w22.06 3 ¶5-6




Tuesday, July 9

A kind man benefits himself.​—Prov. 11:17.



That forgivers will be forgiven was made clear by Jehovah in connection with his servant Job. That faithful man had been deeply hurt by the cutting remarks of three men named Eliphaz, Bildad, and Zophar. Jehovah instructed Job to pray in their behalf. After Job did so, Jehovah blessed him. (Job 42:8-10) Harboring resentment is damaging. Jehovah wants us to enjoy the relief that comes from unburdening ourselves of resentment. (Eph. 4:31, 32) He urges us to “let go of anger and abandon rage.” (Ps. 37:8) There is wisdom in following that advice. Harboring resentment can be harmful to our physical and mental health. (Prov. 14:30) Our harboring such resentment will not affect the offender any more than our drinking poison would harm the one who offended us. Rather, when we forgive others, we are giving ourselves a gift. We find peace of mind and heart, and we are able to move ahead in our service to Jehovah. w22.06 10 ¶9-10




Wednesday, July 10

Put on the breastplate of faith and love and the hope of salvation as a helmet.​—1 Thess. 5:8.



Our hope acts as a figurative helmet that protects our thinking and safeguards us from choosing a self-indulgent lifestyle, which would spoil our relationship with Jehovah. (1 Cor. 15:33, 34) Our helmet of hope can also protect us from thinking that there is no point in even trying to please Jehovah. Recall that Job’s false comforter Eliphaz used similar reasoning with Job. Eliphaz said: “What is mortal man that he should be pure?” Further, he said of God: “Look! He has no faith in his holy ones, and even the heavens are not pure in his eyes.” (Job 15:14, 15) What lies! Remember who is behind such thinking​—Satan. He knows that if you allow yourself to dwell on such thoughts, your hope will fade. Instead, reject such lies. Never doubt that Jehovah wants you to live forever and that he will help you to reach that goal.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4. w22.10 25-26 ¶8-10




Thursday, July 11

Job did not sin with his lips.​—Job 2:10.



Satan wanted Job to believe that he was suffering because he had lost Jehovah’s approval. For instance, Satan used a strong wind to bring down the house where all ten of Job’s children had been enjoying a meal together. (Job 1:18, 19) He also caused fire to fall from heaven and destroy not only Job’s flocks but also the servants who were caring for them. (Job 1:16) The wind and fire obviously came from a supernatural source; hence, Job concluded that Jehovah God must have been that Source. And as a result, Job believed that he had somehow upset Jehovah. Even so, Job refused to curse his heavenly Father. Job acknowledged that over the years he had received many good things from Jehovah. He therefore reasoned that if he was happy to accept the good, he should also be willing to accept the bad. So he said: “Let the name of Jehovah continue to be praised.”​—Job 1:20, 21. w22.06 21 ¶7




Friday, July 12

You will be hated by all people on account of my name. But the one who has endured to the end will be saved.​—Mark 13:13.



Jesus gave his disciples a similar warning, recorded at John 17:14. We have certainly seen the fulfillment of that prophecy, especially during the last 100 years. How so? Shortly after Jesus was installed as Messianic King in 1914, Satan was cast out of heaven. He is now confined to the vicinity of the earth, awaiting his destruction. (Rev. 12:9, 12) But he is not waiting passively. Satan is desperate and furious, venting his anger on God’s people. (Rev. 12:13, 17) For that reason, the world’s hatred of God’s people has intensified. We have no reason, though, to fear Satan and his followers. Instead, we can have the same conviction as did the apostle Paul, who wrote: “If God is for us, who will be against us?” (Rom. 8:31) We can have complete confidence in Jehovah. w22.07 18 ¶14-15




Saturday, July 13

This good news of the Kingdom will be preached in all the inhabited earth.​—Matt. 24:14.



Jesus was not worried that there would be a shortage of workers during the conclusion of the system of things. He knew that the prophetic words of the psalmist would be fulfilled: “Your people will offer themselves willingly on the day of your military force.” (Ps. 110:3) If you are sharing in the preaching work, you are supporting Jesus and the faithful slave and are helping to fulfill that prophecy. The work is going ahead, but there are challenges. One challenge that Kingdom preachers face is opposition. Apostates, religious leaders, and politicians have given many the wrong impression about our work. If our relatives, acquaintances, and workmates are misled by this propaganda, they may pressure us to stop serving Jehovah and to stop preaching. In some countries, the opposition takes the form of intimidation, threats, arrests, and even imprisonment. w22.07 8 ¶1; 9 ¶5-6




Sunday, July 14

We must enter into the Kingdom of God through many tribulations.​—Acts 14:22.



Jehovah expects us to set aside time to study the Bible regularly and to think deeply about what we read. When we apply what we learn, our faith grows stronger and we draw closer to our heavenly Father. As a result, we are strengthened to endure trials. Jehovah also gives his holy spirit to those who rely on his Word. And that spirit can give us “the power beyond what is normal” to endure any trial. (2 Cor. 4:7-10) With Jehovah’s backing, “the faithful and discreet slave” produces an abundance of articles, videos, and music that can help us to build strong faith and stay alert spiritually. (Matt. 24:45) Jehovah has trained his people to love and to comfort one another during distressing times. (2 Cor. 1:3, 4; 1 Thess. 4:9) Our brothers and sisters are eager to help us remain faithful when we experience difficulties. w22.08 12 ¶12-14




Monday, July 15

[Endeavor] to maintain the oneness of the spirit in the uniting bond of peace.​—Eph. 4:3.



By freely mentioning the good qualities of our brothers and sisters, we give them added reason for drawing close to one another, which builds up the congregation in love. At times, even mature Christians may disagree or argue with each other. That happened to the apostle Paul and his close friend Barnabas. These two men strongly disagreed about whether to take Mark with them on their next missionary trip. There was “a sharp burst of anger” between them, and they parted ways. (Acts 15:37-39) But Paul, Barnabas, and Mark mended the rift in their relationship. Paul later spoke well of Barnabas and Mark. (1 Cor. 9:6; Col. 4:10) We too need to resolve any differences we might have with others in the congregation and then continue to focus on their good qualities. In that way, we will promote peace and unity. w22.08 23 ¶10-11




Tuesday, July 16

Stop judging that you may not be judged.​—Matt. 7:1.



While we try hard to live by Jehovah’s righteous standards, we must avoid judging others and becoming self-righteous. We keep in mind that Jehovah is “the Judge of all the earth.” (Gen. 18:25) Jehovah has not entrusted such judging to us. Consider the example of the righteous man Joseph. He avoided judging others, even those who treated him badly. His own brothers assaulted him, sold him into slavery, and convinced their father that Joseph was dead. Years later, Joseph was reunited with his family. Now a powerful head of state, Joseph could have judged his brothers harshly and sought vengeance. Joseph’s brothers were afraid he might do exactly that, even though they were sincerely sorry for what they had done. But Joseph assured them: “Do not be afraid. Am I in the place of God?” (Gen. 37:18-20, 27, 28, 31-35; 50:15-21) Joseph humbly left the judging to Jehovah. w22.08 30 ¶18-19




Wednesday, July 17

Do not withhold good from those to whom you should give it if it is within your power to help.​—Prov. 3:27.



Did you know that you can be used by Jehovah to answer someone’s fervent prayer? That is true whether you are an elder, a ministerial servant, a pioneer, or a congregation publisher. It is true whether you are young or old or whether you are a brother or a sister. When someone who loves Jehovah calls out to him for help, our God often uses the elders and other faithful servants to become “a source of great comfort” to that person. (Col. 4:11) What a privilege it is to serve Jehovah and our brothers in that way! We may be able to do so when there is a disease outbreak, a disaster, or persecution. We may want to help others, but that can be challenging if our own family members are suffering. Still, we want to help our brothers, and Jehovah is pleased when we do what we can for them.​—Prov. 19:17. w22.12 22 ¶1-2




Thursday, July 18

This is my commandment, that you love one another just as I have loved you.​—John 15:12.



Love is the foundation of trust. Jesus said that the two greatest commandments are to love Jehovah and to love our neighbor. (Matt. 22:37-39) Our love for Jehovah impels us to imitate his perfect example of trustworthiness. For instance, love for our brothers and sisters moves us to keep their personal matters private. We would never want to reveal something that could cause them harm, embarrassment, or pain. Humility will also help us to be trustworthy. A Christian who is humble does not try to impress others by being the first to reveal a matter. (Phil. 2:3) He does not exaggerate his own importance by suggesting that he is aware of information that he is not allowed to reveal. Humility will also prevent us from spreading speculations about matters that are not discussed in the Bible or in our Bible-based publications. w22.09 12 ¶12-13




Friday, July 19

True knowledge will become abundant.​—Dan. 12:4.



An angel told Daniel that the prophetic words in Daniel’s book would be understood more fully by God’s people, but that “none of the wicked [would] understand.” (Dan. 12:10) Now is the time for us to prove that we are not among the wicked ones. (Mal. 3:16-18) Jehovah is gathering those whom he views as “a special property,” or a treasured possession. We surely want to be among them. Truly, we are living in exciting times. But far more amazing things are about to happen. Soon we will see the destruction of all wickedness. Following that, we will see the fulfillment of Jehovah’s promise to Daniel: “You will stand up for your lot at the end of the days.” (Dan. 12:13) Do you long for the day when Daniel, along with your loved ones, will “stand up” again? If so, do your utmost now to be faithful, and you can be sure that your name will remain written in Jehovah’s book of life. w22.09 24 ¶17; 25 ¶19-20




Saturday, July 20

I am sending you.​—Ezek. 2:3.



Those words must have strengthened Ezekiel. Why? No doubt he recalled that Jehovah had used similar words when He commissioned Moses and Isaiah as His prophets. (Ex. 3:10; Isa. 6:8) Ezekiel also knew how Jehovah had helped those two prophets overcome challenges. So when Jehovah told Ezekiel twice: “I am sending you,” the prophet had good reason for trusting in Jehovah’s support. Further, in the book of Ezekiel, we find this statement numerous times: “The word of Jehovah came to me.” (Ezek. 3:16) Moreover, the statement “The word of Jehovah again came to me” occurs repeatedly. (Ezek. 6:1) Surely, Ezekiel was convinced that he was sent by Jehovah. In addition, being the son of a priest, Ezekiel had likely been taught by his father how throughout history Jehovah assured His prophets of His backing. To Isaac, Jacob, and Jeremiah, Jehovah had spoken the words: “I am with you.”​—Gen. 26:24; 28:15; Jer. 1:8. w22.11 2 ¶3




Sunday, July 21

This means everlasting life.​—John 17:3.



Even though Adam and Eve sinned and brought death to their children, Jehovah did not change his mind regarding his purpose. (Isa. 55:11) His purpose is still that faithful humans live forever. Consider the things Jehovah has said and done in order to fulfill his purpose. Jehovah has promised that he will resurrect the dead and make everlasting life available to them. (Acts 24:15; Titus 1:1, 2) The faithful man Job was certain that Jehovah longs to resurrect those who have died. (Job 14:14, 15) The prophet Daniel was aware that humans have the prospect of being resurrected with the opportunity to live forever. (Ps. 37:29; Dan. 12:2, 13) Jews in Jesus’ day also knew that Jehovah could grant his faithful servants “everlasting life.” (Luke 10:25; 18:18) Jesus repeatedly spoke of this promise, and he himself was resurrected by his Father.​—Matt. 19:29; 22:31, 32; Luke 18:30; John 11:25. w22.12 4-5 ¶8-9




Monday, July 22

I trust in you, O Jehovah.​—Ps. 31:14.



Jehovah invites us to be close to him. (Jas. 4:8) He wants to be our God, our Father, and our Friend. He answers our prayers and helps us during difficult times. And he uses his organization to teach us and protect us. We can draw close to Jehovah by praying to him and by reading his Word and meditating on it. As we do, we are filled with love and appreciation for him. We are motivated to give him the obedience and praise that he so richly deserves. (Rev. 4:11) The more we get to know Jehovah, the more we will trust in him and the organization that he has provided to help us. The Devil, however, tries little by little to undermine our trust in Jehovah and his organization. But we can resist his tactics. When our faith is strong and our trust in Jehovah is unshakable, we will not abandon our God and his organization.​—Ps. 31:13, 14. w22.11 14 ¶1-3




Tuesday, July 23

They . . . were willing to die rather than serve or worship any god except their own God.​—Dan. 3:28.



Many true Christians have risked their freedom and even their lives out of love for Jehovah as their Sovereign Ruler. They are integrity-keepers, who have resolve like that of the three Hebrews whose lives were spared in the fiery furnace for remaining faithful to the Supreme One. The psalmist David wrote about the importance of keeping integrity to God: “Jehovah will pass sentence on the peoples. Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousness and according to my integrity.” (Ps. 7:8) Again, David wrote: “May integrity and uprightness safeguard me.” (Ps. 25:21) The best way to live is to remain faithful to Jehovah, maintaining our loyalty to him! Then we will feel the same as did the psalmist who wrote: “Happy are those who keep integrity . . . , who walk in the law of Jehovah.”​—Ps. 119:1, ftn. w22.10 17 ¶18-19




Wednesday, July 24

His invisible qualities . . . are perceived by the things made.​—Rom. 1:20.



Of all the conversations Job had throughout his life, one in particular must have stood out​—the conversation he had with Jehovah God. To strengthen Job’s confidence in His wisdom and ability to care for His servants, Jehovah pointed to some extraordinary features of nature. For instance, Job was reminded that God provides for the animals, so He could also take care of Job. (Job 38:39-41; 39:1, 5, 13-16) By considering examples from creation, Job learned a great deal about the qualities of his God. We too can learn more about our God when we examine his creative works. However, we may not always find it easy to do so. If we live in a city, we may see little evidence of nature in our daily lives. Even if we do live close to nature, we may feel that we have little time to study it, but it is worthwhile to take the time and make the effort to observe creation. w23.03 15 ¶1-2




Thursday, July 25

The shrewd one sees the danger and conceals himself.​—Prov. 22:3.



Jesus said that “great earthquakes” and other disasters would occur before the end comes. (Luke 21:11) He also spoke of an “increasing of lawlessness,” which is evident in crime, violence, and terrorist attacks. (Matt. 24:12) Jesus never said that these calamities would impact only those whom Jehovah has abandoned. In fact, many of Jehovah’s faithful servants have been victims of disasters. (Isa. 57:1; 2 Cor. 11:25) Jehovah may not miraculously protect us from all disasters, but he will give us whatever we need to remain calm and at peace. We will find this easier if we have planned in advance how to respond. But does preparing indicate that we lack faith in Jehovah? Not at all. In fact, preparing for a disaster shows that we do have faith in his ability to care for us. How so? God’s Word advises us to prepare for potential disasters. w22.12 18 ¶9-10




Friday, July 26

God has sent me ahead of you for the preservation of life.​—Gen. 45:5.



While Joseph was in prison, Jehovah caused the king of Egypt to have two troubling dreams. When the king learned that Joseph had the ability to interpret dreams, he sent for him. With Jehovah’s help, Joseph interpreted the dreams and impressed Pharaoh with the practical advice he gave him. Seeing that Jehovah was with the young man, Pharaoh appointed Joseph as the food administrator for all of Egypt. (Gen. 41:38, 41-44) Later, a severe famine arose that affected not only Egypt but also Canaan, the land in which Joseph’s family were living. Joseph was now in a position to save his family and thus preserve the line of descent that would lead to the Messiah. Obviously, it was Jehovah who made everything Joseph did succeed. In the end, Jehovah turned the cruel scheme of Joseph’s brothers into a means by which He could accomplish His will. w23.01 17 ¶11-12




Saturday, July 27

Pay attention to yourselves.​—Luke 21:34.



A person who pays attention to himself is alert to any dangers that threaten his relationship with Jehovah, and he takes steps to avoid them. In this way, he keeps himself in God’s love. (Prov. 22:3; Jude 20, 21) The apostle Paul admonished Christians to pay attention to themselves. For example, he told the Christians in Ephesus: “Keep strict watch that how you walk is not as unwise but as wise persons.” (Eph. 5:15, 16) Our spirituality is under constant threat, so the Bible counsels us to “keep perceiving what the will of Jehovah is” so that we can deal with any type of threat. (Eph. 5:17) To make wise choices, we need to perceive, or sense, “the will of Jehovah.” We can do this by regularly studying God’s Word and meditating on it. The more we understand Jehovah’s will and cultivate “the mind of Christ,” the more likely we will walk “as wise persons,” even when we do not have specific rules to guide our conduct.​—1 Cor. 2:14-16. w23.02 16-17 ¶7-9




Sunday, July 28

Be transformed by making your mind over, so that you may prove to yourselves the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.​—Rom. 12:2.



How often do you clean your home? Perhaps before you first moved in, you scoured it thoroughly. But what if you neglected it afterward? As you know, dust and dirt can accumulate quickly. To keep your home presentable, you need to clean it regularly. A similar ongoing effort is required when it comes to our thinking and our personality. Of course, before getting baptized we worked hard to make necessary changes in our life in order to “cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit.” (2 Cor. 7:1) Now, though, we need to follow the apostle Paul’s counsel to “continue to be made new.” (Eph. 4:23) The dust and dirt of this world can quickly accumulate in us. To avoid that outcome and to remain presentable to Jehovah, we must regularly examine our thinking, our personality, and our desires. w23.01 8 ¶1-2




Monday, July 29

He saw God’s spirit descending like a dove and coming upon him.​—Matt. 3:16.



Imagine what it was like to listen to Jesus teach. How often he referred to the Holy Scriptures from memory! It was at the time of his baptism and his being anointed with holy spirit that Jesus’ memory of his prehuman existence was evidently restored to him. In his first recorded words after his baptism and in some of his last words before his death, Jesus quoted from the Scriptures. (Deut. 8:3; Ps. 31:5; Luke 4:4; 23:46) And during the three and a half years between those two events, Jesus often publicly read and quoted from the Scriptures and explained them. (Matt. 5:17, 18, 21, 22, 27, 28; Luke 4:16-20) Years before he began his ministry, Jesus read and heard God’s Word repeatedly. At home, he no doubt heard Mary and Joseph quote from the Scriptures. (Deut. 6:6, 7) Also, Jesus attended the synagogue every Sabbath with his family. (Luke 4:16) While there, he must have listened carefully as the Scriptures were read. w23.02 8 ¶1-2




Tuesday, July 30

You must love Jehovah your God.​—Mark 12:30.



There are so many reasons to love Jehovah. For example, you have come to understand that he is “the source of life” and that he is the Giver of “every good gift and every perfect present.” (Ps. 36:9; Jas. 1:17) Every good thing that you enjoy comes from our generous, loving God. The ransom is a wonderful gift that Jehovah has given to us. Why can we say that? Consider the bond that exists between Jehovah and his Son. Jesus said: “The Father loves me” and “I love the Father.” (John 10:17; 14:31) The bond between them grew stronger over the course of billions of years. (Prov. 8:22, 23, 30) Now think how it must have pained God to allow his Son to suffer and die. Jehovah loves mankind​—including you—​so much that he was willing to give his beloved Son as a sacrifice to enable you and others to live forever. (John 3:16; Gal. 2:20) There can be no greater reason to love God. w23.03 4-5 ¶11-13




Wednesday, July 31

Hold fast to what you have.​—Rev. 2:25.



We must reject the teachings of apostates. Jesus reproved some in Pergamum for promoting divisions and sects. (Rev. 2:14-16) He commended those in Thyatira who had steered clear of the “deep things of Satan,” and he urged them to “hold fast” to the truth. (Rev. 2:24-26) Weak Christians there who had allowed themselves to be seduced by false teachings needed to repent. What about us today? We must reject any teaching that is opposed to Jehovah’s thinking. Apostates may have “an appearance of godliness,” but they prove “false to its power.” (2 Tim. 3:5) It is easier to identify and reject false teachings when we are diligent students of God’s Word. (2 Tim. 3:14-17; Jude 3, 4) We need to make sure that our worship is acceptable to Jehovah. If we are doing something that could make our worship unacceptable, we need to take immediate action to make things right.​—Rev. 2:5, 16; 3:3, 16. w22.05 4 ¶9; 5 ¶11




