
June
Saturday, June 1

My flesh is covered with maggots and clods of dirt; my skin is full of scabs and pus.​—Job 7:5.



Job enjoyed a close friendship with Jehovah. He had a large, united family, and he was very wealthy. (Job 1:1-5) But in just one day, Job lost nearly everything. First, he lost his wealth. (Job 1:13-17) Then, all his beloved children died. Imagine the shock, grief, and despair that Job and his wife felt on learning that all ten of their children had been crushed to death. No wonder Job ripped his clothes apart in mourning and collapsed to the ground! (Job 1:18-20) Satan next attacked Job’s health and robbed him of his dignity. (Job 2:6-8) At one time, Job had been highly respected in his community. People came to him for guidance. (Job 31:18) Now they avoided him. He was an outcast, rejected by his brothers, his close companions, and even by his own household servants!​—Job 19:13, 14, 16. w22.06 21 ¶5-6




Sunday, June 2

Let us by love grow up in all things.​—Eph. 4:15.



After baptism, all of us need to follow the advice the apostle Paul gave to fellow believers in Ephesus. He encouraged them to become “full-grown” Christians. (Eph. 4:13) That is another way of saying, ‘Continue to make progress.’ You already love Jehovah very much. But your love for him can grow deeper. How? The apostle Paul points to one way, as recorded at Philippians 1:9. Paul prayed that the love of the Philippians “abound still more and more.” So we can grow in our love. We can do that by acquiring “accurate knowledge and full discernment.” The more we get to know Jehovah, the more we love him and appreciate his personality and way of doing things. We grow in our eagerness to please him, never wanting to do anything that would disappoint him. We work hard to discern what his will is and how we can cooperate with it. w22.08 2-3 ¶3-4




Monday, June 3

A revelation by Jesus Christ, which God gave him, to show his slaves the things that must shortly take place.​—Rev. 1:1.



What is written in the book of Revelation is not for people in general but for us, God’s dedicated servants. As God’s people, we should not be surprised to discover that we are sharing in the fulfillment of the prophecies found in this fascinating book. The aged apostle John identified the time when these prophecies are to be fulfilled. He said: “By inspiration I came to be in the Lord’s day.” (Rev. 1:10) When John wrote those words in about 96 C.E., “the Lord’s day” was still far off. (Matt. 25:14, 19; Luke 19:12) But according to Bible prophecy, that day started in 1914 when Jesus was enthroned as King in heaven. From that year onward, the prophecies of Revelation, which involve God’s people, started to undergo fulfillment. Yes, we are now living in “the Lord’s day”!​—Rev. 1:3. w22.05 2 ¶2-3




Tuesday, June 4

The wild beast was caught, and along with it the false prophet.​—Rev. 19:20.



While still alive, both the wild beast and the false prophet were hurled into the fiery lake that burns with sulfur. So while they are still functioning, these political enemies of God will be destroyed forever. What does this mean for us? As Christians, we must be loyal to God and his Kingdom. (John 18:36) We need to remain neutral with regard to this world’s political affairs. Such neutrality can be extremely difficult, though, because the world’s governments demand our full support, both in word and in deed. Those who succumb to their pressure receive the mark of the wild beast. (Rev. 13:16, 17) Any who receive that mark, however, will incur Jehovah’s disapproval and lose out on everlasting life. (Rev. 14:9, 10; 20:4) How important it is for each one of us to maintain strict neutrality, no matter what pressure is put on us to do otherwise! w22.05 10-11 ¶12-13




Wednesday, June 5

Have you seen a man skillful at his work? He will stand before kings; he will not stand before common men.​—Prov. 22:29.



One goal you can set is to learn a useful skill. If we develop our skills, we will be equipped to take on added responsibilities. Consider the vast number of workers needed to build Bethel facilities, Assembly Halls, and Kingdom Halls. Many of these workers acquired their skills by working alongside brothers who are experienced tradesmen. Today, both brothers and sisters are learning the skills that are needed to help maintain Assembly Halls and Kingdom Halls. In these and other ways, Jehovah God, “the King of eternity,” and Christ Jesus, “the King of . . . kings,” are accomplishing marvelous things by means of capable workers. (1 Tim. 1:17; 6:15) We want to work hard and use our skills to glorify Jehovah, not ourselves.​—John 8:54. w22.04 24 ¶7; 25 ¶11




Thursday, June 6

Money is a protection.​—Eccl. 7:12.



Solomon was fabulously wealthy, and he lived in luxury. (1 Ki. 10:7, 14, 15) Jesus, on the other hand, had few possessions and no permanent home. (Matt. 8:20) Yet, both men had a balanced view of material things because their wisdom came from the same Source​—Jehovah God. Solomon acknowledged that with money, we are able to obtain life’s necessities and perhaps a few wants. Yet, as wealthy as he was, Solomon realized that there are more important things than money. For example, he wrote: “A good name [or, “a good reputation,” ftn.] is to be chosen rather than great wealth.” (Prov. 22:1) Solomon also observed that people who love money are seldom happy with what they have. (Eccl. 5:10, 12) And he warned against putting all our trust in money, since whatever money we have can quickly disappear.​—Prov. 23:4, 5. w22.05 21 ¶4-5




Friday, June 7

Jehovah is waiting patiently to show you favor, and he will rise up to show you mercy. For Jehovah is a God of justice. Happy are all those keeping in expectation of him.​—Isa. 30:18.



As we meditate on our current blessings, we strengthen our relationship with Jehovah. And meditating on the blessings that Jehovah has in store for us will keep the hope of serving him forever very real to us. All of this will contribute to our joy in serving Jehovah now. Jehovah “will rise up” in our behalf when he brings an end to this wicked world. We are confident that Jehovah​—“a God of justice”—​will not allow Satan’s world to exist for one day longer than justice requires. (Isa. 25:9) We wait patiently with Jehovah for that day of deliverance to arrive. In the meantime, we are determined to continue to treasure the privilege of prayer, to study and apply God’s Word, and to meditate on our blessings. As we do, Jehovah will help us to endure with joy in our worship to him. w22.11 13 ¶18-19




Saturday, June 8

Do not forsake the instruction of your mother.​—Prov. 1:8.



Although the Bible does not describe Timothy’s baptism, it is not hard to imagine the joy that his mother, Eunice, felt that day. (Prov. 23:25) Eunice had successfully met the challenge of teaching her son to love Jehovah and his Son, Jesus Christ. Timothy was raised in a religiously divided household. His father was a Greek, and his mother and grandmother were Jews. (Acts 16:1) Timothy was likely a teenager when Eunice and Lois embraced a different religion​—Christianity. Still, the household remained divided. Which path would Timothy take? Christian mothers today likewise love their family. More than anything, they want to help their children to develop a close friendship with Jehovah. And our God highly values their efforts. (Prov. 1:8, 9) Jehovah has guided countless mothers as they helped their children to accept the truth. w22.04 16 ¶1-3




Sunday, June 9

God put it into their hearts to carry out his thought.​—Rev. 17:17.



Soon Jehovah will put it into the hearts of the political powers “to carry out his thought.” With what result? Those political powers, the “ten kings,” will turn on false religious organizations and destroy them. (Rev. 17:1, 2, 12, 16) How do we know that the end of Babylon the Great is near? To answer that question, it is helpful to remember that the ancient city of Babylon was partly protected by the waters of the mighty Euphrates River. The book of Revelation compares the millions of supporters of Babylon the Great to protective “waters.” (Rev. 17:15) But it also reveals that the waters would ‘dry up,’ indicating that the world empire of false religion would lose many of its supporters. (Rev. 16:12) In fulfillment of that prophecy, today a considerable number of people have abandoned false religion and have begun looking elsewhere for answers. w22.07 5-6 ¶14-15




Monday, June 10

The one who does not practice mercy will have his judgment without mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.​—Jas. 2:13.



Being forgiving shows appreciation. In one parable, Jesus compared Jehovah to a master who canceled an enormous debt that one of his slaves could not repay. Yet, the forgiven slave failed to act mercifully toward a slave who owed him a much smaller amount of money. (Matt. 18:23-35) What was Jesus teaching us? If we truly appreciate Jehovah’s great mercy toward us, we will be moved to forgive others. (Ps. 103:9) The Watchtower expressed it this way years ago: “No matter how many times we forgive our fellow creatures, it could never equal the extent of God’s forgiveness and mercy to us through Christ.” Forgivers will be forgiven. Jehovah shows mercy to those who are merciful. (Matt. 5:7) Jesus made that clear when he taught his disciples how to pray.​—Matt. 6:14, 15. w22.06 10 ¶8-9




Tuesday, June 11

By means of your offspring all nations of the earth will obtain a blessing for themselves.​—Gen. 22:18.



Jesus came to earth as a man. He has perfectly reflected his Father’s personality. (John 14:9) So through him we have come to know and love Jehovah God. We have also benefited from Jesus’ teachings and his guidance as he directs the Christian congregation today. He has taught us how to live in a way that will help us to gain Jehovah’s approval. And we all can benefit from Jesus’ death. When Jesus was resurrected, he offered the value of his blood as a perfect sacrifice that “cleanses us from all sin.” (1 John 1:7) He is now a glorious, immortal King. Soon, Jesus will crush the serpent’s head. (Gen. 3:15) What a relief it will be for faithful mankind when Satan comes to his end! Until then, do not give up. Our God is trustworthy. He will bring countless blessings to “all nations of the earth.” w22.07 18 ¶13; 19 ¶19




Wednesday, June 12

We cannot avoid suffering such things.​—1 Thess. 3:3.



We need to be flexible when setting goals. Why? Because we do not have complete control over our circumstances. To illustrate: The apostle Paul had helped to form a new congregation in the city of Thessalonica. But opposers forced Paul to leave that city. (Acts 17:1-5, 10) If Paul had stayed, he would have put his brothers at risk. But Paul did not give up. Instead, he adapted to the changed circumstances. Later, he dispatched Timothy to care for the spiritual needs of the new believers in Thessalonica. (1 Thess. 3:1, 2) How happy the Thessalonians must have been. We can learn from Paul’s experience in Thessalonica. We may be reaching out for a privilege of service, but circumstances beyond our control are preventing us from receiving it. (Eccl. 9:11) If that is true in your case, be willing to pick a different goal that is within your reach. w22.04 25-26 ¶14-15




Thursday, June 13

Happy is the man who keeps on enduring trial.​—Jas. 1:12.



Jehovah comforts us by giving us a hope for the future. Consider just a few thoughts from the Bible that can comfort us when we experience trials. In the Scriptures, Jehovah assures us that nothing​—and that includes severe trials—​“will be able to separate us from [his] love.” (Rom. 8:38, 39) He also assures us that he “is near to all those calling on him” in prayer. (Ps. 145:18) Jehovah tells us that if we rely on him, we can endure any trial and even find a measure of happiness when we suffer. (1 Cor. 10:13; Jas. 1:2) God’s Word also reminds us that our trials are temporary and brief when compared to the everlasting reward he offers us. (2 Cor. 4:16-18) Jehovah gives us the sure hope that he will eliminate the root cause of all our trials​—Satan the Devil and those who imitate his wicked ways. (Ps. 37:10) Have you memorized some comforting Bible passages to help you endure future trials? w22.08 11 ¶11




Friday, June 14

Continue considering these things.​—Phil. 4:8.



Do you ever worry about whether you can continue living by Jehovah’s righteous standards day after day, year after year? Jehovah promises that our righteousness can be “like the waves of the sea.” (Isa. 48:18) Imagine that you are standing on the shore of a wide sea, watching the waves roll in endlessly, one after another. In that peaceful setting, would you worry that one day those waves might simply stop? No! You know that they will surely keep on coming. Your righteousness can be just like the waves of the sea! How? When you have a decision to make, first consider what Jehovah would want you to do. Then follow through. No matter how difficult the decision might be, your loving Father will always be there to help you to remain constant and steady and to live your life day after day according to His righteous standards.​—Isa. 40:29-31. w22.08 30 ¶15-17




Saturday, June 15

As soon as the 1,000 years have ended, Satan will be released from his prison.​—Rev. 20:7.



At the end of the 1,000 years, Satan will be released from his confinement. He will then try to mislead perfect humans. During that test, all perfect humans on earth will have an opportunity to show clearly where they stand on the issue of God’s name and sovereignty. (Rev. 20:8-10) Their individual responses to Satan’s efforts will determine whether their names should be written permanently in the book of life. Some, an unspecified number, will prove to be like Adam and Eve, rejecting Jehovah’s rulership. What will happen to them? Revelation 20:15 tells us: “Whoever was not found written in the book of life was hurled into the lake of fire.” Yes, these rebellious ones will be completely destroyed forever. But the majority of perfect mankind will pass this final test. w22.09 23-24 ¶15-16




Sunday, June 16

Unless you get circumcised according to the custom of Moses, you cannot be saved.​—Acts 15:1.



Some in the first-century congregation insisted that Gentile converts be circumcised, perhaps to avoid criticism by outsiders. (Gal. 6:12) The apostle Paul strongly disagreed with that viewpoint, but rather than insist that his way be followed, he humbly referred the matter to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem. (Acts 15:2) As a result, his conduct helped those Christians to maintain joy and peace in the congregation. (Acts 15:30, 31) If a serious dispute does arise, we promote peace by seeking guidance from those whom Jehovah has appointed to care for the congregation. Often, Bible-based direction can be found in our publications or in guidelines provided by the organization. If we focus on following those instructions rather than on promoting our personal views, we will contribute to the peace of the congregation. w22.08 22 ¶8-9




Monday, June 17

A true friend shows love at all times.​—Prov. 17:17.



At one time or another, most of us feel the need to confide in a close friend. Sometimes that may be difficult. We may not be accustomed to revealing our innermost thoughts to anyone, and we would be devastated if we learned later that our friend told others what we said. On the other hand, how we appreciate someone who can keep a confidence! Elders who are known to keep a confidence are “a hiding place from the wind, a place of concealment” for their brothers. (Isa. 32:2) We know that we can talk freely to these men, certain that what we say to them will be kept confidential. We do not pressure them to tell us things that they should keep private. In addition, we appreciate our elders’ wives because they do not try to pry information out of their husbands. Really, it is a blessing that an elder’s wife is not told personal information about her brothers and sisters. w22.09 11 ¶10-11




Tuesday, June 18

I am God. I will be exalted among the nations.​—Ps. 46:10.



We can be confident that Jehovah will rescue his loyal servants during the coming “great tribulation.” (Matt. 24:21; Dan. 12:1) He will do this when a coalition of nations, known as Gog of Magog, makes its vicious, worldwide assault on those who are faithful to Jehovah. Even if that coalition includes all 193 members of the United Nations, it will be no match for the Supreme One and his heavenly forces! Jehovah promises: “I will certainly magnify myself and sanctify myself and make myself known before the eyes of many nations; and they will have to know that I am Jehovah.” (Ezek. 38:14-16, 23) Gog’s assault will trigger Jehovah’s final showdown at Armageddon when He destroys “the kings of the entire inhabited earth.” (Rev. 16:14, 16; 19:19-21) In contrast, “only the upright will reside in the earth, and the one who keeps integrity will remain in it.”​—Prov. 2:21, ftn. w22.10 16-17 ¶16-17




Wednesday, June 19

[God’s] will is that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.​—1 Tim. 2:4.



We cannot read hearts; only “Jehovah examines the motives.” (Prov. 16:2) He loves all kinds of people, from all different backgrounds and cultures. And Jehovah encourages us to “open [our] hearts wide.” (2 Cor. 6:13) We seek to love all in our spiritual family, not to judge them. This also means that we are not to judge those outside the congregation. Would you ever judge a relative who does not share your faith, saying, “That man will never come into the truth”? No, that would be presumptuous, self-righteous. Jehovah is still giving “all people everywhere” an opportunity to repent. (Acts 17:30) Always remember that self-righteousness is a form of unrighteousness. May our love for Jehovah’s standards of righteousness promote joy and inspire others, helping them to draw closer to us and to our God. w22.08 31 ¶20-22




Thursday, June 20

They will certainly know that a prophet was among them.​—Ezek. 2:5.



We can expect to face opposition as we carry out our preaching work. That opposition may well increase in the future. (Dan. 11:44; 2 Tim. 3:12; Rev. 16:21) Still, we can be sure that Jehovah will give us the help we need. Why? Jehovah has always helped his servants to accomplish their assignments​—no matter how difficult the tasks. Consider the prophet Ezekiel, who preached to the Jewish exiles in Babylon. What kind of people were in Ezekiel’s preaching territory? Jehovah described them as “defiant,” “hardhearted,” and “rebellious.” They were as harmful as thorns and as dangerous as scorpions. No wonder Jehovah told Ezekiel repeatedly: “Do not be afraid”! (Ezek. 2:3-6) Ezekiel was able to carry out his preaching commission because he was (1) sent by Jehovah, (2) empowered by God’s spirit, and (3) nourished by God’s words. w22.11 2 ¶1-2




Friday, June 21

In the day you eat from it you will certainly die.​—Gen. 2:17.



Jehovah created living things on earth with a limited life span, except for humans. He gave them the unique prospect of never dying. Jehovah has also created within us a strong desire to keep living. The Bible says regarding humans that God has “put eternity in their heart.” (Eccl. 3:11) That is one reason why we view death as an enemy. (1 Cor. 15:26) If we become seriously ill, do we just accept the condition and give up? No. Usually, we visit a physician and perhaps take medicine to combat the disease. In fact, we do all we reasonably can to avoid dying. And when someone we love dies, whether that person is young or old, do we not feel deep and lasting emotional pain? (John 11:32, 33) Certainly, our loving Creator would not give us the desire and the capacity to keep living unless his purpose was for humans to keep living. w22.12 3 ¶5; 4 ¶7




Saturday, June 22

The same kind of sufferings are being experienced by the entire association of your brothers in the world.​—1 Pet. 5:9.



Many of our fellow worshippers may be ill, fearful, or lonely in these difficult times. Reach out to your brothers and sisters. A disease outbreak may require that we maintain physical distancing even when we are with our fellow worshippers. At a time like that, you might feel as did the apostle John. He wanted to see his friend Gaius face-to-face. (3 John 13, 14) Still, John recognized that for a time, he could not see Gaius. So John did what he could; he wrote Gaius a letter. If it is not always possible for you to visit with your brothers and sisters in person, try to contact them in other ways. When you keep in touch with fellow Christians, you will feel more secure and at peace. Reach out to the elders if you feel especially anxious, and accept their loving encouragement.​—Isa. 32:1, 2. w22.12 17-18 ¶6-7




Sunday, June 23

Joseph’s master took him and gave him over to the prison, the place where the prisoners of the king were kept under arrest.​—Gen. 39:20.



The Bible indicates that for a time Joseph’s feet were bound in fetters and his neck was put in irons. (Ps. 105:17, 18) Joseph’s situation was going from bad to worse. He went from being a trusted slave to being a lowly prisoner. Have you ever been in a distressing situation that went from bad to worse despite your earnest prayers? That can happen. Jehovah does not shield us from trials in a world that is ruled by Satan. (1 John 5:19) Still, you can be sure of this: Jehovah is fully aware of what you are going through, and he cares about you. (Matt. 10:29-31; 1 Pet. 5:6, 7) Furthermore, he has promised: “I will never leave you, and I will never abandon you.” (Heb. 13:5) Jehovah can help you to endure even when your situation seems hopeless. w23.01 16 ¶7-8




Monday, June 24

Our God . . . will forgive in a large way.​—Isa. 55:7.



The Scriptures assure us that our God will not abandon us when we make mistakes. The Israelites sinned against Jehovah again and again; yet, when they sincerely repented, God forgave them. First-century Christians were also made aware of God’s love. Under inspiration, the apostle Paul urged fellow believers to “forgive and comfort” a man who had pursued a course of serious sin but who had repented. (2 Cor. 2:6, 7; 1 Cor. 5:1-5) How remarkable that Jehovah did not reject his worshippers just because they had erred! Rather, he lovingly reached out to them, corrected them, and invited them back into his arms. He promises to do the same for all repentant sinners today. (Jas. 4:8-10) The Bible reveals God’s wisdom, his justice, and his love. This book proves that Jehovah wants us to come to know him. He wants us to become his friends. w23.02 7 ¶16-17




Tuesday, June 25

You are doing well in paying attention to it.​—2 Pet. 1:19.



For good reason, we are interested in seeing how current world events are fulfilling Bible prophecy. For instance, Jesus provided a list of specific events to help us know when the end of Satan’s system is drawing near. (Matt. 24:3-14) The apostle Peter encouraged us to pay attention to the fulfillment of prophecy so that our faith will remain strong. (2 Pet. 1:20, 21) He wants us to keep a balanced view when considering Bible prophecy. He urges us to “keep close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah.” (2 Pet. 3:11-13) Why? Not because we want to work out the “day and hour” when Jehovah will bring Armageddon, but because we want to use the time we have left to perform “holy acts of conduct and deeds of godly devotion.” (Matt. 24:36; Luke 12:40) We want to maintain upright conduct and make sure that our efforts in Jehovah’s service reflect our deep love for him. To keep that focus, we must pay attention to ourselves. w23.02 16 ¶4, 6




Wednesday, June 26

I have other sheep . . . I must bring in.​—John 10:16.



There are things that the “other sheep” need to do now to qualify to live in Paradise. We need to show how we feel about Jesus. For instance, we show our affection for him by the way we treat his spirit-anointed brothers. Jesus said that he would judge the sheep on that basis. (Matt. 25:31-40) We can support them in the preaching and disciple-making work. (Matt. 28:18-20) We do not need to wait until we are living in Paradise to become the kind of person that Jehovah wants there. Right now we can work at being honest in our speech and actions and moderate in our habits. And we can be loyal to Jehovah, to our marriage mate, and to fellow Christians. The more closely we conform to God’s standards while living in this wicked world, the easier it will be for us to live by them in Paradise. We can also develop skills and traits to show that we are preparing to live then. w22.12 11-12 ¶14-16




Thursday, June 27

Whoever loves me will be loved by my Father.​—John 14:21.



We love Jesus as our King because he is the ideal Ruler. Jehovah himself trained his Son and appointed him to rule. (Isa. 50:4, 5) Think, too, of the self-sacrificing love Jesus has shown. (John 13:1) As your King, Jesus fully deserves your love. He explained that those who truly love him​—those whom he calls his friends—​show their love by obeying his commands. (John 14:15; 15:14, 15) What an honor it is to be a friend of Jehovah’s Son! You see Jesus as a perfect, humble reflection of his Father. You have learned that he fed the hungry, comforted the discouraged, and even healed the sick. (Matt. 14:14-21) You have seen how he leads his congregation today. (Matt. 23:10) And you know that he will do far more in the future as King of God’s Kingdom. How can you show that you love him? By following his example. You can begin to do just that by dedicating yourself to Jehovah and getting baptized. w23.03 4 ¶8, 10




Friday, June 28

Lift up your eyes to heaven and see. Who has created these things?​—Isa. 40:26.



Jehovah filled not only the heavens but also the earth and the sea with a number of amazing creative works that we can learn from. (Ps. 104:24, 25) And just think of the way God made us. He instilled in us an appreciation for natural beauty. He also made it possible for us to enjoy the variety of his creation by means of our five senses​—sight, hearing, touch, taste, and smell. The Bible reveals another important reason why we should examine creation. It teaches us about Jehovah’s qualities. (Rom. 1:20) For instance, consider the designs that are so obviously present in nature. Do they not reveal God’s wisdom? And think about the variety of foods we can enjoy. That is clear proof of his love for mankind. When we perceive Jehovah’s personality from the things he made, we come to know him better and we are moved to draw closer to him. w23.03 16 ¶4-5




Saturday, June 29

The very essence of your word is truth.​—Ps. 119:160.



As this world goes from bad to worse, our confidence in the truth will be put to the test. People may try to sow doubts in our mind​—doubts about the truthfulness of the Bible or about whether Jehovah has appointed a channel for guiding his worshippers today. But if we are convinced that Jehovah’s Word is always true, we will be able to resist such attacks on our faith. We will be “resolved to obey [Jehovah’s] regulations at all times, down to the last.” (Ps. 119:112) We will “not be ashamed” to tell others about the truth and to encourage them to live in harmony with it. (Ps. 119:46) And we will be able to endure the most difficult situations, including persecution, “with patience and joy.” (Col. 1:11; Ps. 119:143, 157) The truth stabilizes us, giving us a definite purpose and clear direction. It provides us with hope for a better future under the rulership of God’s Kingdom. w23.01 7 ¶16-17




Sunday, June 30

I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, you also love one another.​—John 13:34.



On the night before his death, Jesus prayed at length for his disciples, asking his Father to “watch over them because of the wicked one.” (John 17:15) How loving of Jesus! He was about to undergo a difficult trial of his own; yet, he was concerned about the welfare of his apostles. In imitation of Jesus, we do not focus only on our own needs. Instead, we regularly pray for our brothers and sisters. When we do that, we are obeying Jesus’ command to love one another and we show Jehovah just how much we love our fellow believers. Praying for our brothers and sisters is not a waste of time. God’s Word tells us that “a righteous man’s supplication has a powerful effect.” (Jas. 5:16) Our fellow worshippers need our prayers because they face many trials. w22.07 23-24 ¶13-15




