
October
Tuesday, October 1

In the midst of the congregation I will praise you.​—Ps. 22:22.



We can all contribute to the success of our congregation meetings by raising our voices in song and by giving well-prepared comments. Some find it a challenge to sing or to give a comment in public. Do you? If so, consider what others have done to overcome their fears. As to song, some have found it helps to sing wholeheartedly. When we sing our Kingdom songs, our primary focus should be on our desire to praise Jehovah. So prepare for the songs at home, just as you would prepare for other parts on the meeting and try to identify how the lyrics tie in with the subject being discussed. Also, focus more on the words and less on your singing ability. Commenting can be a real challenge for some. What will help? Try to do so regularly. Remember, it is OK if your answer is short, simple, and to the point. Jehovah greatly appreciates our determination to praise him at congregation meetings. w22.04 7-8 ¶12-15




Wednesday, October 2

Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid.​—Heb. 13:6.



The word “helper” refers to a person who runs to the aid of someone crying for help. Picture Jehovah hurrying to rescue someone in distress. You will surely agree that this description highlights Jehovah’s willingness​—yes, eagerness—​to be our Helper. With Jehovah on our side, we can endure our trials with joy. What are some ways in which Jehovah helps us? To answer, let us turn to the book of Isaiah. Why? Many of the prophecies Isaiah was inspired to write apply to God’s servants today. Further, Isaiah often describes Jehovah in terms that we can easily understand. Take as an example Isaiah chapter 30. There, in language that creates vivid pictures in our mind, Isaiah describes how Jehovah helps us as his people (1) by listening attentively and responding to our prayers, (2) by providing us with guidance, and (3) by giving us blessings now and in the future. w22.11 8 ¶2-3




Thursday, October 3

Do not be afraid of the things you are about to suffer. . . . Prove yourself faithful even to death, and I will give you the crown of life.​—Rev. 2:10.



In Jesus’ messages to the congregations in Smyrna and Philadelphia, he told Christians there not to be afraid to suffer persecution, since their faithfulness would be rewarded. (Rev. 3:10) We must expect persecution and be willing to endure it. (Matt. 24:9, 13; 2 Cor. 12:10) The book of Revelation informs us that God’s people would be persecuted in our day​—“the Lord’s day.” (Rev. 1:10) Revelation chapter 12 mentions that war breaks out in heaven immediately following the birth of God’s Kingdom. Michael​—the glorified Jesus Christ—​and his armies fight against Satan and the demons. (Rev. 12:7, 8) As a result, those enemies of God are defeated and cast down to the vicinity of the earth, bringing untold suffering to the earth and its inhabitants.​—Rev. 12:9, 12. w22.05 5 ¶12-13




Friday, October 4

With Jehovah our God there is no injustice.​—2 Chron. 19:7.



Jehovah’s judgments are always just and fair. He is completely impartial. His forgiveness is never determined by someone’s appearance, wealth, prominence, or abilities. (1 Sam. 16:7; Jas. 2:1-4) No one can pressure or bribe Jehovah. His decisions are never colored by frustration or sentiment. (Ex. 34:7) Without a doubt, Jehovah’s understanding and his penetrating insight make him the most qualified Judge. (Deut. 32:4) The writers of the Hebrew Scriptures recognized that Jehovah’s forgiveness is unique. In some cases, they used a Hebrew word that one reference work says “is reserved especially to mark the pardon extended to the sinner by God, and is never used to denote that inferior kind and measure of forgiveness which is exercised by one man towards another.” Only Jehovah has the power to pardon a repentant sinner completely. w22.06 4 ¶10-11




Saturday, October 5

Train a boy in the way he should go; even when he grows old he will not depart from it.​—Prov. 22:6.



If you are raising your children without a mate or in a religiously divided household, be assured that your faithful example strengthens and motivates those around you. What if it seems that your child is not responding to your efforts? Remember that training a child takes time. When you plant a seedling, you may at times wonder if it will ever grow into a plant that produces fruit. Although you cannot control the outcome, you continue to water it in order to give it the best opportunity to grow. (Mark 4:26-29) Likewise, as a mother, you may sometimes wonder if you are reaching the heart of your young ones. You cannot control the outcome. But if you continue to do all that you can to train them, you give them the best possible opportunity to grow spiritually. w22.04 19-20 ¶16-17




Sunday, October 6

Pride is before a crash, and a haughty spirit before stumbling.​—Prov. 16:18.



When he was a faithful worshipper of Jehovah, Solomon had a balanced view of himself. As a young man, he modestly acknowledged his limitations and asked for Jehovah’s guidance. (1 Ki. 3:7-9) Early in his reign, Solomon was also aware of the danger of becoming prideful. Sadly, Solomon later failed to apply his own advice. Some time into his kingship, he proudly began to ignore God’s requirements. For example, one of the laws stated that a Hebrew king should not “take many wives for himself, so that his heart may not go astray.” (Deut. 17:17) Solomon disregarded that law and acquired 700 wives and 300 concubines! (1 Ki. 11:1-3) Perhaps Solomon felt that he had “everything under control.” In time, Solomon suffered the consequences of his drawing away from Jehovah.​—1 Ki. 11:9-13. w22.05 23 ¶12




Monday, October 7

“My righteous one will live by reason of faith,” and “if he shrinks back, I have no pleasure in him.”​—Heb. 10:38.



People today have an important decision to make. Will they support Jehovah God as the rightful Ruler of the universe, or will they stand behind his vicious enemy, Satan the Devil? There is no middle ground. Whatever decision they make will affect their everlasting future. (Matt. 25:31-33, 46) During “the great tribulation,” they will be marked either for survival or for destruction. (Rev. 7:14; 14:9-11; Ezek. 9:4, 6) If you have chosen to support Jehovah’s rulership, you have made a wise decision. Now you are eager to help others make the right choice. Blessings will come to those who loyally support Jehovah’s rulership. We do well to consider such vital truths. Doing so will strengthen our resolve to keep on serving Jehovah. In addition, we can use what we have learned to help others make the right decision and stick to it. w22.05 15 ¶1-2




Tuesday, October 8

Happy are you when people . . . lyingly say every sort of wicked thing against you.​—Matt. 5:11.



We need to listen to Jehovah, not our enemies. Job paid close attention when Jehovah spoke to him. God reasoned with Job, in effect saying: ‘I am aware of everything that has happened to you. Do you think that I cannot take care of you?’ Job responded humbly and with deep appreciation for Jehovah’s goodness. “My ears have heard about you,” he said, “but now I do see you with my eyes.” (Job 42:5) Job was likely still sitting among the ashes, his body riddled with sores, when he said those words. Even so, Jehovah confirmed His love for Job and assured him of His approval. (Job 42:7, 8) Today, too, people may insult us and treat us as if we were worthless. They may attempt to destroy our reputation as individuals or as an organization. From Job’s account, we learn that Jehovah has confidence that we will remain loyal to him when we face trials. w22.06 24 ¶15-16




Wednesday, October 9

The marriage of the Lamb has arrived.​—Rev. 19:7.



Although there will be a great shout of joy in heaven when Babylon the Great is destroyed, there is something else that will bring greater joy. (Rev. 19:1-3) It is, in fact, the climax of the book of Revelation​—“the marriage of the Lamb.” All the 144,000 will be in heaven just before the war of Armageddon is fought. However, that will not be the time for the marriage of the Lamb. (Rev. 21:1, 2) The marriage of the Lamb takes place after the war of Armageddon has been fought and all of God’s enemies have been removed. (Ps. 45:3, 4, 13-17) What does the marriage of the Lamb really mean for those involved? Well, just as a marriage joins a man and a woman together, so this symbolic marriage unites the King, Jesus Christ, with his “bride,” the 144,000. That climactic event inaugurates the new government that will rule the earth for 1,000 years.​—Rev. 20:6. w22.05 17 ¶11-13




Thursday, October 10

Happy is that slave if his master . . . finds him doing so!​—Matt. 24:46.



Jesus foretold that during the time of the end, he would appoint a “faithful and discreet slave” to provide spiritual food. (Matt. 24:45) This has proved to be the case. Our overseer has used a small group of anointed men to provide God’s people and interested ones with spiritual “food at the proper time.” These men do not view themselves as masters over the faith of others. (2 Cor. 1:24) Instead, they recognize that Jesus Christ is the “leader and commander” of his people. (Isa. 55:4) Since 1919 the faithful slave has prepared a variety of publications that have given newly interested ones their first taste of nourishing spiritual food. In 1921 the slave prepared the book The Harp of God to help interested ones to learn basic Bible teachings. As times changed, additional publications were provided. Which publication helped you to come to know and love our heavenly Father? w22.07 10 ¶9-10




Friday, October 11

You will keep me in your presence forever.​—Ps. 41:12.



Jehovah is the most generous Person. No matter what you give him, he will always give you back far more. (Mark 10:29, 30) He will give you the most interesting, rewarding, and fulfilling life possible, even now in this dying old world. And that is just the beginning. You can go on serving your beloved Father forever. The love between you and your Father will continue to grow, and you will actually live as long as he lives, for all eternity. When you take the steps of dedication and baptism, you have the privilege of giving something truly precious to your Father. He has given you every good thing, every happy moment, that you have ever enjoyed. In response, you can give the Owner of heaven and earth something that he does not already have​—your willing, devoted service. (Job 1:8; 41:11; Prov. 27:11) What better use could you ever make of your life? w23.03 6 ¶16-17




Saturday, October 12

How can a young man keep his path clean? By keeping on guard according to your word.​—Ps. 119:9.



During adolescence, sexual feelings can become intense, and you may face strong pressure to commit sexual immorality. Satan wants you to give in to your desires. What can help you remain morally clean? (1 Thess. 4:3, 4) In your personal prayers, share your feelings with Jehovah. Tell him how you really feel, and ask him to strengthen you. (Matt. 6:13) Remember that Jehovah wants to help you, not to condemn you. (Ps. 103:13, 14) Do not try to handle your problems on your own. Talk with your parents about your struggle. It is not easy to talk about such personal matters, but it is important to do so. By reading the Bible and meditating on its principles, you will find it easier to make decisions that please Jehovah. You will notice that you do not need a rule for every situation because you will understand Jehovah’s thinking on matters. w22.08 5 ¶10-12




Sunday, October 13

If anyone does not provide for those who are his own, . . . he has disowned the faith.​—1 Tim. 5:8.



A Christian family head takes seriously the responsibility to care materially for his family. If you are a family head, you may be worried about putting food on the table and paying the rent or the mortgage on your home. You may also be afraid that if you lost your job, you would not be able to find another one. Or you may have hesitated to make an adjustment in your secular work that would affect your lifestyle. Satan has had a lot of success in exploiting such fears. Satan tries to make us believe that Jehovah does not care about us personally and that we are on our own when it comes to providing for our family. As a result, we might conclude that we need to do whatever it takes to hold on to our present employment, even if it means ignoring Scriptural principles. w22.06 15 ¶5-6




Monday, October 14

We have this hope as an anchor for the soul, both sure and firm.​—Heb. 6:19.



We know that our God is “merciful and compassionate, slow to anger and abundant in loyal love and truth.” (Ex. 34:6) Jehovah loves justice. (Isa. 61:8) It hurts him to see us suffer, and he is ready​—yes, eager—​to bring all suffering to an end at the appointed time. (Jer. 29:11) How marvelous! No wonder we love Jehovah so much! What is another reason why we love the truth? The truth brings great benefits to us. Consider an example. Bible truth includes our hope for the future. Just as an anchor steadies a boat, our Bible-based hope can stabilize us when we face trials in life. In today’s text, the apostle Paul was discussing the heavenly hope that anointed Christians cherish. But his words also apply to Christians who look forward to living forever on a paradise earth. (John 3:16) Certainly, learning about the hope of everlasting life has given our life meaning. w22.08 14-15 ¶3-5




Tuesday, October 15

Do not let the sun set while you are still angry.​—Eph. 4:26.



Love is the basis for trust. First Corinthians chapter 13 describes many aspects of love that can help us to build or rebuild our trust in others. (1 Cor. 13:4-8) For example, verse 4 says that “love is patient and kind.” Jehovah is patient with us even when we sin against him. Certainly, then, we can be patient with our brothers if they say or do things that irritate or hurt us. Verse 5 adds: “[Love] does not become provoked. It does not keep account of the injury.” We would not want to make a mental record of our brothers’ offenses for future reference. Ecclesiastes 7:9 notes that we should “not be quick to take offense.” Try to see your brothers and sisters as Jehovah sees them. God loves them and does not keep track of their sins. Neither should we. (Ps. 130:3) Instead of focusing on their faults, look for their fine qualities.​—Matt. 7:1-5. w22.09 3-4 ¶6-7




Wednesday, October 16

There will occur a time of distress.​—Dan. 12:1.



The book of Daniel reveals the sequence of exciting events that will occur during the time of the end. For example, Daniel 12:1 reveals that Michael, who is Jesus Christ, is “standing in behalf of [God’s] people.” That part of the prophecy began to be fulfilled in 1914 when Jesus was appointed as King of God’s heavenly Kingdom. However, Daniel was also told that Jesus would “stand up” during “a time of distress such as has not occurred since there came to be a nation until that time.” This “time of distress” is the “great tribulation” mentioned at Matthew 24:21. Jesus stands up, or acts to defend God’s people, at the end of this time of distress, that is, at Armageddon. The book of Revelation refers to these ones as “a great crowd who come out of the great tribulation.”​—Rev. 7:9, 14. w22.09 21 ¶4-5




Thursday, October 17

Whoever has sinned against me, I will wipe him out of my book.​—Ex. 32:33.



Names that are presently in the book of life can be wiped out, or erased, as if Jehovah had initially written the names in pencil. (Rev. 3:5, ftn.) We must make sure that our name remains in that book until it is written permanently in ink, as it were. One group who has names written in the book of life is made up of those who have been selected to rule with Jesus in heaven. According to the apostle Paul’s words to his “fellow workers” in Philippi, the names of the anointed ones, who have been invited to rule with Jesus, are now in the book of life. (Phil. 4:3) But in order to keep their names in that figurative book, they must remain faithful. Then when they receive their final sealing, whether before they die or before the outbreak of the great tribulation, their names will be written permanently in this book.​—Rev. 7:3. w22.09 14 ¶3; 15 ¶5-6




Friday, October 18

Happy are those hearing the word of God and keeping it!​—Luke 11:28.



Have you ever had this experience? Someone cooks one of your favorite meals. But either because you are too hurried or are too preoccupied mentally, you gulp it down without really tasting each morsel. After you finish eating, you realize how quickly you ate and you wish you had slowed down and enjoyed each bite. Well, have you ever read the Bible in such haste that you failed to savor its message? Take the time to enjoy reading God’s Word; visualize the scenes, imagine the sounds of the voices, and think about what you have read. The whole experience will add to your happiness. Jesus appointed “the faithful and discreet slave” to provide spiritual food at the proper time, and we are very well-fed spiritually. (Matt. 24:45) The inspired Scriptures are the primary ingredient in everything the faithful slave produces.​—1 Thess. 2:13. w22.10 7-8 ¶6-8




Saturday, October 19

We have had our full share of ridicule from the self-assured.​—Ps. 123:4.



The Bible warned that in the last days, there would be no shortage of ridiculers. (2 Pet. 3:3, 4) They are motivated by “their own desires for ungodly things.” (Jude 7, 17, 18) How can we safeguard ourselves from following the course of ridiculers? One way is to avoid associating with those who show a critical attitude. (Ps. 1:1) This means that we do not listen to or read anything from apostates. We realize that if we are not careful, we could easily develop a critical spirit and begin to doubt Jehovah and the direction we receive through his organization. To avoid such a course, we can ask ourselves: ‘Do I usually have something negative to say when we receive new direction or explanations? Am I inclined to find fault with those taking the lead?’ When we are quick to correct such tendencies in ourselves, Jehovah will be pleased with us.​—Prov. 3:34, 35. w22.10 20 ¶9-10




Sunday, October 20

The house of Israel will refuse to listen to you.​—Ezek. 3:7.



God’s spirit strengthened Ezekiel for the task of preaching to the “hardheaded and hardhearted” people in his territory. Jehovah told Ezekiel: “I have made your face exactly as hard as their faces and your forehead exactly as hard as their foreheads. I have made your forehead like a diamond, harder than flint. Do not be afraid of them or be terrified by their faces.” (Ezek. 3:8, 9) In effect, Jehovah told Ezekiel: ‘Do not let the people’s stubbornness discourage you. I will fortify you.’ Thereafter, God’s spirit carried Ezekiel along in his preaching territory. “The hand of Jehovah rested strongly on me,” wrote Ezekiel. It took the prophet a week to absorb the message that he had to deliver. (Ezek. 3:14, 15) Then Jehovah directed him to a valley plain where “spirit entered into [him].” (Ezek. 3:23, 24) Ezekiel was ready to begin his ministry. w22.11 4-5 ¶8-9




Monday, October 21

How long, O Jehovah, must I cry for help, but you do not hear? . . . Why do you tolerate oppression?​—Hab. 1:2, 3.



The prophet Habakkuk faced many hardships. At one point, he seems to have doubted whether Jehovah cared about him. So he poured out his feelings to Jehovah in prayer. Jehovah responded to the heartfelt prayer of his loyal servant. (Hab. 2:2, 3) After meditating on Jehovah’s saving acts, Habakkuk was filled with renewed joy. He became convinced that Jehovah cared for him and would help him endure any trial. (Hab. 3:17-19) What is the lesson for us? When you face hardships, pray to Jehovah and tell him how you feel. Then look to him for support. When you do, you can be confident that Jehovah will give you the strength you need to endure. And when you feel his support, your faith in him will grow stronger. If you stick to your spiritual routine, you will not allow hardships or doubts to separate you from Jehovah.​—1 Tim. 6:6-8. w22.11 15 ¶6-7




Tuesday, October 22

Truly I tell you today, you will be with me in Paradise.​—Luke 23:43.



Jesus and the two criminals beside him were suffering as they felt their life draining away. (Luke 23:32, 33) Both of the criminals had been speaking abusively of Jesus. (Matt. 27:44; Mark 15:32) But one of them had a change of heart. He said: “Jesus, remember me when you get into your Kingdom.” Jesus replied with the words of today’s text. (Luke 23:39-42) Jesus’ words to the criminal should move us to think about what life in Paradise will be like. Actually, we can learn something about Paradise from the peaceful rule of King Solomon. And we can expect that Jesus, the one greater than Solomon, will work along with his corulers to bring wonderful conditions to the earth. (Matt. 12:42) Understandably, the “other sheep” should be interested in what they need to do to qualify to live forever in Paradise.​—John 10:16. w22.12 8 ¶1; 9 ¶4




Wednesday, October 23

He will surely show you favor at the sound of your cry for help.​—Isa. 30:19.



Isaiah assures us that Jehovah will listen attentively when we cry out to Him and will respond quickly to our supplications. Isaiah adds: “He will answer you as soon as he hears it.” These reassuring words remind us that our Father is willing​—yes, eager—​to come to the aid of those who reach out to him. Knowing this helps us to endure with joy. Jehovah gives attention to the prayer of each one of us. Why can we say that? In the first part of Isaiah chapter 30, the pronoun “you” is used in the plural form because Jehovah is addressing his people as a group. However, in verse 19 “you” is addressed to individuals. Isaiah writes: “You will by no means weep”; “he will surely show you favor”; “he will answer you.” As a loving Father, Jehovah views us as individuals and gives our prayers his personal attention.​—Ps. 116:1; Isa. 57:15. w22.11 9 ¶5-6




Thursday, October 24

Prove yourselves cautious as serpents and yet innocent as doves.​—Matt. 10:16.



Preaching and teaching despite opposition brings us joy and peace. In the first century when the Jewish authorities commanded the apostles to stop preaching, those faithful men chose to obey God. They kept preaching, and that work made them happy. (Acts 5:27-29, 41, 42) Of course, when our work is restricted, we must be discreet while preaching. But if we do our best, we will have the peace that comes from pleasing Jehovah and from sharing a lifesaving message. Be confident that even during the most difficult times, we can have peace. At such times, we must remember that the peace we need is the peace that only Jehovah can give. Rely on him when you face a disease outbreak, a disaster, or persecution. Stick close to his organization. Look ahead to the marvelous future that awaits you. As you do, “the God of peace will be with you.”​—Phil. 4:9. w22.12 21 ¶17-18




Friday, October 25

Put on the new personality.​—Eph. 4:24.



That involves action on our part. Among other things, we must work hard to overcome such personality traits as malicious bitterness, anger, and wrath. (Eph. 4:31, 32) Why might that be challenging? Because some negative personality traits are deep-rooted. For example, the Bible says that some people are “prone to anger” and “disposed to rage.” (Prov. 29:22) Controlling ingrained traits will likely require continual effort even after baptism. (Rom. 7:21-23) Pray to Jehovah about the trait that you are struggling with, confident that he will hear you and help you. (1 John 5:14, 15) While Jehovah will not miraculously eliminate the trait, he can strengthen you so that you do not give in to it. (1 Pet. 5:10) Meanwhile, work in harmony with your prayers by not feeding inclinations of the old personality. And do not let your mind dwell on improper desires.​—Phil. 4:8; Col. 3:2. w23.01 10 ¶7, 9-10




Saturday, October 26

Whoever loves God must also love his brother.​—1 John 4:21.



One way we demonstrate our love is by having a zealous share in the preaching work. We speak to everyone we meet. We do not discriminate against anyone because of his race, tribe, financial position, or social background. In this way, we are working in harmony with Jehovah’s purpose “that all sorts of people should be saved and come to an accurate knowledge of truth.” (1 Tim. 2:4) We also prove our love for God and Christ by showing love for our brothers and sisters. We take a personal interest in them and support them during their trials. We comfort them when they have lost a loved one, visit them when they are sick, and do our best to encourage them when they are disheartened. (2 Cor. 1:3-7; 1 Thess. 5:11, 14) We keep praying for them, remembering that “a righteous man’s supplication has a powerful effect.”​—Jas. 5:16. w23.01 28-29 ¶7-8




Sunday, October 27

Keep encouraging one another and building one another up.​—1 Thess. 5:11.



Just as a construction worker improves his skills over time, we too can become more effective in building one another up. We can help others gain strength to endure trials by sharing with them examples of those who endured in the past. (Heb. 11:32-35; 12:1) We can promote peace by mentioning the good we see in others, preserve peace when it is threatened, and restore peace when differences arise. (Eph. 4:3) And we can continue to build up the faith of our brothers and sisters by sharing with them important Bible truths, by providing practical help, and by supporting any who have become weak spiritually. We can experience happiness and contentment when we help with the spiritual building work in the congregation. Unlike physical buildings that will eventually decay, the results of our work can last an eternity! w22.08 22 ¶6; 25 ¶17-18




Monday, October 28

Jehovah himself gives wisdom; from his mouth come knowledge and discernment.​—Prov. 2:6.



Jesus identified an important quality that we need if we are to understand what we read in God’s Word​—discernment. (Matt. 24:15) What is discernment? It is the ability to grasp how one idea relates to another and how it differs from another and to see what is not immediately obvious. In addition, as Jesus indicated, we need discernment to identify events that fulfill Bible prophecy. We also need this quality so that we can benefit fully from everything we read in the Bible. Jehovah gives his servants discernment. So turn to him in prayer, and ask him to help you develop this quality. How can you work in harmony with your prayer? Carefully analyze what you read, and note how it relates to other things you know. Look for the meaning of a Bible passage, and see ways in which you can apply it in your life. (Heb. 5:14) As you read with discernment, your understanding of the Scriptures will grow. w23.02 10 ¶7-8




Tuesday, October 29

By him we have life and move and exist.​—Acts 17:28.



Imagine that a friend gave you a very old but priceless painting​—a masterpiece. It has some discoloration, stains, and cracks. Despite the imperfections, the painting is valued at millions of dollars. Surely you would appreciate and protect that piece of art. Similarly, Jehovah has given us a valuable gift, the gift of life. In fact, Jehovah shows how much he values our life by giving his Son as a ransom for us. (John 3:16) Jehovah is the Source of life. (Ps. 36:9) The apostle Paul acknowledged this truth when he said: “By him we have life and move and exist.” (Acts 17:25, 28) So we can appropriately refer to our life as a gift from God. He lovingly provides us with what we need to stay alive. (Acts 14:15-17) But Jehovah does not preserve our lives miraculously. Rather, he expects us to care for our physical and spiritual health to the best of our ability.​—2 Cor. 7:1. w23.02 20 ¶1-2




Wednesday, October 30

Write in a book all the words that I speak to you.​—Jer. 30:2.



How grateful we are to Jehovah God for the Bible! Through its pages, he provides us with wise counsel that can help us to cope successfully with the problems we face today. He also gives us a wonderful hope for the future. More important, Jehovah has used the Bible to reveal many aspects of his personality. As we meditate on his beautiful qualities, our hearts are deeply touched and we are moved to draw close to our God by developing a warm friendship with him. (Ps. 25:14) Jehovah wants people to know him. In the past, he revealed himself by such means as dreams, visions, and even angels. (Num. 12:6; Acts 10:3, 4) But how could these dreams, visions, or messages from angels be studied unless they were written down? For good reason, Jehovah had men “write in a book” what he wanted us to know. Because “the way of the true God is perfect,” we can be confident that this method of communicating with us is excellent and beneficial.​—Ps. 18:30. w23.02 2 ¶1-2




Thursday, October 31

There is more happiness in giving than there is in receiving.​—Acts 20:35.



Set worthwhile goals. Choose goals that will strengthen and refine you. (Eph. 3:16) For example, you may decide to improve your routine of personal study and Bible reading. (Ps. 1:2, 3) Or you may see the need to give attention to the frequency and the quality of your prayers. Perhaps you need to exercise greater self-control in your choice of entertainment and your use of time. (Eph. 5:15, 16) You grow as a Christian when you help other people. For example, you can make it your goal to help the elderly and the infirm in your congregation. Perhaps you can run errands for them or assist them with their use of electronic devices. You also show love to those outside the congregation by sharing the good news of the Kingdom with them. (Matt. 9:36, 37) If at all possible, make it your goal to share in some aspect of the full-time ministry. w22.08 6 ¶16-17




