Vol. XXXVIII 


BROOKLYN, N. Y., AUGUST 15, 1917 


No. 1(> 


THE FAITH-BATTLES OF THE KING'S OWN BRIGADE 

"Fight the good fight of faith; lay hold on eternal life. ' * — 1 Timothy 6:12. 


Paradoxical as it may seem, the church of Christ are the 
greatest warriors the world has ever known. Yet the followers 
of Christ are instructed to be peace-makers, to "follow peace 
with all men," to "live peaceably with all," so far as in 
them lies. This, however, is on the principle that "he that 
ruleth his own spirit is greater than he that taketh a city." 
(Matthew 5:9; Hebrews 12:14; Romans 12:18; 14:19) Nevertheless
, this class are called upon to "Fight the good fight," 
the fight of faith. 

In our text St. Paul is addressing only the brigade of the 
"King's Own," the body of Christ, the consecrated church. 
As the mouthpiece of the great Captain of our salvation, the 
Apostle gives this injunction to the loyal soldiers of the 
cross. It would be wholly out of order for an officer to issue 
commands to those who have never joined his army, who do 
not recognize his authority. So it is very evident that the 
world is not addressed here. This i^ likewise shown by the 


introduction to all the apostolic epistles; for they are each 
addressed "to the saints in Christ Jesus." St. Paul, as a 
faithful lieutenant, gives us here the instruction of his superior, 
the Lord Jesus, the great General-in-Chief of Jehovah's Army. 

Jehovah has another great army, an agency which he is 
now using in this great time of trouble ; but the army referred 
to in our text is composed only of the most faithful soldiers 
of the cross. It is a picked company of the bravest and 
staun chest type — the "King's Own." As viewed from the 
world's standpoint it is not large in numbers; its excellence 
consists in its quality rather than in quantity. To these the 
instructions come that the fight is on, and that our great 
Commander-in-Chief expects each soldier to do his duty, to 
stand bravely by the colors and bear them up. 

OTJE BATTLE NOT WITH FELLOW OEEATTJEES 

Against whom do these soldiers fight? Against what do 
they fight? We answer, Our battle is not against our fellow 


T6127] 


(Ui-244) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


creatures, nor with carnal weapons. Indeed we can have 
large sympathy for even our most relentless foes, who, having 
not been enlightened as to the cause of our warfare, are will* 
ing and ready, to the extent that modern civilization will permit
, to despitefully use us, to persecute us and say all manner 
of evil against us falsely. We can readily see that they are 
blinded in considerable measure either by their own prejudice 
and passion or by the great adversary's delusive doctrines, 
superstitions, etc. In most eases it is probably both. Hence 
our warfare is not directed against these; and as opportunity 
offers we are glad to do them good, "in meekness instructing 
those that oppose themselves" — set themselves in opposition 
to us. 

When dealing with these, therefore, so far from battling 
with them and resisting evil with evil, we return good for 
evil, gentleness for rudeness, kindness for discourtesy, as our 
Captain has given us instruction. We seek to do good to 
those who speak evil of us, that thus the eyes of their understanding
 may, if possible, he opened to discern that there is 
such a thing as the spirit of love, of generosity and forbearance
; whereas they suppose that ull are actuated by the 
same malevolent, bitter spirit, the same spirit of selfishness, 
that controls themselves. 

Our fight is against Sin, the great taskmaster who captured
 our nice six thousand years ago and who has held mankind
 as slaves from then until now. A few only have hurst 
these bonds of slavery, through the grace of God, and are 
now enlisted in warfare against this enslaver. Satan, through 
whom the great taskmaster gained possession of mankind, is 
also the special enemy of the soldiers of Christ. But our 
battle is not directly with Satan, nor are we to "bring against 
him a railing accusation." Rather we are to say with Michael 
— our great Captain — "The Lord rebuke thee" ; and therefore
 we are to await the Lord's time and the Lord's way for 
rebuking Satan. Nevertheless, we are to resist him; we are 
to resist his influence, his deceptions and his endeavors to 
mislead us into error and sin. 

The Lord instructs us through the Apostle that "we wrestle 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and 
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, 
against wicked spirits in heavenly places" — the "powers of the 
air." (Ephesians 6:12-18) Satan, as the great general of the 
army of Sin, has largely to do with all the various influences 
against which we battle. It is his cunning, his "wiles," that 
supervise the battle against us; and since he is a spirit being 
of a high order, and therefore much more intelligent than 
ourselves, the contest would be a very unequal one without 
a still more powerful spirit Leader. But we are not left 
helpless to battle against superior wisdom and cunning. Our 
Chief Captain, the Lord Jesus, has conquered Sin, and has 
been exalted to the highest position in the universe next to 
Jehovah. So we can confidently say, "Greater is he that is 
on our part than all they that he against ub." Neither Satan 
nor his cohorts of evil spirit nor all his deluded earthly agents 
can harm us while we trust in our great Captain and obey 
his instructions faithfully. 

OUR BHBMIES— THE WOULD, THE FLESH. THE DEVIL 

The Apostle Paul seems to sum up the agencies through 
which our great enemy Sin seeks again to conquer us, as 
three — the world, the flesh, and the devil. All who have the 
spirit of the world are deceived by the arts of the adversary, 
Satan, who will endeavor to draw us away from the warfare 
in which we have enlisted, to draw us back into the world and 
its vanities. With this spirit of the world we must do battle. 
It is to be fought against and resisted. We must not permit 
its enticements, its ambitions, its pride, again to overpower 
ua and bring us into bondage. These we must resist steadfastly
; and it is a daily battle. 

But the most crucial and continuous part of our battle as 
soldiers of the Lord is with our own flesh. This is ever with 
us. Ever since Sin captured mankind in the person of father 
Adam, its slavery has been conducive to mental, moral and 
physical degradation. ' Its only tendency is to evil, and that 
continually; and only as we become rid of its binding influences
 and perverted tastes, desires, ambitions and hopes 
which sin cultivates, are we able to see matters in their true 
light and to have even a faint glimpse of our naturally degraded
 and fallen condition. But our great Captain has 
redeemed us from this slavery with his own precious blood, 
has delivered us from the thraldom of Sin; and so long as we 
keep our eyes of faith fixed upon him and follow wherever he 
leads, we shall not be reehslaved. 

But we must ever bear in mind that we are still tabernacling
 in fallen, earthly bodies, which have in them the 
motions of sin. These the Lord leaves with us to practise 
on and to develop in as new creatures. Consequently while 


we are now free in Christ, and with our minds we are serving 
our heavenly King, and are enlisted under the banner of the 
King's Son, fighting in his great army corps, yet we are still 
liable to temptations from without and within; and we must 
never for one instant trust to our own power or strength to 
stand. We find ourselves still harassed more or less by the 
perverted tastes and inclinations of our flesh toward the 
service of the old taskmaster. Thus we find that our battle 
with our old nature is also a daily battle, and that we require
 daily strength from above, from the Giver of all good. 
CONSTANT VIGILANCE NECESSARY 

Our flesh, though reckoned dead, and legally dead, is actually
 alive, and necessitates continual watchfulness and 
prayer on our part. But with the great Apostle Paul we 
should he able to say: "I keep my body under, and bring it into 
subjection, lest, while I have preached to others, I myself 
should be a castaway." (1 Corinthians 9:27) When Satan 
attacks us, he appeals to these enemies in our own flesh and 
seeks to encourage these in a warfare against us as new 
creatures, as soldier of the army of the Lord. It is through 
our fleshly weaknesses and tendencies that the spirit of the 
woxld gains closest approach to us and seeks to recapture 
us and lead us hack into the old slavery. 

The new creature is beset, surrounded on every hand, by 
enemies seeking our spiritual disaster. We must battle — 
battle for ourselves — battle for our liberty, battle for victory 
over our own fleshly infirmities and inclinations, battle against 
the spirit of this present evil world, and against the delusions 
and snares set for our feet by our wily foe, Satan, who seeks 
to make evil appear good and good appear evil, and right 
appeal undesirable. No wonder that the Christian soldier is 
urged in, the Word of the Lord to be continually watchful and 
to have on the "whole armor of God." No wonder he is 
cautioned against his wily foes, and especially those of his 
own flesh! 

"PRAISE IS COMELY FOE THE RIGHTEOUS" 

Thanks be to God for the great Captain of our salvation! 
Thanks be to God for the great armory of his blessed word, 
from which we obtain the "helmet of salvation/' the intellectual 
knowledge to protect us from the delusions of our own natural, 
perverted sense, and from the deceptive wiles of the adversary 
of our souls! Thanks be to God for the "breastplate of righteousness
," the merit of our Redeemer, which covers us and 
compensates for all our imperfections and blemishes, which 
protects our vitals from the enemy's darts! Praise his name 
for the shield of faith, of trust, of confidence in him "who 
bought us with his own precious blood," of, assurance that 
he who has begun a good work in us will complete it! Praise 
be to him for the "sandals," the preparation to endure hardness
 patiently as good soldiers! We praise him for the 
wonderful "sword of the spirit/' the Word of his truth, a 
weapon both offensive and defensive, by which we can resist 
our great enemy and slay our internal foes, and "come off more 
than conquerors through him that loved us and bought us." 

We are fighting on behalf of ourselves and on behalf of 
each other. We are fighting to the death — the death of the 
old creature — to maintain our liberty and that of each other. 
The Apostle says: "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, fighting
 against sin" (Hebrews 12:4); but we must continue the 
fight until we have poured out our blood in the glorious 
cause in which we have enlisted. It is a fight to the finish. 
We must give no quarter to the enemy, nor seek to spare 
ourselves. We are not of those who flee to the rear in time 
of severe conflict. When the battle wa^es hottest, there the 
faithful soldier will surely be found, face to the foe. There are 
no cowards in these ranks — no ignoble deserters! We rejoice 
to defend the honor of our King, the majesty of his righteous 
government. 

THE PARTICULAR OBJECT OF THE WAR 

There is another feature of our warfare aside from these 
which we have mentioned. To observe this feature with 
elearness and distinctness we must take an elevated position 
and note not only the entire trend of the conflict, which has 
now been in progress for over eighteen centuries, but also 
the particular object which the King himself has declared shall 
he attained by this great war. It is this: Not only the church, 
but the entire human race, were "sold under sin" by the disobedience
 of our first parent, Adam. And our great Redeemer, 
our Captain who bought us with his precious blood, gave his 
life as a "propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world." (1 John 2:2) Thus 
he purchased the right, not only to release those who are 
now enlisted as his soldiers, but also to release from the 
power and slavery of Sin all the slaves of this dread taskmaster
. 


[6128] 


August IS, 191? 


THE WATCH TOWRR 


(245-246) 


The great Redeemer has not been prosecuting the work 
of releasing all these slaves up to the present time, but has 
been confining his work to the releasing of a special few, 
a little flock, a small, choice company, that these may be used 
in the later features of his work as associates and joint-heirs 
with himself. So all the *laves of Sin who so desire are yet 
to be delivered through the instrumentality of those who are 
fighting under the banner of the King of heaven. When their 
mighty warfare has been finished, these faithful soldiers will 
be exalted to reign with the King's Son. 

What a glorious prospect, what a benevolent ambition is 
thus set before us in the Gospel, in respect to the future work 
of all who are now called to be sons of God, joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, and good soldiers in his cause — the cause of 
righteousness and truth. Oh, how anxious we are that we 
Khali be "overeomerV that we may inherit these blessed privileges
 — secure this great boon of association with' our Redeemer 
in his work of blessing ^all the families of the earth V 

Inspired by this vision of future glory, let us return to a 
further consideration of the requirements of this special, select 
company which the great King has chosen as particularly his 
own. Every soldier knows at the time of his enrollment that 
he is sure to see service, and not only in one battle, but in 
many; and that although there will be times of special 
fighting, there will never be a time until the close of the war, 
when there will be a cessation of hostilities. We may desert 
if we choose, for none are drafted in this army, but all are 
i\t liberty to abandon the cause if they wish. None are 
held in bondage; but true soldiers should be always at their 
post. 

MANY COUNTERFEIT ARMY CORPS 

Our Captain desires in this army only those who serve the 
truth in the love of it, who have a real desire for serviee. All 
others are in the wrong ranks, if they essay to join themselves
 to the King's brigade. The charge to each of these 
true soldiers is: "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee the crown of life." (Revelation 2:10) Only in death 
can we finish our course, and be mustered out of the war. 

All who truly desire to be soldiers of Christ must beware 
of certain deceptions which the great adversary brings forward
, by which he would get us into the wrong army, by appearing
 as an angel of light, us a servant of righteousness, as 
a fighter in the Lord's cause. He has organized numerous 
false army corps, into which he endeavors to attract all 
who learn something of the liberty of Christ and who wish 
to become his soldiers. In order to make the matter the more 
deceptive, the adversary carefully guards against any intimation
 of his relationship with these. Indeed, he puts" forth as 
leaders and under-officers in these various armies as many 
nf the soldiers of the cross as he can get into a deluded condition
, that these armies may be the more attractive to those 
who are seeking the service of the true King, 

These armies are not as select as the King's army; but 
they offer many inducements to soldiers, and attract very many 
who are really servants of this great enemy of the King, because
 they promise great rewards and little or no fighting, and 
a generally pleasant and social camp life. These conditions 
of enlistment seem so much more favorable than those made 
in enlisting in the more select army, and on the whole these 
other army corps are so large, so tine and so attractive in 
appearance, that many of the soldiers of the cross make 
the mistake of enlisting under some one of these wrong 
banners. 

The banner of the "King's Own" is emblazoned with a 
cross and a crown and on the reverse side are the names of 
the great King and of the great General-in-Chief. The law 
of this army is briefly comprehended in one word — -"Love." 
Hence the soldiers who are taking the proper care to be 
guided into the right company, who have listened with the 
proper diligence to the King's directions, will make no mistake
. If any true soldiers of the King have inadvertently 
gotten into the wrong ranks, they are sure later to see their 
mistake; and then they promptly withdraw and join the 
ranks of the faithful. 

A "FIGHT OF FAITH" INDEED 

Our text calls this good fight a "fight of faith," and it is 
very properly so called; for it is a fight of faith in every 
particular. It is a fight under an unseen Leader and against an 
unseen foe. It is only by the eye of faith that we recognize 
the Captain of our salvation, and only by means of the Word 
of God do we recognize the wily leader who opposes us. It is 
a warfare which can be successfully conducted only by earnest 
prayer and constant watchfulness. If we begin to trust in 
our own strength and prowess, and forget to look always toour
 Captain for instructions, we are certain to weaken before 


our enemy, and are in continual danger of defeat. But with 
our eyes fixed on him, and keeping our banner held aloft 
as an inspiration, we can never fail. We can exclaim with 
the Apostle: 'Thanks be to God, who giveth us the victory 
through our Lord Jesus Christ!" 

This faith which we must have to be true soldiers ia not 
only an intellectual belief in God, but both head and heart— 
both intellect and affections — must be enlisted. Some have 
only the head belief. Others have only emotion. But neither 
of these alone is sufficient. Neither will stand the fiery 
ordeal. They must abide together if one would endure to the 
end and win the promised reward. The trial of our faith to 
which our Lord and the Apostles refer is a trial not only of 
our intellectual recognition of divine truth, but also of our 
heart-reliance upon God. In both respects every true child 
of God will find his faith sorely tried, and as a faithful 
soldier let him not fail to be armed for the conflict. 

If an attack is made upon the intellectual foundation ot 
our faith, we should see to it that we have a "thus saith the 
Lord" for every item of our belief. Let the Word of God 
alone settle every question, and let no human philosophies, 
however ingenious, lead us into error; for if the foundation of 
faith become unsettled, the superstructure cannot stand when 
the winds and floods of adversity beat against it. Doubt and 
fear will cause it to tremble; and when it is thus weakened, 
the vigilant adversary will surely send a blast of temptation 
against it, and great will be the soul's peril, 

"PURIFIED AND MADE WHITE AND TRIED" 

But having the doctrines of the Word of God clearly comprehended
 as a sure foundation of faith, we need also to look 
well to the superstructure of heart-reliance, which is really in 
greater danger from storms and floods than is the foundation, 
being more constantly exposed. The Apostle Peter, another 
faithful lieutenant in the army of our King, telU us that a 
tried, proven faith, a faith that has stood the test of fiery 
ordeal, and has come off victorious in the testings, is very 
precious in the sight of God, (1 Peter 1:7) Every time we 
pass through a conflict and still retain, not only the truth, but 
also our confidence in God, our reliance on his promises, our 
integrity of heart and of purpose, and our zeal for righteousness
 our characters grow stronger, more symmetrical, more 
Ohristlike; and hence we are more pleasing to oux King, 
who is subjecting us to discipline to this very end. 

Then "think it not strange concerning the fiery trial which 
is to try you, as though some strange thing happened to you. 
But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are partakers of Christ's sufferings, 
that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy." (1 Peter 4:12, 13) The Prophet Daniel 
says that in this time — the time of the end of the present 
reign of evil — "Many Bhall be purified and made white and 
tried." (Daniel 12:10) Malachi the Prophet compares the 
trials and tests of this time to a "refiner's fire," and to "fuller's 
soap." (3:2, 3) The Word of our God abounds with promises, 
warnings, and counsels to t"hese soldiers who are valiantly 
fighting for the Lord and for his truth. Many are the words 
of comfort and consolation found in this storehouse of treasure 
for the battle-worn people of God — both in the Old Testament 
and in the New. 

Are you, dear brother or sister, t beloved comrade in the 
army corps of our King, hard pressed on every side with 
temptations to daubt that our great King thinks upon you? 
Are you tempted to doubt that his love and care are yours, 
that his precious promises belong to you? Have you grown 
discouraged and disheartened? Do the foes seem too many 
and too strong? Do the reproaches come with crushing weight, 
and do the clouds hang heavy over your seemingly defenseless 
head? Ah! it is just here that faith must claim her victory! 
Is it not written, "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even your faith"? (1 John 5:4) Your faith is on 
trial now. You have been blessed with an understanding of 
God's glorious truth that few possess, that even the saints of 
former days did not have. Great blessings and great light 
call for corresponding faith. Will you rise to the occasion? 
Will you prove to be a faithful soldier of the cross who will 
stand the fiery darts of the enemy? 

THE BIJBSSEDNESS 07 PERFECT TRUST 

Can you doubt that he who cares for the lilies of the field 
cares for you? W T ill not he who nourishes and waters them, 
and who gives them the genial sunshine and the refreshing 
showers, more surely feed and water and nourish and care 
for his child? The lilies do not trouble themselves as to 
whether they shall have what they need for their growth 
and sustenance. They simply look up to God and Teceive 
their needs. 


[6129] 


(246-249) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N, Y. 


"They do not -toil; 
Content with their allotted task 
They do but grow; they do not ask 
A richer lot, a higher sphere, 
But in their loveliness appear, 
And grow, and smile, and do their best, 
And unto God they leave the rest." 

A Christian writer has beautifully expressed the proper 
attitude of the true child of God. He says: "Interpose no 
barrier to his mighty life-giving power, working in you all 
the goed pleasure of his will. Yield yourself up utterly to 
his sweet control. Put your growing into his hands as completely
 as you have put all your other affairs. Suffer him to 
manage it as he will. Bo not concern yourself about it, nor 
even think of it. Trust him absolutely and always. Accept 
each moment's dispensation as it comes to you from his dear 
hands, as being the needed sunshine or dew for that moment's 
growth. Say a continual 'yes' to your Father's will." 

So doing, the soul will surely thrive and grow up into the 
likeness of the Master, our great Leader and Captain. No 
sorrow can. overtake us except as his dear hand shall administer
 it. Nothing can come to the child of God by chance. 
It is blessed to thus yield ourselves wholly to the Lord in 
perfect trust, confidence and resignation. It brings a peace 
that none can know who do not place themselves fully in his 
hands in childlike faith, glad to let &im lead where he will. 
It is a lack of faith that causes a fear to yield ourselves thus 
wholly to God; and "without faith it is impossible to please 
him." (Hebrews 11:6) If we really believe in his infinite 
love for us, and in his infinite wisdom and power, we cannot 
doubt him. 

A NOTEWORTHY EXAMPLE OF FAITH 

The beloved Apostle Paul was a noteworthy example of 
this unwavering faith. He says of himself and of the other 
Apostles, "Ye have us for an ensample." (Philippians 3:17; 
1 Peter 5:3) And noble examples they were of faithfulness, 
of zeal, of patience, of endurance, of true Christian fortitude 
and heroism. At the beginning of St. Paul's Christian career, 
the Lord said of him, "I will show him how great things he 
must suffer for my flame's sake"; and the Apostle was not 
long in proving the truth of this prediction and assurance. 
But instead of permitting* the prospect of continual tribulation 
to depress him, he rejoiced in the privilege thus afforded of 
testifying his love to the Lord. He says: "And now, behold, 
I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the 
things that shall befall me there; save that the holy Spirit 
witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions 
await me. But none of these things move me; neither count 
I my life dear unto myself, so that I may finish my courte 
with joy, and the ministry which I have received of the Lord 


Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God."— Acts 
20:22-24. 

Hear the Apostle's testimony of his experiences: "In labors 
abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons frequent, in 
deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received 1 forty stripes, save 
one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I atoned, thrice 
1 suffered shipwreck, a night and a day have I been in the 
deep; in journeyings often, in perils of water, in perils of robbers
, in perils of mine own countrymen, in perils by the heathen, 
in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the 
sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness
, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings 
often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things that are 
without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches." — 2 Corinthians 11:23-28. 

Through all these tribulations the noble Apostle never 
wavered in his faith in God. Daily he pressed toward the 
prize: fighting, "not as uncertainly," nor "as one that beatetli 
the air." His singleness of purpose saved him from many 
temptations which come to those who are more or less doubleminded
. He f ol lowed the course which was sure to win , 
and no other course would win. He did not gaze around upon 
the objects on either side of him as he ran; but he kept his 
eyes steadfastly fixed upon the goal toward which he was 
bending his every energy. 

Thus only can we win this prize held out to us by our 
God, our great King. Faith and trust in the Lord and fullest 
heart obedience to him are paramount essentials in our winning
 out in the glorious warfare in which we are engaged. 
If our faith be of the proper kind we can say with the Psalmist
: "I will fear no evil, for thy rod and thy staff they comfort
 me." (Psalm 23:4) Such, and such alone, can be led 
of the Lord, in this time when we must walk by faith and 
not by sight. Such alone will have the confidence to go 
forward encountering the many oppositions within and without. 
Dear brethren, fellow soldiers in this glorious war, let us 
have such implicit trust and confidence in our Lord Jesus, 
and such entire and glad submission to his will that all 
the rage of the enemy, all the privations and hardships 
of the way, all the storms of shot and shell, the weariness of 
the soldier's camp life, the dreary marches, the fatigue — 
nothing — shall cause us to desert our great Captain. 

Let each of us prove our mettle. The hosts of heaven are 
looking down upon us. We do not fight alone. Strength all* 
sufficient will be ours for every day and hour and moment. 
The battle will be sharp and short. The conflict of the ages 
is drawing to its glorious close. Victory is certain to all 
the loyal soldiers. Ere long the enemy will flee in confusion, 
and we shall triumph through him who leads us and who can 
know no defeat. 


THE BENEFITS OF TOTAL ABSTINENCE 

[The first paragraph of this article was reprinted from article entitled "Darnel in Babylon," published in issue of July 1 
1899. The remainder was reprinted from article entitled " Good Purposes of Heart," published in issue of September
 15, 1905. Please see the articles named. J 


PROPER LIBERTY IN THE ECCLESIAS 


There is a certain amount of Christian liberty that we believe
 the Lord would be pleased to have exercised by the 
members of each ecclesia. For instance, suppose that a brother 
were to go to the home of another brother, and a few friends 
came in to spend the evening. Suppose that one of these 
should propose to have some secular music or some social 
games, and that another would say, "No, let us have a Bible 
study!" We do not think that it would be proper for the 
host to reply, "We cannot have a Bible study; for all meetings
 held must be authorized by our class. So we will have 
some music or games." This would be a narrow view, an 
arbitrary one. We could see no objection to the holding of 
a Bible study under these circumstances. 

The brother surely would have the right to decide how 
the evening should be spent in his own home, and to ask 
some capable brother to lead the study. And as the host, he 
might properly say, "We will ask in more of our neighbors 
for another meeting next week. I have been trying to interest 
my neighbors in these truths, and I shall be very glad to invite
 them over to hear the truth presented." We think this 
would be entirely proper. 

If, however, those attending the meetings should desire 
a regular meeting, it should be turned over to the local class 
of Associated Bible Students, that they might assign this 


meeting to a certain evening in this brother's home, if he so 
desired, or to another home, and might supply a leader. And 
if certain members of an ecclesia should say, "Let us start 
another regular meeting," this, we understand, would be improper
. They would have a right to start a new ecclesia, but 
if they did so they would thereby be severing their connection 
with the ecclesia of which they had been members. This 
would, we think, be very unwise, except under conditions 
that made such a course seem a necessity. Thereafter they 
would have no right to return to the other class and expect 
to have a voice in its matters, unless they dissolved their 
connection with the new class. Otherwise, confusion would 
result. 

There must be consistency in all that we do. Those who 
become members of an ecclesia, by association and by voting 
in their elections, etc., give up a measure of their personal 
liberties dn order that they may have the advantages of cooperation
 with others of the Lord's people. But this would 
not mean such a bondage that we could not have a study 
in the Bible at any time in our own home or by request in 
the home of another, without the consent of our class, and 
that we must therefore »pend the evening in some far less 
profitable way. We are p seek to have the Lord's spirit, the 
spirit of a sounfd mind, in all that we do. 


T6130] 


THE FIERY FURNACE 

(This article was a reprint of that published m issue o£ July 1, 1899, which please see.] 


THE BOSTON CONVENTION 


The convention at Boston is now a matter of history. 
The pleasure of the personal fellowship of the dear friends 
is past; but it will be a long, long time before the memory 
of those pleasant and blessed hours of fellowship will 'be* 
effaced. We have often heard of the hospitality of the New 
England people; but when to this were added the graces of the 
Spirit of the Lord which were manifested by many of the 
dear friends at Boston, our hearts were made exceedingly 
glad. 

They had placed at our disposal one of the finest auditoriums
 in the city of Boston — Tremont Temple, the home 
of the elite Baptist Church Congregation of that city. This 
beautiful auditorium seats about 3,000; but this was only one 
of the many conveniences placed at the disposal of the Convention
. There were reception rooms, consultation rooms, 
rest rooms, hospital rooms, if needed, with necessary conveniences
; chairman's room, president's room, typists and 
typewriters, musicians and almost everything oue could think 
of to increase the pleasure and to manifest love and hospitality. 
And the entertainment committee had given such careful 
attention to the selection of rooms for the visiting friends 
that the chairman reported that during the entire Convention 
lie had not received even one complaint from any one regarding
 this department. On the other hand, he had heard 
many expressions of appreciation and satisfaction. 

The opening day, Wednesday, was exceedingly hot, the 
temperature rnnging between 90 and 100. Thursday seemed 
to be even warmer; but on Friday the hot wave was broken, 
and during the remainder of the Convention the weather was 
agreeable — excellent convention weather. 

However, the "feast of fat things" which the Lord provides
 was the chief desire of all those in attendance. Tnouwinds
 no doubt had been praying for the Lord's rich blessing 
upon the Convention; and he* richly fulfilled his promise that 
w he re two or three might be gathered together in his name 
lie would be there, and would fulfil his promise — "Blessed 
are those servants whom the Lord when he eometh shall find 
watching; verily I say unto you that be shall gird himself 
and make them to sit down to meat and will come forth to 
serve them." It was the testimony of all who came seeking 
a blessing that the Lord fulfilled his promises. Truly he 
gave "things new and old" out of his Word; and he caused 
such rejoicing of heart and manifested his presence and blessing
 to such an extent that many expressed themselves to the 
effect that they had never attended a Convention where the 
presence of the Lord seemed to hover more lovingly over every 
session and to bless each waiting heart! 

The Convention was opened promptly on time with an 
address of welcome by Brother Margeson, chairman of the 
Board of Elders of the Boston ecclesia. Response was made 
by Brother Rutherford, President of the Society, accepting 
the hospitality of the Boston friends, and calling attention to 
the great privileges which are ours in attending the Convention
, with the thought of being in the presence of our Lord 
Jesus and the fellow-members of the body and of the great 
opportunity of pressing forward in the race which is now so 
nearly completed and of the ever brightening hope that we 
might finish our course with joy. The Convention was then 
turned over to the chairman. Following was an hour of rejoicing
 at a praise and testimony meeting. In the afternoon 
there was a short praise and testimony meeting, followed 
with addresses by Brothers Howlett and Graham. In the 
evening Part I of the Creation Drama was shown; and notwithstanding
 the exceeding hot weather the attendance was 
gratifying. 

Thursday was called "Our Warfare Day." In the morning 
a praise and testimony service was followed by discourses by 
Brothers Thornton and Van Amburgh; in the afternoon a 
praise and testimony service, then discourses by Brothers 
Thorn and Rutherford. Part II of the Drama was shown in 
the evening; and again the attendance was good. 

Friday was designated as "Consecration Day" and opened 
with a praise and testimony service, followed with discourses 
by Brothers Eshleman and Toole; and in the afternoon there 
were discourses from Brothers Ilerr, Stephenson and Barker. 
In the evening Part III of the Photo-Drama was shown. 

Saturday was "Harvesters' Day," and opened with a delightful
 morning praise and testimony meeting, particularly 
for the colporteurs and the pastoral workers. Surely it was 
inspiring to listen to the many account of the Lord's blessing 
resting upon those labors of love! This was followed by a 
discourse on baptism by Brother Sturgeon, after which forty 
sisters and twenty-eight brethren symbolized their consecration 
unto death by immersion in water. In the afternoon a short 
prayer and praise service was followed with discourses by 
Brothers Brenneisen and Woodworth. Brother Woodworth 
related some interesting incidents relative to the compilation 
of the Seventh volume, and spoke on the parable of the penny 
and some other things. In the evening Part IV of the Drama 
was shown to an appreciative audience. This closed the meetings
 at the Temple. 

Sunday all the services were held at the Arena. The day 
was designated as "Kingdom Day." The morning testimony 
service was much enjoyed, and was followed with discourses 
by Brothers Meggison and Mac-mill an, both of which were 
much appreciated. The afternoon was intended particularly 
for the public; and the discourse by Brother Rutherford was 
on the subject. "Are We at the End of the World?" It was 
estimated that tljere were between 3500 and 4000 present. 
Close attention was given, and many were the' expression? 
of interest. At seven o'clock the love-feast was held, preceded 
by remarks by Brother Rutherford, encouraging the dear 
friends to run with patience the race set before them, to 
hold fast that which they have, to gird up the loins of thefr 
mind and to give close heed to that which they had heard, 
lest at any time they let these things slip. The expressions 
of appreciation and the good-bys and the-Lord-be-with-you 
during the love -feast were encouraging and uplifting. It is 
estimated that there were 1100 at the love-feast. The attendance
 at the different sessions of the Convention averaged 
from 1000 to 1400. Truly it was good to be there; and all 
felt that the Lord had surely met with us by the way and 
blessed us ! We trust that each who attended returned to his 
home more determined than ever to press along the narrow 
way and to seek diligently to make his calling and election 
sure. May we have the great privilege of attending the 
general assembly of the church of the first-borns, which wc 
hope will convene soon! 


SOME LETTERS OF INTEREST 


ANOTHER NEW REJOICING READER 
Dear Brethren is Christ: — 

For the past few months I have been a very earnest 
student of Studies in the Scriptures, and words will not 
express nay joy and delight in this spiritual food that they 
show me in the Bible. 

One day last Spring, as I entered one of our leading stores, 
a group of men, including our Baptist minister, several of 
our leading men in business and politics, and also an escaped 
missionary from Armenia, were having a vi^ry animated conversation
 about God and why he would allow this terrible war 
to go on. The superintendent of our Presbyterian Sunday 
School said, "The Bible says that God repented that he had 
made man, and I think it is too had if human beings have 
got to suffer for God's mistakes." 

Not one of the other men offered one word in God's defense
, and as I could not help hearing their conversation, 


my heart just ached to step up and say, "Excuse me, gentlemen
, but God does not make mistakes." 

I am just a common farmer's wife and my natural modesty 
and timidity held me back, and besides I was very young in 
the truth then. But I know it was not fear that held me back, 
for if it had been a group of women, I know I should have 
spoken. 

Just before this, in the same store, the proprietor of the 
store and our Methodist minister were having a similar conversation
 as I entered, and I saw that the storekeeper's heart 
was very much troubled, and that neither the Methodist nor 
Baptist minister could help him any or offer any explanations 
of the troublous times we are passing through. 

As soon as I could I had a quiet talk with him alone in 
the rear of his store, and got him to promise to read the 
first volume. He kept it on his desk in the store, and soon 
after he told me that it had disappeared and could not be 

[6181] (250-254) 


(254-255) 


THE WATCH TOWER 


Brooklyn, N. Y. 


found. I said to never mind, I only hoped it had gone 
where it would do Bome one good, and I then took him my 
copy in cloth of Vol. 2, as he seemed very much interested 
in Christ's second coming. 

Your sister in Christ, Allie J. Jackson. — N. Y. 

DAILY PBAYINO FOE HUMILITY AND— DEATH TO 
SELFISHNESS 

Dear Brethren in the One Hope: — 

I have received the answers to the V. D. M. Questions, 
which you so kindly went over for me the second time; and 
words cannot express my rejoicing that I have received the 
85% required to pass this examination. I truly believe that 
this is the Lord's work and one of the ways of proving his 
saints. I appreciate your kindly suggestions on the questions 
as numbered, and also in the reading of the six volumes at 
least twice; and with the help of the Lord I intend doing 
this as soon as I can ; for I realize that we are living in a 
time when we need the whole armor of God to withstand the 
fiery darts of the great adversary, who is seeking every day 
to deceive the Lord's little ones. Each day I am seeking to 
be more humble and to keep self out of sight and to grow more 
in the knowledge of the Lord and in the graces of his Spirit. 

Accept of my love and my heart's thanks for your kindly 
labor of love in giving me a second chance in examining my 
answers to the V. D. M. Questions. I feel the Lord's approval
 now in speaking the glad tidings of his glorious kingdom
, which we believe is so near at hand. 

With much Christian love, J. M. Mountford, — Va. 

THE PASTOR'S VOICE INT HER HOME 
Dear Brethren in Christ: — 

In regard to the Angelophone, I am well pleased with it, 
and so glad to have our dear Pastor's noble voice in my home, 
as we long so much to hear him lecture and to see him as he 
was — so good, loving and kind to all. 

We are the only ones in the truth in this part of the 
country* My husband and his brother's family came here 
seven years ago from Eastern Tennessee. Our Uncle got 
some truth literature. As he was a Baptist minister, he 
preached it at once. He stood severe trials for the truth's 
sake, and was faithful unto death, which came a year ago. 
We feel that he is with Brother Russell in glory. 

Yours in hope, Mrs. Cora Wilmoth. — Mo, 

DEVOTED LOVE FOR DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL 
Dear Brethren: — 

I wish to extend to you all as a family my deepest sympathy
 in your great bereavement, which has befallen you in 
the loss of our dear Pastor Russell. The sad intelligence 
of our Pastor's passing away was a great shock. I was 
greatly overcome. My husband and I devotedly loved Brother 
Russell. We could not help it, for he had done so much for 
us. He was the means of opening our blind eyes. Hia Bible 
helps gave us a more beautiful and harmonious understanding 
of God's great plan of the Bible. Praise the dear Lord for 
it all! 

My husband was one of our dear Pastor's first friends. 
This was in the year 1886. Brother Merrill passed away 
Feb. 8, 1915. He went "in a moment, in the twinkling of 
an eye." He passed away very peacefully, at our cozy home, 
in his easy rocking-chair. He wanted to go that way. I am 
all alone, as far as truth people are concerned, and isolated. 
Thank God I have the truth, and am happy in believing the 
Bible and believing in God and in his Only Begotten Son — 
not in human traditions. 

My husband was the means of bringing me into the truth, 
and he was one of the dearest men on earth. We were 
mutually agreed in believing the Gospel story. My husband 
was wholly the Lord's. One could see the Christ-like spirit 
in hi3 countenance. He was so devoted to God and to Christ, 
thoroughly rooted and grounded in God's plan of salvation! 
His life was pure and spotless. 

When I was married I was a Methodist — didn't know 
there was such a person on earth as our beloved Pastor 
Russell. I soon came into the truth when I heard the "glad 
tidings of great joy." Our beloved Brother Russell — oh, how 
my loved one and I loved him! We loved every sermon and 
message that came from his pen — could not live without our 
dear Pastor's sermons. God and our Savior came first in 
our hearts, and the plan of salvation. 

The grace of God is sufficient for us all in every time of 
need. My loved one saw our dear Pastor. I never did, but 
have his photograph. Praise the Lord! I have all the 
Studies, Watch Towers and sermons! Please read this 
letter to the Bethel family to show them my sympathy for 
you all. I am looking forward to that great day when I 
shall go to meet my heavenly Father, my Savior, my loved 


one, our dear Pastor, and all the dear ones gone before. Love 
and sympathy to all the brethren and sisters from 

Your sister in Christ, Mrs. Alice Merrill. — Vt. 

DEEP APPRECIATION OP THE TOWER 
Precious Brethren in Christ: — 

Greetings in the sweet name of Jesus! I have been feasting
 this morning on the April 15th Watch Tower. My! those 
articles are so good that my heart could not help but thrill 
with joy! Oh, how good our heavenly Father is! What a 
glorious feast the dear Lord has prepared for me! Truly it 
is a feast of fat things! It is actually just what I need that 
always comes out in The Watch Tower. 

"Jesus Anointed at Bethany" is truly a sweeter article than 
honey. It made my heart leap with joy. Yes, I do want to be 
more Christlike. Yes, I want to be like "the servant of all," 
while it is day. 

'The Christian's Duty in Time of War 1 ' was also a solving
 of a question in my mind. Those letters of the saints 
were an encouragement. It makes me put more energy into 
the battle when I see others doing the same. Be assured, 
loving brethren, that I appreciate your ministry of love for 
God and the brethren and that I "do remember you at the 
throne of grace. Praying God's blessing upon your noble 
efforts, I remain, with much Christian love. 

Your Greek brother, Gregory Sakatos. — Ohio. 

A VOICE FROM IRELAND 
Dear Brethren: — 

The members of the Belfast ecclesia desire to express 
their deep sympathy with the dear brethren of the Bethel 
family at Brooklyn in the passing beyond the veil of our 
dear Pastor. We hasten to assure you of our loyal cooperation
 in the harvest work; and we pray always for you 
all, that the Lord may continue to bless and guide you. 

We are looking forward to engaging in the pastoral work 
without delay and are rejoicing in the privilege. We remain, 
dear brethren, 

Your fellow-servants in the Lord, 

Belfast Ecclesia.— Ireland. 
"WHY DID HE NOT TEI#L ME?" 
My Dear Brethren: — 

Explanatory of the enclosed, I submit the following: About 
the year 1890 a friend put the volumes of Millennial Dawn 
in my hands, but he made no comment as to what they contained
 other than that they were a work on pre-millennialism. 
I had never heard of Pastor Russell and, therefore, was not 
interested in the author. At that time I was an elder in the 
church and my time was so fully occupied that I did not open 
the books, not imagining they were very different from other 
works. Why did not my friend tell me? 

Later, I worked in an office with a Bible Student, but he 
never opened up on me. Once or twice I heard him use the 
expression, "The truth," and immediately I sized him up as 
being of "the home of truth" or "new thought" cult. As I 
had no use for the cults that repudiated the ransom, I had no 
use for him from a religious standpoint. He never let me 
know his religion was different. Why did he irot tell me? 

Still later I was brought in contact with one whom I 
subsequently learned was a pilgrim. Even he did not broach 
religion to me, and when I learned he was a Bible Student, 
I did not know that meant anything different from the general
 run of beliefs. Why did he not tell me? 

Later still I attended now and then the Sunday services 
of the Bible Students, but always happened in when some 
ordinary Bible theme was being presented and, therefore, did 
not know even then that there was a difference. I did not read 
the literature, for I supposed it to be of the same nature as 
the discourses, and why take time from the reading of my 
Bible? 

Finally, a friend of mine, a Presbyterian elder, joined the 
Bible Students and he told me there was a difference. Then 
the Photo-Dbama of Creation came along, and I knew there 
was a difference. I prayed, "Lord, that which I see not, teach 
thou me." (Job 34:32) And my eyes were opened wide. Immediately
 I consecrated and symbolized my consecration at 
the very first opportunity, whieh chanced to be at the same 
time our dear pilgrim -brother R. 0. Hadley was baptized — 
October, 1914. 

I believe I would have welcomed the truth at any time 
had I but known there was a difference. As it is, I have 
lost a lifetime of opportunity for harvest work. 

Because of ray experience as here narrated, it ie my purpose
 to let my friends in the nominal church know there is a 
difference and a delightful and blessed difference! 

Lew Anderson. 


[6182] 


August 15, 1917 


THE WATCH TOWER 


(242-259) 


ANOEIiOPHONE IMPROVED WITH USE 

Dkab Brfthrkn: — 

We received the Angelophone on the 8th inst. We aTe indeed
 thankful that Pastor Russell's voice is audible. We 
know that it is he who is speaking. How great are God's 
wisdom and power! Our Pastor's memory will live throughout
 the ages. Through his teachings God has drawn us closer 
to himself. 

We would have written sooner, but were waiting to see 
if the Angelophone would improve with use. We find that it 
does. We hope that the dear friends who have been so badly 
disappointed will find their Angelophones improving in like 
manner. We very much regret the impatience shown on our 
part, and will try to improve along that line, as well as along 
many others. Asking your pardon for being so impatient, 
we are, dear friends, 

Yours in the one hope, . — Fta. 


DOING WHAT SHE CAN DO TO SPREAD THE TBUTH 

My Deab Brethren: — 

Greetings in our dear Redeemer's name! Having read 
the article in The Watch Towkr regarding the V. D. M. 
questions, I feel that it is meat in due season for me. I received
 great blessing from it, and now wish to have a blank 
mailed to me if you please, so that I may know just where 
I stand in the school of Christ, I am so thankful to the 
heavenly Father that you had that in The Wqtoh Tower. 
I feel it was especially for me, I am one of the few who 
cannot go ,out in the pastoral work, but I witness to my 
neighbors and friends as I have the opportunity, and hand 
out tracts in the car sometimes and to those who come to 
my door. Once in a while I get a hearing ear, and it makes 
my heart rejoice. In sincere Christian love, 

Your sister in the Lord, by his grace, 

Harriet H. Moore. — Ind. 


For some time the work in Jamaica has been hindered in 
a measure. We are pleased to announce now that the Society 
has opened a depot at No, 5 Duke St., Kingston; and from 
that headquarters all the work of the Society will be transacted
 throughout Jamaica and Porto Rico. We hope the dear 
friends will co-operate with the brethren there in spreading 
the glad tidings. The opportunities now for putting the 
Scripture Studies in the hands of the people, and for doing 
the volunteer work, and for the spreading of the glad tidTHE
 HARVEST WORK IN JAMAICA 


ings, are second to no time in the past; and we hope that all 
who can will go forth in the harvest while it is called day. 

Please address all communications concerning the work 
in the West Indies to the International Bible Students 
Assn., No. 5 Duke St., Kingston. 

A general convention is being arranged for the Island, to 
be held at Kinsgton, October 28 to 31, inclusive. All inquiries 
concerning the convention and arrangements should be addressed
 to the depot above named. 


BROTHER RUSSELL'S SERMONS IN BOOK 


A book containing many of Brother Russell's choice sermons
 is being prepared. The number of orders from the 


friends will determine the size of the edition. Order now 
that we may know how many books to print. Price later. 

