





“The Generous Person Will Be Blessed”




SACRIFICES have long been an important part of true worship. The Israelites offered animal sacrifices, and Christians have always been well-known for their “sacrifice of praise.” Yet, there are other sacrifices with which God is well-pleased. (Heb. 13:15, 16) These sacrifices bring both joy and blessings, as the following examples show.
Hannah, a faithful servant of old, dearly wanted a son but had been unable to bear children. In prayer, she vowed to Jehovah that if she would bear a son, she would “give him to Jehovah all the days of his life.” (1 Sam. 1:10, 11) In time, Hannah did become pregnant, and she gave birth to a son named Samuel. After Samuel was weaned, Hannah took him to the tabernacle, just as she had vowed. Jehovah blessed Hannah for her self-sacrificing spirit. She was privileged to have five more children, and Samuel became a prophet and a Bible writer.​—1 Sam. 2:21.
Like Hannah and Samuel, Christians today have the privilege of using their lives in dedicated service to their Creator. Jesus promised that any sacrifices we make to worship Jehovah will be richly rewarded.​—Mark 10:28-30.
In the first century, a Christian woman named Dorcas was well-known for her “good deeds and gifts of mercy”​—sacrifices she made to help others. Sadly, however, “she fell sick and died,” bringing grief to the congregation. When the disciples heard that Peter was in the area, they urged him to come at once. Imagine their joy when Peter came and raised Dorcas from the dead​—the first recorded resurrection by an apostle! (Acts 9:36-41) God had not forgotten the sacrifices of Dorcas. (Heb. 6:10) Her record of generosity has been preserved in God’s Word as a fine example for us to imitate.
The apostle Paul likewise set an excellent example of one who gave generously of his time and attention. Writing to his Christian brothers in Corinth, Paul said: “For my part, I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for you.” (2 Cor. 12:15) Paul learned through experience that sacrificing oneself in behalf of others brings not only personal satisfaction but also​—and more important—​Jehovah’s blessing and approval.​—Acts 20:24, 35.
Clearly, Jehovah is pleased when we use our time and energy to promote Kingdom interests and assist fellow believers. But are there other ways in which we can support the Kingdom-preaching work? Yes! In addition to our labors of love, we can honor God by way of our voluntary contributions. They are used to further the worldwide preaching work, which includes supporting missionaries and other special full-time servants. In addition, the preparation and translation of literature and videos, the assistance with disaster relief efforts, and the construction of new Kingdom Halls are all cared for by our voluntary contributions. We can be assured that “the generous person will be blessed.” Moreover, when we give our valuable things to Jehovah, we honor him.​—Prov. 3:9; 22:9.



How Some Choose To Contribute To The Worldwide Work
As in the apostle Paul’s day, many today “set something aside,” or budget an amount of money, and place it in the congregation contribution box labeled “Worldwide Work.” (1 Cor. 16:2) Each month, congregations forward these contributions to the office of Jehovah’s Witnesses that serves their branch territory. It is also possible for you to send donations directly to a legal entity that is used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country where you reside. To learn the name of the primary legal entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the country where you live, please contact the branch office. The address can be found on www.jw.org. Depending on local conditions, the types of donations that you can send directly may include:
OUTRIGHT DONATIONS
  Donations via electronic bank transfer, debit card, or credit card. In some branches this is also possible using jw.org or another designated website.

  Donations of cash, jewelry, or other valuable personal property. Include a letter indicating that the cash or the item is an outright donation.


CONDITIONAL DONATION ARRANGEMENT
  Donations of cash with the condition that it can be returned if needed by the donor.

  Include a letter stating that the donation is conditional.


CHARITABLE PLANNING
In addition to gifts of money and valuable personal property, there are other ways to benefit Kingdom service worldwide. These are listed below. Regardless of the method or methods you would like to use, please first contact the branch office that serves your branch territory to see which avenues are available. Since legal requirements and tax laws vary, it is important to consult qualified tax and legal advisers before choosing the best way to donate.
Insurance and Retirement Plans: A donation made by specifying an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as the beneficiary of a life insurance policy, individual retirement account, or a retirement/​pension plan.
Bank Accounts: Bank accounts may be made payable on death to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in accord with local bank requirements.
Stocks and Bonds: Stocks and bonds donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses as an outright gift or by means of a written agreement to transfer on death.
Real Estate: Salable real estate donated to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses, either by making an outright gift or, in the case of residential property, by reserving a life estate to the donor, who can continue to live in the residence during his or her lifetime.
Wills and Trusts: Property or money may be bequeathed to an entity used by Jehovah’s Witnesses by means of a legally executed will or by specifying the entity as the beneficiary of a trust agreement. This arrangement may provide certain tax advantages.
As the term “charitable planning” implies, these types of donations typically require some planning on the part of the donor. To assist individuals desiring to benefit the worldwide work of Jehovah’s Witnesses through some form of charitable giving, a brochure entitled Charitable Planning to Benefit Kingdom Service Worldwide has been prepared in English and Spanish. The brochure was written to provide information on a variety of ways that gifts may be made now or later, such as through a bequest at death. The information covered in this brochure may not apply fully to your situation because of tax laws or other laws in the country where you reside. By using such methods of charitable giving, many have helped to support our religious and humanitarian activities worldwide and maximize tax benefits. If available in the country where you reside, the brochure may be obtained by requesting a copy from the secretary of the local congregation.
For more information, select the link “Make a Donation to Our Worldwide Work” at the bottom of any page on jw.org, or contact the branch office.


