Results of Repeated Visits to One House
IT IS remarkable that a Christian minister would call almost continuously for some fifteen years to conduct Bible studies with the people of one house. However, in Akron, Ohio, this is what has occurred, as is explained:
“About fifteen years ago when I was preaching from house to house I placed the Bible-study aid ‘Let God Be True’ with a lady. I soon began a home Bible study with her, and after two years she was baptized in symbol of her dedication to serve Jehovah God. However, in time, this lady moved out of the house.
“Later, as I was again making ministerial calls in this neighborhood, I met the new tenants. These included a man, his wife and their children. This family, too, agreed to a Bible study, and we again used the study aid ‘Let God Be True.’ They progressed in Bible knowledge, and later the man dedicated his life to serve God. But this is not all.
“After a little while I was able to start a Bible study with several young people who had moved into the house. The message fell upon receptive hearts, because two of the young men finally symbolized their dedication to Jehovah God by water baptism. One of them eventually became a full-time pioneer minister.
“You might think that there could not possibly be anymore response from that one house. However, new tenants moved in, and one Sunday morning I was making ministerial calls in the neighborhood with my daughter. I said to her: ‘If anyone invites me in, I believe I will start a Bible study.’ The lady of the house invited us in, saying that she wanted to see Jehovah’s name in the Bible. A Bible study was started in the ‘Let God Be True’ book, and the householders progressed to the point that they dedicated their lives to God and were baptized in 1966.
“Still, this is not quite all. You see, there are now new tenants living in that house. And, recently, while making ministerial calls in the neighborhood I placed the Bible-study aid ‘Things in Which It is Impossible for God to Lie’ with the occupants, a man and his wife. I am now holding a home Bible study with them.”

