Assembling With Those Who Fear God
“PEOPLE everywhere long for freedom from fear​—fear of violence, fear of unemployment, and fear of serious illness. We share that longing. . . . Why, then, are we discussing how to cultivate fear?” That intriguing question was raised by the keynote speaker at each of the “Godly Fear” District Conventions, which began in June 1994.
The millions who attended​—first in North America, then later in Europe, Central and South America, Africa, Asia, and the islands of the sea—​were eager to learn to cultivate such fear. Why? Because our sharing in the blessings that Jehovah God has for his people depends on our having godly fear. It was to learn about godly fear that the conventioners came together, and during the three-day program, they learned much about this essential Christian quality.
‘Fear God and Keep His Commandments’
That was the theme of the first day of the convention, based on Ecclesiastes 12:13. What does it mean to fear God? In the very first part on the program, the convention chairman explained that godly fear reflects awe and a profound reverence for Jehovah as well as a wholesome dread of displeasing him. Such godly fear is not morbid; it is healthful and proper.
How does this healthful fear benefit us? The following talk, “Do Not Grow Weary and Give Up,” explained that godly fear will motivate us to keep God’s commandments with joy. Along with love for God and neighbor, such fear will infuse us with spiritual energy. Yes, godly fear can help us to avoid slowing down in the race for everlasting life.
Next on the program were interviews presenting living proof that godly fear can sustain us. Those interviewed told how a reverential fear of God influenced them to continue in the ministry despite apathy, indifference, or persecution and helped them to endure even in the face of difficult personal trials.
Why, though, do some people have godly fear while others do not? In the talk “Cultivating and Benefiting From Godly Fear,” the keynote speaker explained that at Jeremiah 32:37-39, Jehovah promised that He would give a God-fearing heart to His people. Jehovah implants godly fear in our hearts. How? By means of his holy spirit and his inspired Word, the Bible. Clearly, however, we must put forth earnest effort to study God’s Word and to take full advantage of the abundant spiritual provisions that he has made. These include our conventions and congregation meetings, which help us to learn to fear him.
The afternoon program opened with admonition to trust in Jehovah and his Word. This was followed by a discussion of the primary ways that the Kingdom should affect our lives as Christians.
Then came the first symposium of three presented at the convention. “Godly Fear Moves Us to Obey Divine Requirements” was the theme of this symposium, which focused attention on the family. Following is a sample of the Scriptural​—and practical—​advice offered.
□ For husbands: Godly fear should move a man to love his wife as his own body. (Ephesians 5:28, 29) A man does not intentionally injure his own body, humiliate himself before his friends, or gossip about his own shortcomings. So, then, he should treat his wife with the dignity and respect that he accords himself.
□ For wives: Jesus’ godly fear moved him ‘always to please God.’ (John 8:29) This is a fine spirit for wives to imitate in dealing with their husbands.
□ For parents: Christian parents can show godly fear by taking parental responsibilities seriously, viewing their children as an inheritance from Jehovah. (Psalm 127:3) The primary goal of parents should be to raise their children to become genuine Christians.
□ For children: Jehovah instructs children to obey their “parents in union with the Lord.” (Ephesians 6:1) Hence, to obey their parents is to obey God.
The closing talk of the day struck a chord, for it discussed the deep feelings all of us experience when we lose a loved one in death. About halfway through the talk, however, there was a surprise. The speaker delighted the audience by announcing the release of the new brochure When Someone You Love Dies. This 32-page, full-color publication says much that can help those who are grieving to understand and deal with the feelings and emotions that surface following the death of a loved one. Have you ever been at a loss as to what to say to a bereaved person? A section of this brochure discusses how we can help those who are grieving. While listening to the speaker, many in the audience were thinking of someone who could benefit from this new brochure.
‘Render Sacred Service With Godly Fear and Awe’
That was the theme of the second day, based on Hebrews 12:28. During the morning program came the second symposium, “Congregations Walking in the Fear of Jehovah.” The first segment dealt with attending meetings. Our presence at meetings demonstrates our respect for God and his spiritual provisions. By attending, we show that we fear his name and are eager to comply with his will. (Hebrews 10:24, 25) The second speaker explained that for the congregation as a whole to walk in the fear of Jehovah, each individual must do his part in maintaining fine conduct. The final speaker talked about a privilege and duty that all Christians have​—to declare the good news without letup. How long will we continue to preach? Until Jehovah says it is enough.​—Isaiah 6:11.
“The Joy of Jehovah Is Your Stronghold” was the theme of the next talk, as covered now in the study articles in this magazine. (Nehemiah 8:10) Why are Jehovah’s people joyful? The speaker outlined a number of reasons. A very significant one is that a close relationship with God makes us the most joyful people on earth. Just think, the speaker reminded the conventioners, we have the privilege of being among the people that Jehovah has drawn to Jesus Christ. (John 6:44) What a powerful reason for joy!
A highlight of every convention is the baptism, and the “Godly Fear” Conventions were no exception. In the talk “Dedication and Baptism in the Fear of Jehovah,” the speaker explained that the personal obligations of all baptized persons are fourfold: (1) We must study God’s Word with the aid of publications that help us to understand and apply it; (2) we must pray; (3) we must associate with fellow believers at congregation meetings; and (4) we must bear witness to Jehovah’s name and Kingdom.
The Saturday afternoon program began with the reassuring subject “A People Not Forsaken by Jehovah.” Thirty-five centuries ago, when the nation of Israel faced difficult times, Jehovah gave a guarantee through Moses, saying: “Jehovah your God . . . will neither desert you nor leave you entirely.” (Deuteronomy 31:6) Jehovah proved true to that guarantee by protecting the Israelites when they entered the Promised Land and took possession of it. Today, when facing difficult trials, we too can have full confidence that Jehovah will not forsake us, provided we stick close to him and heed the advice of his Word.
How can you find delight in reading the Bible? In the talk “Read God’s Word, the Holy Bible, Daily,” the speaker suggested reading with an inquisitive mind and asking such questions as these: What does this account teach me about Jehovah’s qualities and ways? How can I be more like Jehovah in these respects? Reading the Bible in this way is a delightful and rewarding experience.
Attention was next focused on the third symposium of the program, “Provisions to Help Those Who Fear Jehovah.” Although Jehovah may not perform miracles in behalf of his servants today, he certainly comes to the aid of those in fear of him. (2 Peter 2:9) This symposium considered four provisions from Jehovah to help us in these critical times: (1) By means of his spirit, Jehovah empowers us to accomplish works far beyond our own strength. (2) By means of his Word, he provides counsel and guidance for us. (3) By means of the ransom, he grants us a clean conscience. (4) By means of his organization, including the elders, he provides us with direction and protection. (Luke 11:13; Ephesians 1:7; 2 Timothy 3:16; Hebrews 13:17) By taking full advantage of these provisions, we will be able to endure and thus gain Jehovah’s approval.
The final talk on Saturday afternoon was entitled “Jehovah’s Fear-Inspiring Day Is Near,” based on Malachi’s prophecy. There have been fear-inspiring days in past history, as when judgment was executed upon Jerusalem in 70 C.E. But the most fear-inspiring day in all human experience will be Jehovah’s coming day when ‘vengeance is brought upon those who do not know God and those who do not obey the good news about our Lord Jesus.’ (2 Thessalonians 1:6-8) How soon will that be? The speaker stated: “The end is close! Jehovah knows that day and hour. He will not change his timetable. We are called upon to endure patiently.”
It was hard to believe that two days had already passed. What would the final day bring?
“Fear God and Give Him Glory”
The theme of the third day was based on Revelation 14:7. During the morning program, a series of talks highlighted some of the doctrinal teachings that set Jehovah’s Witnesses apart from all other religious organizations.
In the talk “There Will Be a Resurrection of the Righteous,” the speaker raised an interesting question: “During that thousand-year Judgment Day, when will those who died faithful in these final years of Satan’s system of things be resurrected?” The answer? “The Bible does not say,” the speaker explained. “However, is it not logical that those who die in our day would be resurrected early in order to share with the great crowd of Armageddon survivors in the immense educational work that is to take place throughout Judgment Day? Yes, indeed!” Will there be survivors? There certainly will be. Bible teachings and examples that assure us of this were clearly explained in the next talk, “Saved Alive Through the Great Tribulation.”
Jehovah’s Witnesses have long understood that the Bible holds out two destinies​—everlasting life on a paradise earth for countless millions and immortal heavenly life for a limited number who will rule with Christ in his Kingdom. The heavenly hope was discussed in the talk “Have No Fear, Little Flock.” (Luke 12:32) In view of the present world situation, the little flock must be fearless; each one of them must endure right down to the end. (Luke 21:19) “Their fearlessness,” the speaker said, “serves to encourage those of the great crowd. They too should cultivate an attitude of fearlessness as they anticipate deliverance during the greatest time of trouble the earth has ever known.”
At the conclusion of the morning program, the audience watched with delight the Bible drama The Choices You Face. In the days of Joshua, and also of the prophet Elijah, the Israelites were at a crossroads. A choice had to be made. Elijah said: “How long will you be limping upon two different opinions? If Jehovah is the true God, go following him; but if Baal is, go following him.” (1 Kings 18:21) Today, too, mankind is at a crossroads. This is no time to be limping upon two different opinions. What is the right choice? The same one that Joshua of old made. He said: “As for me and my household, we shall serve Jehovah.”​—Joshua 24:15.
Suddenly, it seemed, it was Sunday afternoon and time for the public discourse entitled “Why Fear the True God Now.” At Revelation 14:6, 7, all mankind is urged: “Fear God and give him glory.” Why is it urgent to fear God now? Because, as the scripture goes on to say, “the hour of the judgment by him has arrived.” By means of his Son, now enthroned as King of God’s heavenly Kingdom, Jehovah will bring to a conclusion the present unclean, rebellious system of things. The speaker explained that this is the only way to bring relief to those who fear God as well as to rescue and preserve our earthly home. Since these are the closing days of this system of things, it is urgent that we fear the true God now!
Following a summary of the Watchtower lesson for that week, the final speaker took the stage. As a result of the convention program, godly fear had taken on greater meaning for the conventioners, he explained. He stressed the many benefits that come to those who fear God. The speaker announced the release of a new video​—United by Divine Teaching. It highlights the unique aspects of the “Divine Teaching” International Conventions held in 1993-94. As the talk was concluding, many wondered, ‘What can we look forward to next year?’ Three-day district conventions in many places.
In conclusion, the speaker referred to Malachi 3:16, which says: “At that time those in fear of Jehovah spoke with one another, each one with his companion, and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening. And a book of remembrance began to be written up before him for those in fear of Jehovah and for those thinking upon his name.” The conventioners left with a clear determination to think on Jehovah’s name and serve him with godly fear.
[Picture on page 24]
Baptism candidates need to continue manifesting godly fear
[Picture on page 25]
The drama “The Choices You Face” impressed listeners with the need to be decisive about serving Jehovah
[Picture on page 26]
Conventioners were delighted to receive the new brochure “When Someone You Love Dies”

