VOL. XXII. JUNE 15, 1901. No. 12. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 195 

Presbyterian Creed Revision 195 

Religious Federation and Trusts 196 



What Leading Jews Say About 

Jesus 197 

In the Paradise of God 198 

The New Jerusalem and Glorified 

Temple 199 

God the Creator of all Things 203 

What Self-Styled Bible Evolutionists 

Claim 204 

Public Ministries of the Truth 208 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the $1.00 packages of mottoes now. 

LEATHER BOUND DAWNS will not be ready for some weeks. 

OUR READERS SHOULD KNOW that we publish a number of 
German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian and French tracts; and 
that the WATCH TOWER in German is issued quarterly. Samples 
free. 

WE GIVE GENEROUS CREDITS on our own publications, but on 
no others. We must pay cash to secure the low rates we give 
you, and must ask that cash accompany your orders. 

YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post paid. 



"SILENT SERMONS," delayed, are now in good supply, and 
orders are being filled. 

ABOUT TEACHERS' BIBLES. 



We no longer have Bagster Bible No. 8706. We commend 
instead the Holman edition, which contains not only excellent 
Bible Study helps, but also eighty (80) photo-engravings, illustrating 
Palestine and the Orient in a most truthful manner- 
enabling accurate conceptions. These pictures are well worth 
one dollar. The type is Bourgeois of good size. Price in French 
seal, divinity circuit, $1.35; in Persian morocco, silk sewed, 
$2.35. Postage 25 cents extra. 

However, before deciding about this, or any other Bible, 
see our remarks respecting wide-margin Bibles, under the head 
of "Bible Markings Commended," last issue. 



R2830 : page 195 

PRESBYTERIAN CREED REVISION. 



THE General Assembly of the Church of the Presbyterians, 

whose names are written on earth, 

(compare Heb. 12:23), has again been forced to discuss 

its creed in response to the general clamor of its people, 

who want to be told whether or not they still believe 

it; or whether or not they may do just a little thinking 

for themselves. 

When the Assembly convened in Philadelphia, 
Pa., its committee reported:— a majority favoring some 
sort of an amendment or revision, and a minority 
favoring no revision, no change. The Assembly 
sided with the majority, and the discussion pro and 
con showed considerable warmth at times. 

Rev. D. S. Kennedy was the bravest of the brave 
in defending the creed which has so nauseated the 
tender-hearted, and so severely tried their faith's unreason. 
He repudiated the statement that "ministers 
of the gospel and elders in the church do not believe 
the oath of ordination they have taken." He challenged 
any man on the floor to dispute his statement! 
And, strange (?) to say, not one of the Assembly was 
willing to sacrifice himself by admitting himself to be 
a violator of his conscience and of his oath of consecration; 
—by admitting that he neither believed the 
Westminster Confession, nor taught it. 

Judge J. K. Ewing took the same stand against 
all revision, saying:— 

"I protest against changing the Confession for the 
sake of popularity; for as the church goes up in popularity, 



it usually goes down in spirituality. When the 

church flirts with this idea it falls into a ditch. You 

will never convert the world by popularizing the doctrine 

of the church. The Confession in its present 

form is popular enough for me." 

But the majority, without, perhaps, being more 
conscientious, were less brave. If their consciences 
could have a little relief they wanted it. It was at 
this time, after several days of discussion, that Rev. 
Moffat, D.D., brought order out of confusion, and a 
rainbow in the Assembly's clouds by some skilful word-strategy. 
He is reported to have said:— 

"What is this whole matter about? Is it revision? 
There is no revision before this Assembly. I don't 
know what I am, a revisionist, or an anti-revisionist, 
for revision is not before us at all. This majority report 
only asks for more time and authority. Probably 
revision will be before us next year; if it is, then the 
speech Dr. Kennedy made this morning will be right 
in place. How do these men know that a new creed 
will be the outcome of the adoption of the majority 
report? I admire their imagination, but I do not admire 
their exegetical ability. 

"I will guarantee that if there is any heresy in 
the report they bring in next year, the Assembly of 
1902 will burn the whole document. This new creed 
proposed is to sustain the same relation to the Confession 
of Faith that the Shorter Catechism sustains to 
the Larger Catechism. The Westminster divines maintained 
that the Shorter Catechism was better suited to 
the wants of the common people than the larger one, 
then why be afraid to go on with this subject? The 
whole thing is under proper ecclesiastical supervision. 
The presbyteries asked for it. The last Assembly discussed 
it and appointed the committee and they have 
done their work well. I am sorry to see men belittle 
this work. One hundred and fifty presbyteries asked 
for some change. What would be your attitude if that 
number asked for the dismissal of the whole subject? 

"I claim it is not wise for this Assembly to disregard 
the voice of the church in this matter, and we 
should hesitate long before we say to them, Be still. 
Preachers who come to the General Assembly ought 
to practice what they preach. I have sympathy with 
the common people, and they are demanding some 
changes. Theologians can get along with the creed 
as it is; but the common people cannot, and I only 

R2830 : page 196 

want our belief stated so they can understand it, and 

when it is thus stated, and not till then, will all denominations 

say: 'Why, they believe just what we do!' 

"The saddest declaration I have ever heard was: 
'We simply cannot tell the world what we believe.' 
This is not true. Adopt the majority report and we 



will then get a statement of what we believe, and all 
the world will believe it.' 

"Tremendous applause followed the address." 

The dis-ease affecting Presbyterianism, the Assembly 
would have us think a very peculiar one. They 
wish their Christian neighbors and friends to think 
that the Westminster Confession of Faith, framed 
shortly after emergence from the superstitions of the 
"dark ages," is an infallible statement of the truth, 
and therefore unalterable, unchangeable. Neither 
their own nor other hands must shatter their idol. 
Neither will they admit that it has an ugly and a repulsive 
look, and if not broken up and burned should at 
least be veiled from public view. The resolution 
which now comforts and rejoices the Assembly and 
the large and intelligent, but blindly stubborn body 
of Presbyterians, is that their idol shall not be harmed, 
nor covered nor veiled;— it will be merely set back in 
the rear, so as not to be so conspicuous to outsiders 
and new beginners, and it will be represented at the 
front door by a more lovable-looking, a more angelic 
idol. 

In other words, Doctor Moffat tells the world and 
the mass of Presbyterians and the vast majority of the 
Assembly, that the Westminster Confession is so 
"deep" that few but himself can really understand 
and interpret it. He assures them that what appears 
to them to be black is really the purest of white, and 
that men of sufficient ability to demonstrate this to 
the Christian world, have been put upon the committee 
which is to report such a modernized explanation of 
the Westminster Confession. No wonder there was 
applause at such a suggestion;— that the idol need not 
be destroyed nor even maimed. Moreover, it was not 
merely the idol that they cared for, but more especially 
themselves, the priests of that idol; for whatever 
would discredit it, would discredit them. If it were 
proven faulty, fallible, the same would be true of 
them; for had they not sworn themselves and each 
other to the reliability of this idol? And if they now 
were to admit error, falsehood, misrepresentation of 
the divine character and Word and plan, who would 
receive their testimony as infallible hereafter? Would 
there not be great danger that some of the best of the 
"sheep" would cease to follow traditions of men and 
seek instead the voice of the Good Shepherd Jesus 
and his leading into the green pastures and by the 
still waters of his Word? 

Later Dr. Moffat put his thought into the following 
words which were adopted as a part of the Assembly's 
instructions to its committee, which has a 
year in which to fix up the substitute idol and see 
how lovely it can be made, and yet bear some faint 
traces of family likeness to its still to live parent, the 
Westminster Confession, to which it will bear the relationship 
of representative, but not of substitute. The 



resolution follows:— 

"We recommend that this committee be instructed 
to prepare and submit to the next General Assembly 
for such disposition as may be judged to be wise, a 
brief statement of the reformed faith, in untechnical 
terms, the said statement to be prepared with a view 
to its being employed to give information and a better 
understanding of our doctrinal beliefs, and not with 
a view to its becoming a substitute or an alternative 
of our Confession of Faith." 

FAMISHING FOR THE BREAD OF LIFE. 

Some who are awaking are crying out for bread 
—the bread of truth, instead of the stones of error 
offered by the various creeds. The Rev. T. Chalmers 
voiced the sentiments of an increasing number, when, 
not long since, he said:— 

"We cannot resist the inevitable. The creed of 
Calvinism is like a coat which is becoming too small 
for the rapid growth of human thought. With every 
movement of the arms it will be sure to rip somewhere, 
unless we refrain from all vigorous exercise. We do 
not want any coat which binds us so tightly that we 
cannot act with freedom. It is folly to attempt to 
keep pace with the ripping of the coat by a little sewing 
here and there. It is too small, and no amount 
of sewing and patching will help it any. It may have 
a good deal of good material which may be kept and 
still used, but the system of Calvinism, as a system, 
has done its service for humanity. We don't want 
systems any more. We want liberty and truth and 
love and righteousness. We want more of Christ and 
less of creed. We want still to grow— to grow until 
we come into the unity of the faith and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God unto the perfect man, unto the 
fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ." 

RELIGIOUS FEDERATIONS AND TRUSTS. 



Long ago we pointed out that combination would 
be the order of the churches and the world for the new 
century;— that these will be the great giants of the 
end of this age, and make necessary the symbolic 
fire which will destroy present systems, corresponding 
to the giants, whose wisdom and super-ability and 
tyranny preceded the literal destruction of the first 
order of things (kosmos) by a flood of literal waters. 
The financial giants of Christendom are growing rapidly 
—beyond the wildest dream of the world's financiers 
—in every part of Christendom. It must be near 
the time for the religious combines to begin. Indeed, 
the leaders in finance are closely related to, and in 
many instances the real manipulators of, the nominal 



R2831 :page 197 

church machinery. Money moves Christendom to a 
degree that the masses are not aware of. And who 
can doubt that the spirit of federation, or "confederacy" 
as the Scriptures designate it, is growing in all 
directions; and that financial successes will encourage 
religious combines. It is not long since the Disciple 
denomination passed the following resolution:— 

"The national congress of the Disciples of Christ, 
lately held at Lexington, appointed a committee of 
seven to take charge of a movement in behalf of an 
international confederation of religious denominations. 
According to this scheme, the different religious bodies 
are to retain their own creeds, but will be auxiliary to 
an international congress and will affiliate with all 
other churches on a common platform. The ultimate 
aim is to create one international church. This movement 
is the first of its kind in America, and is in line 
with the widespread tendency to church federation and 
church unity, and with the rapidly growing spirit of 
internationalism in literature, social reform, and art." 

Now the Literary Digest has the following to say 
under the caption:— 

WILL BRITISH CONGREGATIONALISTS AND BAPTISTS 
UNITE? 

"The movement toward church union and federation, 
evident of late in nearly every part of Christendom, 
has been particularly noticeable in Great Britain 
during the past year. Closely following the organic 
union of the Free and United Presbyterian churches of 
Scotland and the proposed union of all evangelical 
bodies in that kingdom, has come the first joint assembly 
of the Congregational and Baptist churches of 
England. Both these bodies are strongly Congregational 
in church polity and Calvinistic in theology; 
and there seems to be every reason to believe that 
their corporate union is only a question of a comparatively 
short time. Indeed, Mr. Alfred Dawson, 
English editor of The Congregationalist, speaks of that 
union as a consummation 'sure to take place.' The 
rapprochement which has been going on for a long 
period, this year culminated in two joint sessions of 
these bodies, which Mr. Dawson pronounces 'the most 
wonderful series of religious gatherings' he has ever 
attended. He writes (The Congregationalist, May 1 1): 

'"There were two joint assemblies: on Tuesday, 
April 23, when Dr. Parker presided and Dr. McLaren 
delivered his address as president of the Baptist Union; 
and on the following Thursday, when the positions 
were reversed, Dr. McLaren presiding and Dr. Parker 
delivering his address as chairman of the Congregational 
Union. The experiment was in every way a 



success; perfect harmony and the warmest fraternal 
feeling prevailed throughout, and not one single jar-note 
was struck.... 

'"Reverting to the paramount question of Baptist 
and Congregational union, the committee of the 
latter body frankly remarked in their annual report: 
"Neither of the joint assemblies can meet without the 
idea occurring to many minds that a permanent 
union of Baptists and Congregationalists should not 
be an impossible dream." Certainly many of the leaders 
and rank and file on both sides do not so regard it.'" 

WHAT LEADING JEWS SAY ABOUT JESUS. 



The views of Jewish notables respecting Jesus 
have been secured, and here we give extracts from 
some of them: 

Dr. Isadore Singer, editor of the Jewish Encyclopaedia, 
says: 

"I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the 
Jews, one whom all Jewish people are learning to 
love. His teaching has been an immense service to 
the world in bringing Israel's God to the knowledge 
of hundreds of millions of mankind. 

"The great change in Jewish thought concerning 
Jesus of Nazareth I can not better illustrate than by 
this fact: When I was a boy, had my father, who 
was a very pious man, heard the name of Jesus uttered 
from the pulpit of our synagog, he and every other 
man in the congregation would have left the building, 
and the rabbi would have been dismissed at once. Now, 
it is not strange, in many synagogs, to hear sermons 
preached eulogistic of this Jesus, and nobody thinks 
of protesting— in fact, we are all glad to claim Jesus 
as one of our people." 

Dr. Max Nordau, wrote,— 

"Jesus is soul of our soul, as he is flesh of our 
flesh. Who, then, could think of excluding him from 
the people of Israel? St. Peter will remain the only 
Jew who said of the son of David, I know not the 
man.' If the Jews up to the present time have not 
publicly rendered homage to the sublime moral beauty 
of the figure of Jesus, it is because their tormentors 
have always persecuted, tortured, assassinated them 
in his name. The Jews have drawn their conclusions 
from the disciples as to the Master, which was a wrong, 
a wrong pardonable in the eternal victims of the implacable, 
cruel hatred of those who call themselves 
Christians. Every time that a Jew mounted to the 
sources and contemplated Christ alone, without his 
pretended faithful, he cried, with tenderness and admiration: 
'Putting aside the Messianic mission, this 
man is ours. He honors our race and we claim him 
as we claim the Gospels— flowers of Jewish literature, 



and only Jewish.'" 

Prof. Emil G. Hirsch, of Chicago University: 

"The Jews of every shade of religious belief do 
not regard Jesus in the light of Paul's theology. But 
the gospel Jesus, the Jesus who teaches so superbly 
the principles of Jewish ethics, is revered by all the 
liberal expounders of Judaism. His words are studied; 
the New Testament forms a part of Jewish literature. 
Among the great preceptors that have worded the 
truths of which Judaism is the historical guardian, 
none, in our estimation and esteem, takes precedence 
of the rabbi of Nazareth. To impute to us suspicious 
sentiments concerning him does us gross injustice. We 
know him to be among our greatest and purest." 

Dr. Kaufman Kohler, a rabbi of New York City, 
says: 

"He was a bold religious and social reformer, 
eager to regenerate Judaism. True, a large number 
of sayings were attributed to the dead master by his 
disciples which had been current in the schools. Still, 

R2831 :page 198 

the charm of true originality is felt in these utterances 
of his when the great realities of life, when the idea 
of Sabbath, the principle of purity, the value of a 
human soul, of woman, even of the abject sinner, are 
touched upon. None can read these parables and verdicts 
of the Nazarene and not be thrilled with the joy 
of a truth unspelled before. There is wonderful music 
in the voice which stays an angry crowd, saying, 
'Let him that is without sin cast the first stone!'— 
that speaks the words, 'Be like children, and you are 
not far from the kingdom of God!' 

"The Jew of today beholds in Jesus an inspiring 
ideal of matchless beauty. While he lacks the element 
of stern justice expressed so forcibly in the law and 
in the Old Testament characters, the firmness of self-assertion 
so necessary to the full development of manhood, 
all those social qualities which build up the home 
and society, industry and worldly progress, he is the 
unique exponent of the principle of redeeming love. 
His name as helper of the poor, as sympathizing friend 
of the fallen, as brother of every fellow sufferer, as 
lover of man and redeemer of woman, has become the 
inspiration, the symbol, and the watchword for the 
world's greatest achievements in the field of benevolence. 
While continuing the work of the synagog, 
the Christian Church, with the larger means at her 
disposal created those institutions of charity and redeeming 
love that accomplished wondrous things. The 
very sign of the cross has lent a new meaning, a holier 
pathos to suffering, sickness and sin, so as to offer new 
practical solutions for the great problems of evil which 
fill the human heart with new joys of self-sacrificing 
love. 



"All this modern Judaism gladly acknowledges, 
reclaiming Jesus as one of its greatest sons. But it 
denies that one single man, or one church, however 
broad, holds the key to many-sided truth. It waits 
for the time when all life's deepest mysteries will have 
been spelled and to the ideals of sage and saint that of 
the seeker of all that is good, beautiful and true, will 
have been joined; when Jew and Gentile, synagog and 
church, will merge into the church universal, into the 
great city of humanity whose name is 'God is there.'" 

"THEY SHALL LOOK UPON ME WHOM THEY HAVE 
PIERCED AND THEY SHALL MOURN FOR 
HIM."-ZECH 12:10. 

Quite evidently the way is preparing for the fulfilment 
of this Scripture in the near future. If a few 
of the Jewish "common people" are already "looking 
unto Jesus," despite the opposition of their leaders 
and the violent persecution, and generally disinheritance, 
sure to follow the acknowledgement of him, what 
may we not expect soon— when the changed sentiments 
of their leaders begin to be widely understood. 

Let us not forget, however, that every such evidence 
of the return of divine favor to fleshly Israel— 
every evidence that their blindness begins to pass 
away— is an equally sure evidence and proof that the 
Gospel age is closing, and that its mission (the selection 
of spiritual Israel) is nearly accomplished, that 
the time in which we may make our calling and election 
sure is gradually closing.— Rom. 11:25. 



R2832 : page 198 

IN THE PARADISE OF GOD. 

-REV. 21:l-7,22-27.-JUNE 23.- 

"He that overcometh shall inherit all things; 
and I will be his God and he shall be my son." 

PARADISE, the garden of God, was applicable 
as a name to the Garden of Eden, in which 
our first parents resided while they were still in harmony 
with God, before their disobedience; and the 
same term is Scripturally applied as a name to the 
new earth when restitution blessings shall, during 
our Lord's second presence (the Millennium), be 
brought to perfection as the fit abode of those who, 
under divine favor, shall then prove worthy of life 
everlasting. It was to this paradise that the Apostle 
Paul was in vision "caught away" when given a 
glimpse of various features of the divine plan, not 
then due to be understood by the Church in general 



—"things not lawful to be uttered." (2 Cor. 12:4.) 

John the Revelator was similarly caught away in 

vision, and shown some of these wonders of the Paradise 

epoch; but only in symbols, which he was permitted 

to report, and which have been comparatively misapprehended 

until now, in the Lord's due time, the 

holy spirit is guiding his people into the truth on this 

subject, as well as others, because it is now nigh at 

hand, and "meat in due season" for the "household." 

Our Lord refers to this paradise in language 
which identifies it with the first paradise of Eden, 
saying, "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of 
the tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of 
God." (Rev. 2:7.) It will be remembered that all 
the trees in Eden were trees of life, but that the one 
in the midst of the garden was then a forbidden tree, 
the disobedient eating of which brought death on 
Adam and his race. That tree in the midst of paradise 
was called the tree of knowledge, and our Lord's 
promise is that the overcomers of this present age 
shall have full liberty to partake of that tree of knowledge, 
and under most blessed and satisfactory conditions, 
when the knowledge will be of benefit to them 
under divine approval, and not bring a curse. It is 
this same paradise of the future on this earth that our 
Lord referred to when addressing the penitent thief, 
he said, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee this day, 
Thou shalt be with me in paradise." 

This Paradise, we recall, is elsewhere referred to 

R2832 : page 199 

by the Apostles as "the third heaven"— "a new 
heavens and a new earth." (2 Cor. 12:2; 2 Pet. 3:13.) 
They are not referring to new worlds, nor to heavens 
ranged one above another, as many have supposed, 
but, as already shown,* what is termed the first heavens 
and earth or order of things, passed away at the 
flood; and that the heavens and earth "which are 
now," the present order of things, are reserved of 
God to pass away with a great fire of trouble, revolution, 
etc., which shall utterly destroy them— the present 
spiritual powers and the present earthly or social 
arrangements. "Nevertheless, we according to his 
promise look for new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness." This will be the 
third heavens, and third earth, or the new heavens, 
and new earth, which will differ from the present condition 
of things in that it will be righteous, whereas 
the present is unrighteous, imperfect. The "new 
heavens" will consist of the new spiritual ruling 
powers of the future, Christ and the glorified Church, 
as the present heavens consist of the nominal religious 
systems, which, claiming Christ for their Head, in a 
very large degree bow to Antichrist, the god of this 
world, the prince of this world, "who now worketh 



in [through] the children of disobedience," and who 
is captivating and blinding the whole world with the 
exception of the few, the eyes of whose understanding 
have been opened, who are under special blessing 
and leading, and are taught of God,— the "little 
flock," "heirs of the Kingdom."— Eph. 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4. 

It is to this new heavens and new earth condition, 
this paradise, that our lesson introduces us. As the 
"new heavens" does not mean a new place of God's 
throne, and a new throne of God, but new conditions, 
and signify the spiritual power and control of Christ 
and his Church in glory, so the "new earth" does not 
mean another planet, but a new social order on this 
planet. The declaration is that the former heavens 
and former earth (which are now) will then have 
passed away and be no more. All present institutions 
are to utterly perish in the great time of trouble with 
which this age is very shortly to end. "And there 
shall be no more sea." As we have already seen, the 
sea is a symbol for the masses of people in a restless 
and unstable anarchistic condition, just as the land 
represents the social order, and as the mountains represent 
the kingdoms of the present time. As there is 
no reference to the physical earth and physical 
heavens being destroyed, so there is no reference to 
the physical sea being obliterated. The symbol signifies 
that under the new arrangement, under the control 
of the new heavens or spiritual powers, the reconstructed 
social order will be so satisfactory, so complete, 
so thorough, that there will be no more 
sea-class, no more restless people, no more dissatisfaction, 
no more anarchists; everything will be reduced 
to law and order; and law and order will under the 
new regime secure justice to every creature, obliterating 
the differences of wealth and power as they now 
exist. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM. 



In the symbolism of Scripture a city represents a 
government; as for instance, symbolic Babylon is 
denominated "that great city [government] which 
ruleth over the kings of the earth." The New Jerusalem, 
as a symbol, represents the new spiritual government 
of the Millennial age. It is not earth-born, 
it is not reared by men, but, as here pictured, it descends 
from God out of heaven— it is spiritual in every 
sense of the word— of God and not of men. It is for 
this kingdom, this government, that our Lord taught 
us to pray, "Thy kingdom come— thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." The declaration 
that the city is adorned as a bride for her husband 
implies its grandeur and beauty and perfection, as a 
bride's adornment on such an occasion is particular 



and elaborate to the last degree. But additionally to 
this it reminds us that in the government of the future, 
the judges of the world are the saints, now being selected 
through faithfulness in trial and tribulation, and 
that these are frequently called the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife and joint-heir in the Kingdom. The Revelator 
elsewhere strikingly bring this thought to our attention: 
the angel calls to him, "Come hither, and I will 
show thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried 
me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, 
and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, 
descending out of heaven from God, having the glory 
of God."— Verses 9-11. 

We are not to think of this holy city as being 
composed of literal stones, coming down through the 
air; we are to remember, on the contrary, that the 
saints of this present time are "living stones," as the 
Apostle Peter explains. (1 Pet. 2:4-7.) This glorious 
city will not be visible to the natural eye— neither 
Christ nor the saints in glory can be seen of men; only 
those "changed" from human to spiritual nature see 
these matters in the full; but the whole world will be 
quickly made aware of the fact that a new government 
has been instituted,— a government of righteousness, 
and with all power, and that thereafter whosoever 
doeth righteousness shall be blessed, and whosoever 
doeth evil shall be punished. 

THE GLORIFIED TEMPLE. 



The third verse of our lesson associates this city 
with the other figure of a symbolic Temple, which the 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., pp. 66-70,318. 

R2832 : page 200 

Lord is now preparing, of which the saints will constitute 

the "living stones" and "pillars;" for it is declared 

that the tabernacle (dwelling) of God shall be 

with men in this city (government or kingdom). God 

will dwell in this glorious city or government— it will 

be his Temple, and the world of mankind will approach 

God in it to receive the divine blessings, as Israel approached 

the typical Tabernacle and the Temple in 

their typical religious services. Thus God, represented 

in his Church (the Christ, Head and body) will dwell 

with men (the world of mankind during the Millennial 

age) and they shall be his people;— all mankind will 

be treated from the standpoint of reconciliation, the 

propitiation price for the sins of the whole world 

(1 John 2:2) having been paid at Calvary, and the 



due time having then come for the manifestation of 
divine favor, all peoples shall be treated as the Lord's 
people; none of them shall be treated as aliens, strangers, 
foreigners from God and his promises and his 
blessings. 

While the Millennial Kingdom will be the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son, it will also be the Kingdom of 
God, because God's dear Son and his joint-heir, the 
Church, will be in absolute accord with the Father, and 
all that shall be done under their control will fully 
and completely represent the divine will respecting 
men. Nevertheless, it will be a separate Kingdom 
from that of the remainder of the universe, as the 
Apostle Paul indicates. (1 Cor. 15:24,25,28.) "He 
must reign until he hath put all enemies under his 
feet.. ..And when all things shall be subdued unto 
him, then shall the Son also be subject to him that did 
put all things under him. ...Then cometh the end, 
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father,"— at the close of the Millennial 
reign. 

Since God is the Author of all the blessings of redemption 
and restitution, and since every good and 
every perfect gift cometh down from our Father in 
heaven, it is with appropriateness that the record declares 

R2833 : page 200 

that "God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes"— from the eyes of mankind. Tho it will be 
Christ and the Church who will be doing it, nevertheless, 
the Heavenly Father will be recognized as the 
first cause, the fountain of every blessing. The wiping 
away of tears implies a gradual work, such as we 
see will be the process of that glorious time. Man 
will not be exempt from every weakness and trial and 
difficulty at the beginning, but if he will conform to 
the laws of the Kingdom, all cause for distress will 
gradually pass away, as restitution blessings will lift 
him out of death into perfect life. "They that hear 
[obey] that prophet [teacher, the Christ, Head and 
body] shall live; but it shall come to pass that whosoever 
will not hear that prophet [not render hearty 
obedience to his requirements] will be cut off from 
amongst the people [in the Second Death]."— 
Acts 3:23. 

Other Scriptures show us that the work of the 
Kingdom will begin with those who remain over at 
the time of its establishment, and that these, under 
condemnation of death, will at once be blessed with 
the knowledge and opportunities provided through the 
ransom, and if they accept these they will immediately 
be released from condemnation, that they may at once 
go on and upward on the way of holiness, toward 
perfection; and subsequently those who "sleep in the 
dust of the earth" shall come forth to more or less of 



shame and lasting contempt, as they begin to realize 
their mental and physical decrepitude, the results of 
their depravity. Nevertheless, these also, under the 
blessings of the Kingdom, may make progress up to 
perfection, losing their sin-blights, and simultaneously 
losing the "shame and contempt,"— whose lasting 
will be only so long as their cause continues. Thus 
these may progress in the way of righteousness, so 
that only those who sin wilfully shall die, and then 
each for his own sins only, and not the father for the 
son's sins, nor the son for the father's sins.— Jer. 31:29,30; 
Dan. 12:2. 

The whole work of the Millennial age is summed 
up in few words, and we are brought to its culmination 
in the declaration, "There shall be no more 
death; neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there 
be any more pain, for the former things are passed 
away." What a glorious sun-burst of blessing is in 
these words! What a grand fulfilment will be there 
of the Apostle's declaration respecting "times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began!" 
This declaration, however, applies to the very end of 
the Millennial age, and not in full to any previous time 
in that age, for other accounts show us unmistakably 
that there will be imperfections and chastisements 
and stripes throughout the age, while mankind is being 
lifted up; or as our Lord expressed it, the raising 
up of mankind throughout the Millennial age, step by 
step, will be a "resurrection by judgment," chastisements, 
disciplines. (John 5:28,29.) And even at the 
close of that age we are shown, in another pen-picture 
of that time, that there will be a severe trial and testing 
to demonstrate to what extent the enforced obedience 
of that age shall have rightly affected the hearts 
of those who experience its blessings, so that their 
love will be for righteousness, and that they will 
hate iniquity. (Rev. 20:7,8.) All who in that final 
test shall manifest that his heart contains anything 
aside from full loyalty to the Lord and the principles 

R2833 : page 201 

of righteousness will have his part in the Second 
Death. 

"BEHOLD, I MAKE ALL THINGS NEW." 



The fifth verse of our lesson comprehensively 
grasps the entire Millennial age; our Lord Jesus, then 
in the throne of earth's dominion, declaring, "Behold, 
I make all things new." This expression does not 
relate merely to rocks and trees, etc., but to the great 
work which our Lord undertook; viz., the regeneration 



of humanity— of so many of Adam's race as 

would, under favorable conditions of knowledge, experience 

and assistance, develop characters in full accord 

with the divine will. The end of the Millennial 

age will see the work completed;— all the wicked destroyed, 

all who will not hear the voice of that prophet, 

teacher, governor, cut off from amongst the people 

in the Second Death, and all the willing and obedient 

made new, brought to the complete perfection contemplated 

in the original divine plan. 

John was to write this matter, because the testimony 
is true, is faithful, as is the one who has promised. 
This asseveration of faithfulness and truthfulness 
implies what we see to be the case; viz., that 
present conditions seem so contrary to all this grand 
restitution outcome that it cannot be fully believed 
and trusted by any except those who have learned to 
walk with the Lord, and in their weakness to lean 
upon his might,— to trust to his power to accomplish 
all the exceeding great and precious things which he 
has promised. To all others these things will appear 
untrue, and God will appear unfaithful, and the matters 
which we are here discussing will seem "idle 
tales," as fables and golden fancies: but to us who 
believe these promises are precious, and he from 
whom we receive them is precious, correspondingly as 
we know him and trust him.— 1 Pet. 2:7. 

The one enthroned (the Christ) declares at the 
conclusion of the Millennial age, "It is done;" my 
great contract is accomplished; "I am the Alpha and 
the Omega [the A and the Z], the beginning and the 
end." It was the Father's good pleasure that the 
Blessed One, the Only Begotten of the Father, should 
accomplish the entire program of redemption and restitution; 
and that incidentally, by his obedience in the 
things which he suffered that he should prove himself 
worthy to be forever the associate and representative 
of the Father, through whom and by whom all things 
should continue, as he was the one through whom all 
things were made that were made. It is this one who, 
during the Millennial age, will extend to all the willing 
and obedient the water of life, everlasting life — 
the privilege of perpetual existence. But they must 
thirst for it, must desire it; and this desire must be 
manifest in obedience to the terms, the laws, upon 
which it will be supplied freely. Our Lord declared 
to Martha, "I am the resurrection and the life," and 
that anyone believing him, trusting him, tho he were 
dead, yet should he live,— attain to perfect life, escaping 
from death conditions, until at the close of the Millennium 
he shall have life in the full, unrestricted 
sense. And he who thus liveth (attains to life) and 
still believeth, trusteth in the Life-giver, and is obedient 
to his directions, shall never die. 

Our Lord adds, "He that overcometh shall inherit 
these things, and I will be to him a God, and he 



shall be to me a son." Those addressed are not the 
Bride class, selected during the Gospel age, but the 
sheep class of Matt. 25,— such of mankind as during 
the Millennial age become the Lord's sheep and obey 
his voice. To these at the end of the Millennial age, 
in harmony with the Father's plan, he says, "Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world." They are 
not invited to inherit the Kingdom prepared for us, in 
joint-heirship with the Lord, the heavenly Kingdom. 
But they shall inherit the earth, the purchased possession 
—they shall come back into all the good estate 
of father Adam, which he lost for himself and his 
children through disobedience, but which Jesus redeemed 
with his own precious blood, and will restore 
at the close of the Millennium to all the children of 
Adam who shall have accepted his gracious favors and 
been regenerated by him, and thus become his sons, 
and he their God— their "father."— Isa. 9:6. 

THE HEAVENLY CITY RESPLENDENT. 



Here our lesson turns to a consideration of the 
city, the glorified Church, the kingdom class, who, 
during the Millennial age, will be "kings and priests 
unto God, and reign upon the earth," "a thousand 
years." (Rev. 5:10; 20:4.) This City class, the 
glorified Church, it is declared will have no need of 
the sun or the moon. Nothing in this statement indicates 
that the world will not have and need both 
sunlight and moonlight during the Millennial age, 
and subsequently, "as long as the sun and moon endure." 
(Psa. 72:5.) And while it will be true that 
the Church, as spirit beings, will not have need of literal 
sunlight and literal moonlight, nevertheless, this is 
not the thought. The sun and the moon here are symbolical, 
as in Chapter 12:1; the sun signifies the 
light of this Gospel age; the moon signifies the typically 
reflected light of the Gospel in the Law and the 
prophets of the previous dispensation. The glorified 
Church will have no need of the light which in the 
present time she so much enjoys through the Word 
and spirit, and the Law and the prophets. She will 
have, instead of these, a much more excellent glory, 

R2833 : page 202 

to which the Apostle refers when he says, "Now 
[with all the light, privileges and opportunities which 
we enjoy, both as respects the representations of God 
through the Law and the prophets, and through the 
instructions and leadings of the spirit in the present] 
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; 
now we know in part; then we shall know even as we 



are known. "— 1 Cor. 13:12. 

The Church, the Temple of God, will be so filled 
with all the fulness of God, when made like unto the 
glorious Lord, that nothing could add to their blessing 
of knowledge and divine favor;— will be so filled with 
the glory of God that from her, as from the Sun of 
Righteousness, shall proceed the light of the glory of 
God, which shall heal and bless the world during the 
Millennial age. This is the Sun of Righteousness to 
which our Lord referred in Matt. 13:43, "Then shall 

R2834 : page 202 

the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father"— our Lord Jesus, the Head of the 
Church, of course being included. The same Sun of 
Righteousness is mentioned by the Prophet, saying, 
"The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in 
his beams." (Mai. 4:2.) Nevertheless, while so 
filled with the Lord's glory we are not to lose sight of 
the fact which the Apostle impresses upon us, saying 
that Christ is the Head of the Church, even as the 
Father is the Head of Christ Jesus. Hence the Lord 
Almighty and the Lamb will always be an inner 
Temple in this great Temple, which God has provided 
for the world's blessing during restitution times.— 
Verse 22. 

When this Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth, 
its blessings of healing, refreshment and life, mental, 
moral and physical, upon the world of mankind, the 
nations shall walk in the light of it. (The words 
"of them that are saved" are not in old MSS. Indeed, 
it is because they are not saved that they need 
this special light during the Millennial age, in order 
to their enlightenment, their salvation, their restitution.) 
"And the kings of the earth do bring their 
glory into it." (The words, "and honor" are not 
found in old MSS.) The expressions "nations" and 
"kings" are not to be understood as signifying that 
the world of mankind during the Millennial age will 
be divided into nationalities and kingdoms as at present: 
the word "nations" here signifies peoples, and is 
intended to show that all peoples, and not merely the 
people of Israel, will be thus favored under God's 
Kingdom. The word "kings" represents those princes 
or chief ones of the earth who, during the Millennial 
age, will be the chief representatives of the heavenly, 
spiritual, invisible Kingdom of Christ. These princes, 
as we have already seen, will be Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and all the faithful prophets of the previous 
dispensation, who, loving God before the call to the 
Kingdom and to the Bride class, cannot be of it, but 
because of their faithfulness will be the princes whom 
the Lord will establish in all the earth— first making 
them perfect individuals, and qualifying them for 
their office, as a reward for their faithfulness to God 



in the dark times in which they lived— their manifestation 
of love for righteousness and trust in the Omnipotent 
One. 

The bringing of their glory into the city, the 
Kingdom, signifies their acknowledgment of this 
heavenly Kingdom, their rendering of tribute of praise, 
thanks, worship and obedience to it as God's agency. 
And this rendering of glory to the Kingdom will continue 
throughout the entire Millennial age, as the 
princes throughout the earth will make known to the 
people that not in their own names or authority do they 
rule and execute judgment and establish righteousness, 
but in the name and as the ministers and representatives 
of the glorified Christ. The result will be 
that all the people will ascribe honor and praise and 
majesty and glory to the Lord's Anointed, through 
whom their redemption and restitution was and is being 
accomplished; and this is indicated in verse 26. 

Then, in consideration of the fact that this book 
of symbols, while relating to the future, is addressed 
to God's consecrated elect Church in the present time, 
and in view of the fact that this message would be 
communicated to and more or less understood by those 
who would seek to make their calling and election 
sure to a part in the glorious city, the 27th verse is 
added, declaring that "In nowise shall there enter into 
it anything common, or he that doeth abomination 
and falsehood— but only they who are written in the 
Lamb's Book of Life." The Lamb's Book of Life we 
must understand to include those, and only those, who 
attain to position of joint-heirship with Christ, whose 
names are written in heaven during this age, and who are 
faithful to their covenant. What a glorious incentive 
we have here to faithfulness! What a warning against 
the slightest sympathy with anything unclean, untrue, 
or in anywise contrary to the divine standard of holiness! 
If we appreciate the glorious things of the divine 
provision for the Church and for the world, these 
promises and offers will have their influence upon us, 
and under their influence we are expected to keep 
our garments unspotted from the world; to be without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing; to hate every 
contamination of the flesh upon our robe of righteousness; 
and to seek immediately in prayer for the removal 
of any spot or wrinkle or any such thing from 
our wedding garment,— that thus we may abide in 
the Lord's love, and in the due time be "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." 



R2834 : page 203 

GOD THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 
-GEN. 1:26; 2:3. -JULY 1 .- 



"In the beginning God created the 
heavens and the earth."— Gen. 1:1. 

GENESIS, as a word, signifies creation, beginning, 
—the act, process or mode of producing or originating. 
The Bible points out Jehovah God as the 
great first cause of all things. It addresses its counsels 
and promises only to those who recognize their 
Creator with the eyes of their understanding, and declares 
that those who do not recognize this great first 
cause, God, are so degraded, have their intellects so 
perverted, that they are non compos mentis— fools. 
(Psa. 14:1.) It further declares that God will not in 
the present age deal with any who are so depraved; 
but that "He that cometh unto God [acceptably] must 
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them 
that diligently seek him."— Heb. 11:6. 

Amongst those who acknowledge a Creator there 
has come to be a wide difference of opinion respecting 
his Word and his work. Some accept the Bible testimony 
as a divine revelation, relying upon it accordingly. 
Others, with a larger amount of self-confidence, 
deny that the Bible is God-inspired, go to the rocks 
and study them,— forming their conclusions in harmony 
with their findings. Both acknowledge God and 
that his power and wisdom are manifest in his creation, 
yet the latter, leaning more and more to their own understanding 
(Prov. 3:5), tend to question the personality 
of God, and seek, if possible, to prove that there 
are what they term "Laws of Nature" in operation 
now which have been in operation from time immemorial, 
and they query whether or not these laws must 
of necessity have had an author. They see life in its 
various manifestations, and admit intelligence, but 
claim that this intelligence was attained through a 
process of evolution,— attained without a Creator, as 
evolutions from inert matter. In other words, they 
have been seeking for some time to see whether or not 
in their theory a God is absolutely necessary, with a 
view to dropping him entirely from their theories, if 
possible. 

However, the learned, worldly-wise, do not generally 
reach that "fool" condition; for the majority 
admitting that while they could reason out all manner 
of changes as respects conditions, admit that they cannot 
produce a satisfactory theory of the origin of matter, 
nor of the origin of the first spark of life, nor of 
the origin of the first gleam of intelligence. Hence 
scientists as a class still admit that there must be some 
kind of a God, but the Scriptures assure us that, looking 
in the wrong direction, they fail to see the real 
God, fail to discern his real character and plan. "The 
world by wisdom knows not God."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

While the leaders amongst natural men are searching 
for God and for truth in the rocks and in the 



sands, the children of God, begotten by his spirit, are 

seeking the wisdom that cometh from above, and are 

finding and knowing him whom to know is life eternal. 

Yea, and more than this, the "spirit of a sound mind" 

which they receive, and the guidance of the holy 

spirit, enable them to see "the deep things of God," 

in those things which were written aforetime for their 

admonition— in the holy writings which by divine arrangement 

have been gathered and cemented together, 

and which are known to us as the Bible— the Book of 

all books. In thus doubting their own wisdom and the 

ability of themselves and others to master the deep 

subject of creation and the divine will and plan associated 

with it, these whom the world counts unwise 

are really wise, in that they look to the Lord for their 

instruction respecting these things; they manifest a 

faith which is pleasing to him, and put themselves into 

a position of heart in which they may be "all taught 

of God," and thus know things which the natural man 

cannot know— thus seeing and appreciating things 

which "eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard, 

neither hath entered into the hearts of [natural] men, 

...but which God hath revealed unto us by 

his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 

deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err, 

And scan his work in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 

And he will make it plain." 

R2835 : page 203 

We are not meaning to say that God has given 
great revelations respecting the earth and its creation; 
yet while admitting that the things that are revealed 
to God's people by his spirit pertain chiefly to the 
things that are to come, we hold, nevertheless, that 
in respect to the things that are past, the creation, 
etc., the Word of God is sufficient, that the man of 
God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

THE ADVERSARY'S OPPORTUNITY. 



The opportunities afforded by this lesson in various 
Sunday Schools and Bible classes of the civilized 
world are sure to be taken advantage of by many 
ministers, superintendents and teachers to introduce 
the unscriptural views which they have for some time 
past been imbibing from various quarters, especially 
from the colleges and seminaries of Christendom, respecting 
what is known as the Evolution Theory of 
Creation. It is the taking theory— the theory which 



commends itself to the natural mind— the theory which 
will seem to best fit all the facts of history in the judgment 
of those who look at the question from the outside, 

R2835 : page 204 

not from the inside;— from the natural standpoint 
and not from the standpoint of the spiritual new creature, 
instructed by the inner light of the "golden candlestick." 
However, we are to remember that the light 
which the priests enjoyed in the "holy places made 
with hands" represented the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit; which is granted during this Gospel age, only 
to the consecrated "royal priesthood." And as this 
light in the "Holy," could not be seen by those outside, 
we must not be surprised that the "natural man 
receiveth not the things [the light, the instruction] 
of the spirit of God, neither can he know them, for 
they are spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

For centuries natural men have looked to the 
teachings of the Church, the Bible, for instruction; 
because in the "dark" time practically no other course 
of information was open to them. But now, in the dawn 
of the "morning," when light is becoming more general 
on every subject, the natural man is not only disposed 
to repudiate many of the teachings of priestcraft 
and superstition which he had received as truths, but 
additionally he is disposed to doubt that there is, and 
always has been, a truth-centre to Christianity;— 
around which, we admit, there were heavy incrustations 
of error and darkness which have to a very large 
degree misrepresented the truth to the world in general. 

We are now come to the time when the battle of 
books which has waged during the past half century 
amongst professors and school-men is reaching the 
masses of the people. The leaven of doubt as respects 
the whole Bible, and Genesis in particular, is gradually 
permeating the entire mass of Christendom; and 
its progress will be increasingly rapid because it is already 
accepted by the learned; and the ignorant who 
are now being approached will feel that they can safely 
follow, blindly, these blind guides who are preaching 
"another Gospel," of which the atoning sacrifice of 
Christ is not the centre. 

WHAT SELF-STYLED "BIBLE EVOLUTIONISTS" CLAIM. 



We well know that many Christian people who 
have adopted the Evolution Theory will dispute the 
foregoing statement, because of the source from which 
they have accepted it, and because of the insidious 
form in which they received it, and because they are 
not thoroughly furnished in a knowledge of the Scriptures, 
and because they have not reasoned the matter 



out— have not had their "senses exercised by reason of 

use" on this subject. (Heb. 5:14.) Their argument 

is: "We do not dispute the Scriptures, nor is it necessary 

so to do, in accepting the Evolution Theory. If 

asked to explain their position they would say: We 

still believe in God, a personal intelligent God, and 

have no sympathy with those who attempt to claim or 

to prove that life and intelligence could come spontaneously 

and without a Creator's power; we merely 

hold that our God, as Creator, produced the world gradually, 

and not in six twenty-four-hour days; we claim 

also that the creation of the fish, birds, beasts and man 

were gradual evolutions, but nevertheless under divine 

supervision, and during long periods. We claim that 

the monkey and the ape were not direct creations, but 

sharers in this evolution; and that in due time the 

evolutionary process which God started reached the 

point where a new and higher type of creature was 

evolved from the ape, a type having some degree of 

moral sense, that was man. We Bible-Evolutionists 

claim, that in this first gleam of moral sense was man's 

image or likeness to his Creator; and that during the 

past six thousand years this moral sense has been 

growing, expanding, developing, until by the grace of 

God the race has reached its present high altitudes of 

intelligence,— moral, spiritual, intellectual. 

"We claim further that under divine providence 
the reasonable thing to expect is that this evolutionary 
process will continue throughout ages to come, perhaps 
forever, etc. We do not deny the Bible nor the Lord 
nor the apostles, altho we certainly do give less weight 
to their teachings than we formerly did;— being now 
inclined to believe that Jesus and the disciples either 
withheld some of the truth in their teaching, or else that 
they shared with mankind in general the lower planes 
of thought and less intelligence of their day; that they 
are to be respected for their good intentions and valuable 
service, but not to be regarded as competent to teach 
us who live under the more favored circumstances and 
enlightenment of this twentieth century civilization, 
taught by such lights as Prof. Briggs, Mrs. Eddy, 
Prof. Haupt, Darwin, Huxley, Tyndale, Spencer, et al." 

In the foregoing we have given what we believe 
to be as fair a statement as could be made of the views 
of the great mass of intelligent people, especially of 
the educated class. And what does it mean? To us 
it means infidelity— a total denial of the divine Word 
and plan of God. And we will show why. 

"IF THEY SPEAK NOT ACCORDING TO THIS WORD IT IS 
BECAUSE THERE IS NO LIGHT IN THEM." 



If the above theory be true, the Bible theory must 
be false; but if the Bible be true, the above theory 



must be false. We hold that the Scripture teaching 
as a whole is in violent conflict with the foregoing in 
nearly every point. The Genesis account of man's 
creation, in the image and likeness of God, is quite 
distinctly different from its account of the creation of 
the lower animals, and must necessarily mean something 
much higher than evolutionists admit;— it declares 
a direct creation. The words "image" and "likeness" 

R2835 : page 205 

signify a great deal more than a mere first glimmer 

of moral sense. To us these words signify a likeness 

of mental conception, a harmony of sentiment— 

that man was, in the flesh, a copy of his Creator, who 

is a spirit— that he was not a brute with a mere glimmer 

of intelligence. Nor could we imagine how such 

a being but one remove from the brute could be justly 

placed on trial for life, eternal life, so that by one act 

of disobedience he could be justly sentenced to death; 

nor could we see how such a being could with any 

propriety be said to fall, without losing the little spark 

of intelligence possessed, and becoming again a mere 

brute. The fact that the fallen man was possessed of 

such character and qualities as possessed by various of 

the patriarchs before as well as after the flood, as described 

in this very book of Genesis, proves conclusively 

either that the monkeyman and his posterity 

fell upward at a very rapid rate indeed, and not in any 

sense of the word downward and into sin and death, 

or else it disproves totally the Evolution Theory, on 

this subject. 

On the contrary, all the Scriptures declare that man is 
fallen; that he has forfeited his Creator's favor and 
blessing, and the original grant of life everlasting; and 
teach us that this "condemnation" upon the first man 
and his posterity has been inflicted ever since; and that 
the "wrath of God" as manifested in the sentence of 
death has been upon the race as a "curse;" and that 
the only means of removing this "curse" or sentence, 
and recovering the lost man to the original position of 
harmony with God and to the right to eternal life, was 
through the redemption in Christ Jesus. The message 
of Jesus and the apostles was along this line; viz., that 
the promise of God that the race should be succored 
from its fallen condition by a Savior and a great one, 
able to save unto the uttermost— able to recover out 
of the horrible pit and out of the miry clay of sin and 
death, and that he made this recovery possible by 
giving the ransom price, his own sacrifice, and that as 
a result of the sacrifice he was to be the great King 
who, during a future age, the Millennium, would exercise 
divine power and authority, binding Satan and 
all the evil influences at present operating upon mankind 
and holding it in subjection to the curse of sin 
and death, would be removed, hindered, while the 



great King Immanuel should lift up and bless the race 
under restitution processes, bringing all the then willing 
back to the Paradise lost, and to all the favors that 
were lost,— even fellowship with God, the divine likeness 
and the everlasting life. 

These two theories are so antagonistic that there 
cannot possibly be any sympathy or cooperation between 
them. If one is true the other is false, and for 
our part we say, Let God be true, tho it prove every 
professed scientist a liar! (Rom. 3:4.) This Evolution 
Theory of science comes properly under the criticism 
of the Apostle when he speaks of "science falsely 
so-called," which contradicts the divine Word, and sets 

R2836 : page 205 

it at naught, preferring the traditions of men and the 
light of human intelligence rather than the light of 
divine revelation. Yet, as above stated, we must not be 
surprised at this great trial and testing of faith, which is 
to prove all them that dwell upon the face of the whole 
earth. (Rev. 3:10.) We must not be surprised at the 
stumbling of those who have failed to use the opportunity 
granted, of coming into a condition of heart-consecration 
to the Lord, and begetting of his spirit, 
and entrance into the "holy place,"— into the light of 
the golden candlestick: we must not be surprised if 
these now reject and repudiate the true light which 
they see not. Indeed, to our understanding we are in 
the very testing time which is to prove the saints, and 
ultimately to reprove the world and bring to naught 
its wisdom. 

Let us not be misunderstood: We agree that the 
Scriptures do not teach that the earth and all its creatures 
were created in six twenty-four hour days. There 
is nothing said in Genesis respecting the length of 
these periods called "days," but we have clearly set before 
us the fact that the term "day" is properly applied 
in Scripture to various periods. (Luke 1:80; John 8:56; 
Phil. 2:16.) Our Golden Text, rightly understood, 
indicates that the work of the six days mentioned in 
Genesis was a work of ordering and filling the earth, 
rather than a work of creating; for it plainly declares 
that the creation of the earth was "in the beginning"— 
that it "was" before the matters and affairs described 
subsequently, but in a chaotic condition. In harmony 
with this again is the statement, "Now the earth was 
without form and void." (Verse 2.) This was before 
the six creative days began, whatever their length; 
they merely set the earth in order and supplied it with 
living creatures. 

Neither do we insist that anything in the narrative 
necessarily involves the thought that the creation 
of the lower animals, fish, fowl and beasts, was in the 
same manner as the creation of man; rather, since 
their creation is merely mentioned in a general way, 



the inference might be drawn that God used certain 
(possibly evolutionary) processes in their development 
up to the point where they reached fixity of class, nature, 
genera. But we do insist that the Scriptures 
specifically mention man as a direct creation of God, 
and not as an evolution. We insist that this particularity 
of statement respecting man's creation is not 
without significance, and that the special preparation 
for his reception in a Paradise of God was in full accord 
with his high rank as an earthly human son of 

R2836 : page 206 

the Highest, an image and likeness of his heavenly 
Creator. We do insist that the story of the fall as 
told in Genesis and throughout the prophets and 
psalms, and as particularly enunciated in the New 
Testament, must be held to implicitly by those who 
hold to the Word of God at all. We must insist that 
unless there was a fall, Christ died in vain, for if the 
Evolution Theory be true then there were no sinners 
to be redeemed and restored.— Acts 3:19-23. 

We stand, on the contrary, with those who have, 
by the grace of God, attained a knowledge of God's 
Word, and who see in it Christ the Savior of mankind, 
and his cross the centre, the fulcrum upon which the 
entire work of salvation moves, by which alone the 
race can be lifted out of its present degraded condition, 
and brought back through divine processes of redemption 
and restitution to the glorious condition of God-likeness 
in a new Paradise of God, a new heavens and 
a new earth, from which sin shall eventually be blotted 
out, and in which righteousness shall prevail. 
These Scriptural presentations are the best possible 
answer to the doubts and queries of the scientists. 
But these clear views of the divine plan can be had 
only by those whose eyes of understanding have been 
opened, and into whose hearts the light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God shining in the face of Jesus 
Christ our Lord has shined. As respects all others, 
moral and immoral, good and bad, we must surely expect 
that they will fall away in this time of sifting. 
"Who shall be able to stand?" Only those who have 
availed themselves of the mercy of God and who have 
come into covenant relationship with him;— and they 
only as they maintain the spirit of their consecration, 
and grow in grace, knowledge and love toward God 
and men. 

"MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM." 



Our lesson specially deals with the creation of 
man. Verse 26 tells us of the purpose of God in advance, 
and we would render it, "Let us make mankind 



in our image, and after our likeness let them have 
dominion over the fish of the sea," etc., making the 
word "image" to apply to the character-likeness of 
God, in which man was created, and the word "likeness" 
to refer to the dominion;— that mankind should 
have dominion over the creatures of earth, even as 
God has dominion over all things. In a word, man 
was intended to be the king of the earth, the lord of 
the earth; and it was to this end that he was crowned 
with the glory and honor and majesty of the divine 
image,— in the moral and intellectual features of his 
being, a flesh image of his invisible spirit Creator. It 
is to this high exaltation of man, as God's representative 
in the earth, that the Prophet speaks, saying, 
"What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the 
son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him 
a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with 
glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of 
thy hands." (Psa. 8:4-8.) So far from being only a 
little removed above the beast, this scripture declares 
that man was created in the very highest position of 
earthly creatures, but a little removed in intelligence, 
etc., from the angelic hosts. What we shall subsequently 
see respecting the fall of man from this grand 
position and the necessity of his redemption before he 
could be restored to it, is in perfect accord with the 
declarations respecting the glory and honor of the 
image in which he was created. 

Verse 27 declares that that which God purposed 
was accomplished, and that this glory and honor in its 
full, complete sense, was not represented by one of the 
sexes alone, but by them both unitedly. This holy, 
happy pair had the blessing, the favor of God, and, 
contrary to the views of many, their fruitfulness was 
not the result of sin and the fall, but, as here distinctly 
declared, was in the intention of the Almighty respecting 
them before their disobedience and condemnation 
to death. The fact that God said to them, "Be fruitful 
and multiply, and fill the earth," contradicts the 
unscriptural thought that the propagation of children 
was in any sense or degree a transgression, or the transgression 
on account of which the "curse" came upon 
our first parents, and upon all through them. The 
Lord's people are not to be wise above what is written, 
nor to permit idle speculations to twist and warp their 
minds; but, on the contrary, are to rightly divide the 
word of truth. 

The word "replenish" in our common version, is 
manifestly incorrect, as the word implies that the earth 
had once been filled, and was now, for some reason, 
empty and to be replenished or refilled. A more correct 
rendering would be, "Fill the earth." It is in 
harmony with this original instruction, we understand, 
that when the earth has been filled with a population, 
the procreative powers will be eliminated, and eventually 
the race be composed of perfect units, such as 



Adam was originally, before being divided into two 
persons for the purpose of companionship, procreation, 
and the preservation of the race as one, and under one 
headship. As we have already shown, it is our thought 
that in that perfecting or unifying process every male 
being will take on the elements and qualities of the 
mind and of the heart now peculiarly emphasized in 
the female; and every female will take on those elements 
of mind and heart now peculiarly manifest in 
the male; and yet we should here guard ourselves lest 
we should think of either the coarseness or the frailties 
of the fallen race (male and female) being in any 

R2836 : page 207 

sense of the word a part or feature of the perfect 
earthly creatures of the future. We should also bear 
in mind that the Church, now being selected from the 
world, will have no part in this restitution process, 
but will become, as the Scriptures declare, members 
of a new creation, a new order of beings— spiritual— 
not only superhuman, but also "far above angels, 
principalities and powers." 

The vegetarian idea respecting what would constitute 
the proper food for the perfect man is clearly 
set forth in verse 29, the Lord declaring that he had 
given his creatures the herbage and fruitage of the 
earth for their meat— their food. It was not until 
after the flood, and the peculiar changes of conditions 
resulting therefrom (which we cannot here take time 
and space to discuss) that the Lord specially sanctioned 
the eating of animal food. (Gen. 9:1-4.) We understand 
the reason to have been that the conditions 
were so changed as not only to shorten human longevity 
but to greatly impair human strength, making 
necessary the nerve strength obtainable from animal 
food. Since animal food was thus sanctioned by the 
Lord it behooves the Lord's people not to become erratic 
and dictatorial upon this question of vegetarianism, 
nor to condemn those who find, or think they find, that 
animal food is necessary to the maintenance of their 
physical strength: on the other hand, let them remember 
that whatever was originally intended, and 
whatever may be the order of things in the Millennial 
age, there is no Scriptural sanction for condemning 
the eating of animal food in the present time. Whoever, 
therefore, advocates it, let him take heed that 
he does not make another gospel of it, and permit time 
and thought and voice and energy to be thus estranged 
from the service of the gospel truths committed to us 

R2837 : page 207 

by our Lord; let such, on the contrary, remember that 
our Lord ate meat and fish, both before and after his 
crucifixion, and that the apostles ate meat, and that 



in no sense of the word was the eating of it condemned 
or evil spoken of; and that none of the Lord's people 
today have any higher authorities or examples than 
these. And let those who eat meat not mock those 
who eat "vegetable only," believing this course to be 
more healthful for them. 

The fact that for beast and for fowl the Lord 
originally provided the same vegetarian diet, is in perfect 
accord with some of the prophetic statements which 
seem to imply that under the new conditions of the 
Kingdom even the lower animals will return to vegetable 
diet, when "The lion shall eat grass like the ox," 
and when "Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all God's 
holy mountain [kingdom]." (Isa. 11:6,7; 65:25.) 
Thus we learn that the animals which at present are 
carnivorous (flesh-eaters) are not now in their original 
condition, but have been sharers with mankind in the 
results of the catastrophe which came upon our earth in 
the flood; likewise that they will be sharers with man, 
their king, in the great uplift which will come to him 
and to all nature when God's Kingdom, in the hands 
of the Sons of God, shall be established, and shall 
bless the groaning creation.— Rom. 8:19-22. 

All that God did was in full accord with what he 
had purposed, and in his sight was very good; but we 
cannot think that man and the general conditions of 
the world today are in God's sight "very good," but, 
according to his own declaration, very bad— sin has 
marred all; and, as the Apostle expresses it, nothing is 
very good in God's sight now. "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." This is another testimony, therefore, 
to the effect that the fall of man was decidedly 
downward, and that the Evolution Theory of a gradual 
and persistent rise is a fallacy.* 

The creation of man was just in the close of the sixth 
day or epoch. It was the crowning feature of creation, 
and finished it. Having finished his creative work 
God blessed the seventh day (or epoch) and set it 
apart, and rested therein from any further creative 
work— foreknowing, however, that during this seventh 
day, which has lasted from then until now (and will 
last yet another thousand years), sin would enter 
through disobedience, and his sentence of death be 
executed against Adam and his race, and the whole 
creation be caused to groan; knowing also that while 
he would thenceforth withhold his creative power, he 
would provide for the necessities of the fallen race, in 
the person of Jesus, "a Savior and a great one," who, 
by giving the ransom-price for man's sin, would become 
his Redeemer, his Lord, and thus obtain the 
right and the power to rescue him from death, and to 
lift up all the willing and obedient by restitution processes 
to all that was lost in Eden. 

This seventh day, in which God has rested, to 
the intent that Christ may accomplish the great work 
of redemption, reconciliation and restitution has already 



lasted six thousand years, and altho this time 
has been an evil time under the reign of sin and death, 
the Redeemer is, according to the divine program, 
shortly to take unto himself his great power and reign 
for a thousand years, until he shall complete the work 
of restitution of the willing and obedient, and finally 
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 
that God may be the all-in-all throughout eternity. +— 
Heb. 4:4-10. 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. -JUNE 30. 



Golden Text— "God hath both raised up the Lord, 
and will also raise up us by his own power."— 
1 Cor. 6:14. 



*See The Bible versus the Evolution Theory, price 5c. Sample 
copy free on application at this office. 

+Further reading matter upon the subject of the Sabbath 
free to the interested. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 