Be Joyful Workers
1 Today we have every reason to be joyful workers. Our God Jehovah is a “happy God,” and Jesus, his co-worker, is joyful, as he is called “the happy and only Potentate.” (1 Tim. 1:11; 6:14, 15) If we are following in the footsteps of Jesus as his disciples, then we share his joy. Appropriately the apostle Paul wrote: “Always rejoice in the Lord. Once more I will say, Rejoice!”—Phil. 4:4.
FIND JOY IN WITNESSING
2 In order to carry out Jesus’ command at Acts 1:8 to be witnesses, we continue to show love to people. Jesus pointed out the need for us to love Jehovah foremost, but secondly, to love also our neighbor.—Matt. 22:37-39.
3 If we truly love our neighbors and find joy in assisting them, this joy will show in our speech. Our presentation of the truth will not be cut-and-dried, so to speak, reflecting an attitude of ‘Here I am because I have to be here, not because I want to be here.’ Nor will our presentation be repeated word for word from memory without any regard for the intelligence, feelings and sensibilities of the householder. Rather, we should show genuine interest in and love for those to whom we speak, truly seeking to help them to learn the truth of God’s Word. Such unselfish interest in others reflected in our presentation of Bible truths will assist us to gain much joy from witnessing about the Kingdom good news.
FIND JOY IN DISCIPLE-MAKING
4 We know that Jehovah and the angels rejoice when a disciple is made. We, too, will find joy in disciple-making if we reflect Jehovah’s love and concern for people. We must be sincerely concerned about potential disciples, not just as “studies” to be reported, but as persons. Truly we will find that joy in conducting studies and making disciples results more from a genuine love of people than from our attention to certain methods or techniques. People usually respond to a genuine expression of love and interest in them.
5 Jesus set us a fine example. He became the friend of those whom he taught. (John 15:11-15) We, too, can and should endeavor to become the friends of those whom we teach at home Bible studies. With this objective in view our studies should not be cold, systematic reviews or discussions. Rather, they should be warm, helpful, with good teaching and with the emphasis on developing a good relationship with Jehovah. We should seek always to help those with whom we study, not being satisfied with teaching Bible principles and commands, but also showing how to apply these principles in life and how to carry out God’s righteous commands. Our discussions should reflect a genuine personal interest in the student as a potential disciple and therefore a potential brother or sister in the faith.
6 Truly there is much joy derived from seeing a disciple make progress to the point of dedication and baptism. Paul experienced such joy and he felt a special attachment to those whom he assisted. (1 Thess. 2:17-20) Even after baptism many still need help. Certainly we derive joy from helping someone become firmly rooted and solid in the faith. (Eph. 3:17-19) Show personal interest in newly baptized disciples. Why not continue assisting them until they have studied at least two books, in order to help them to become solid in the faith?
7 Certainly our love for Jehovah and for our neighbor will aid us to get the right attitude about helping others. Love and joy are closely connected and are two fruits of God’s holy spirit. (Gal. 5:22) Continue to express your love and interest in people as you carry on your witnessing, teaching and disciple-making activity, and surely you will have much joy as a blessing from our happy and joyful God, Jehovah.

