Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
A landmark month of activity! That is how we will no doubt look back upon November in the days ahead. Each one of us will find the activities of this month both stimulating and rewarding.
Many of us will be busy contacting our personal doctor and lawyer and other acquaintances in the medical field with the new Blood booklet. Each congregation will be distributing the Blood booklet to those of the medical and legal fields in its territory. What a telling effect this campaign is bound to have, and how pleased we are to have a share in it!
Also during this busy month of November most congregation elders in the United States will have opportunity to attend the newly revised Kingdom Ministry School course. Most of these classes will be held between October 31 and November 20; in circuits where assemblies are being held or where there are more elders than can be accommodated during that period, classes may extend an additional three weeks, to December 11.
Circuit and district overseers were scheduled to complete the new two-day Kingdom Ministry School course the week of October 4-8. Then the next week, in two-day classes, brothers attended who will be conducting Kingdom Ministry School classes during the period from October 31 to December 11. A number of brothers from Bethel, together with Kingdom Ministry School instructors, served as teachers for the October 4-8 and 11-15 classes. Among the more than 50,000 scheduled to take the course are elders who are also members of the Bethel family. As Paul encouraged, we are being “fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.”—1 Cor. 1:10.
You will be happy to know that provision has been made to have each body of elders review on a service meeting some of the benefits that the Kingdom Ministry School course will bring to the entire congregation. On returning from the Kingdom Ministry School, elders are encouraged to have in mind increased field service and giving greater attention to working with publishers and pioneers so as to share the benefits of their training and experience. We are confident that each one of you will respond warmly to this personal assistance offered by the elders.
Be assured of our continuing prayers in behalf of all of you, as you “behave in a manner worthy of the good news about the Christ . . . standing firm in one spirit, with one soul striving side by side for the faith of the good news.”—Phil. 1:27.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

