Presenting the Good News—By Focusing on the Bible
1 How is the response to the good news in your area? If you are not seeing the positive response you believe there could be in the territory, could it be that there is a need to focus greater attention on the Bible, using it more in the field service? Paul’s success as a missionary was a result of his focusing attention on God’s Word and reasoning with people on the Scriptures. (Acts 17:1-4) By following Paul’s example in our field service today, we can experience the joy of aiding more to become believers.
2 Our activity in field service is vital if we are going to help others learn the truth. Never should we adopt the attitude that ‘Jehovah is looking after the preaching of the good news, so his sheep will be found regardless of whether I prepare well and share in the field service or not.’ That sentiment is not at all in harmony with the Scriptures, for at Romans 10:14 the question is pointedly asked, “How, in turn, will they hear without someone to preach?” To use the Bible effectively requires preparation.
3 Our current “Topic for Conversation” lends itself to conversational use of the Bible. For example, we might say: “Hello. We’re making brief calls today because of our interest in the neighborhood. Don’t you agree that where persons with different backgrounds are able to live together in unity, life is more enjoyable for them? [Allow response.] Too, if people of all nations could live together in unity, would it not make your life more secure? [Allow response.] What would this require on our part as individuals? Notice the statement at Acts 10:34, 35. [Read scripture.] Since God is not partial, his Word the Bible offers the same hope to people of all kinds, and that hope includes what mankind most needs—leadership that will unify all men.”
4 At this point we might paraphrase Revelation 7:9, 10, drawing attention to the fact that a great crowd of persons out of all nations is shown before God’s “throne,” acknowledging his rulership over them. We could then open to the book Life Does Have a Purpose, pages 44, 45, pointing out the subheading “God’s Rulership the Only Satisfactory One” and the illustration depicting God’s knowledge of our traits and individual needs. Additional points from these two pages can be used if the householder shows interest in the conversation. A similar approach, adjusting the conclusion to include points from the World Government book (possibly pages 160 and 175), would be very appropriate to our offer for December.
5 If you would like help in your use of the Bible in field service, why not approach your book study conductor or another elder and ask him to accompany you? One of the elders’ responsibilities is to train others in the field and to set the example themselves in the Kingdom proclamation. Christ Jesus provided the model as recorded at Matthew 11:1: “Now when Jesus had finished giving instructions to his twelve disciples, he set out from there to teach and preach in their cities.”
6 The extra effort required to prepare for and improve in our use of the Bible in the field will be richly rewarded. We can be certain that as we focus attention on God’s Word, his spirit will give our message more impact to reach the hearts of meek ones and set them to searching the Scriptures.—Ps. 119:130.

