Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 6
15 min: Song 58. Lively discussion of Branch Letter and local announcements.
15 min: “Be Joyful Workers.” Field overseer and two other brothers (not necessarily elders) informally discuss the article together, applying to local needs and circumstances.
30 min: Finding Joy in God’s Service as Paul Did. Discuss with audience the following:
(1) Joy in Jehovah’s service desired by all Christians.
Joy defined: Expectation of good; state of happiness; exultation; gladness.
Jehovah desires his servants to enjoy their works. (Eccl. 5:19)
(2) Joy in service possible in spite of problems or hardships.
Fine example in Paul. Appointed as apostle to nations. (Acts 9:15)
What are some hardships he faced in service? (2 Cor. 11:23-28)
Yet how did Paul feel about association with brothers so that he was willing to travel to distant lands to be with them? (Rom. 1:10-12; Philem. 7)
What view did Paul take of assisting and counseling his brothers? (2 Cor. 4:1, 15, 17; Phil. 3:1)
How did Paul evaluate joy in God’s service with material interests? (Phil. 3:7, 8)
On what did Paul keep his spiritual eyes in order to maintain his joy in service? (2 Cor. 4:18)
What are some hardships we may face today in God’s service?
(Consider local field problems or personal problems some may face.)
(3) What will aid us to find joy in God’s service despite hardships? (Consider following Scriptural points.)
Since joy is a fruit of God’s spirit, how can we get it? (Gal. 5:22; Luke 11:13)
How does doing things for other people help us to find joy today? (Acts 20:35)
When undergoing persecution, what attitude will enable us to have joy? (Matt. 5:11, 12)
What will help us to continue to have joy in God’s service in future days? (Rom. 12:12; 14:17; Heb. 12:2)
(4) Let us continue to have joy in God’s service, thus imitating Paul’s fine example, appreciating that our faithful service brings joy to Jehovah. (Prov. 27:11)
Song 101 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 13
20 min: Song 23. Read and comment on “Letters of Appreciation.” Make any local announcements and give accounts report. Audience discussion of Question Box.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Focusing on the Bible.” Question-and-answer coverage of article. Brother caring for this part should have realistic demonstration prepared, using an elder or a qualified publisher to show how current Topic for Conversation can effectively be used in speaking from the Bible.
20 min: Interview publishers who have enjoyed interesting or encouraging experiences in talking to their personal doctor, lawyer and nurses with the Blood booklet. These should be prepared beforehand. (If experiences are lacking, elders can use this time to cover local needs of congregation.) Song 24 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 20
15 min: Song 5. Announcements and comments on scripture at Titus 3:1-3, 8, emphasizing the need to maintain “fine works,” which benefit others.
25 min: “Witness to Someone Each Day.” Animated talk on article. Include two or three local experiences (prepared beforehand). Invite audience to share additional experiences as time permits.
20 min: Report by one who coordinated Blood booklet campaign. He will deliver report outlining what has been accomplished, including any interesting comments or experiences resulting from the campaign and anything remaining to be done. If desired, this may be handled as a panel report by elder who coordinated campaign. Song 107 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING NOVEMBER 27
15 min: Song 32. Local announcements. “Help ‘These Little Ones.’” To be handled as a talk, developing what can be done locally to prevent ones from becoming inactive. Include local experiences of those who have been helped to return to active service and association with God’s people.
15 min: Start Studies with the Bible. Bible study overseer will handle this part. He should have an experienced publisher or pioneer demonstrate using the Bible to start the study on the initial call. Demonstration should be realistic and applicable to local circumstances, utilizing a Topic for Conversation that has proven effective locally. Show how publisher introduces himself, focuses attention on the Bible, and when discerning interest, suggests householder get his copy of the Bible. Publisher raises appropriate questions and together they look up answers in householder’s Bible. Publisher then arranges for another call to discuss further questions. Bible study overseer concludes with encouragement for all to use the Bible in field service for best results.
30 min: Report from elders on Kingdom Ministry School. Presiding overseer will coordinate this report, which may be given in the form of a panel discussion, interviews, and so forth. Cover the benefits of Kingdom Ministry School course and particularly what these will be for the local congregation. (Elders who have not yet attended Kingdom Ministry School will arrange material pertinent to local needs. They will give their report on the Kingdom Ministry School during a later service meeting.) Song 66 and prayer.

