R2749 : page 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JANUARY 1, 1901. No. 1. 
CONTENTS 



Views from the Watch Tower 3 

Salutations, Greetings and Good 

Wishes 3 

The Spiritual Health of the Lord's 

Flock 6 

Pressing Toward the Mark 6 

What is the Great Mark of Character 

Set Before Us by Our Lord? 8 

Christ the Magnet— "I will Draw 

AUMen" 11 

"The Hour is Come" 11 

The Prince of this World 13 

"What Think Ye of Christ?" 14 

Items: Home Embellishments, etc 2 

R2750 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 

Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 

the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 

God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 

him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 
That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 

in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 

"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 

the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 

and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 

place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 
That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 

"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 

for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 

cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 
That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 

as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 

his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 
That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 

the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 

witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 

next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 
That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 

to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 

of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 

hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church— when all the wilfully 

wicked will be destroyed.— Acts 3:19-23; Isa. 35. 
CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



PLEASE ACCEPT OUR THANKS FOR YOUR KIND LETTERS. 

It rejoices us greatly to hear from so many of you. We received 
1856 letters and cards during the last week of 1900. 
Please accept WATCH TOWER articles as our replies. We send 
postal card or letter receipts for all Money Orders, etc., received: 
so if you do not receive such acknowledgement within two 
weeks apply for a duplicate Money Order and repeat letter-order. 

R2747 : page 2 

HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

The mention, in our Nov. 15 issue, of the motto and text 
cards for home decoration brought us a flood of orders, for 
which we were only partially prepared. More mottoes are on 
their way to us from London, and all orders will be filled 
as quickly as possible. We are glad to think that these good 
words, meeting the eyes of your families will continually 
exercise a silent yet potent influence for good. 

page 2 

WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 

These patent binders permit the insertion of each copy of 
the WATCH TOWER as received. Each binder holds two years' 
issues. Very durable and cheap— 40 cents including postage: 
British money Is. 8d. Binders, etc., for Great Britain, can be 
had through our London branch. 

R2750 : page 2 

ABOUT RENEWING YOUR Z.W.T. SUBSCRIPTION. 

We want all interested in "present truth" on our lists, that 
thus they may share with us the spiritual food now being 
dispensed by our present Lord. We do not urge you to renew, 
tho we will be glad to have you continue with us: all we feel it 
proper to do is to make our terms so reasonable as to leave no valid 
excuse for any to go without this spiritual food if he has an 
appetite for it. If you cannot conveniently send the cash you 
may have it on credit, and should you never be able to pay you 
can have the debt canceled upon request. 



R2751 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



AS THOSE living at the close of the first century, 



on January 1, 101, looked back upon 

a full hundred years called the first century, and looked 

forward to a full hundred years called the second century, 

into which they had just entered, and which 

would continue until Dec. 31, A.D. 200, so we, on 

Jan. 1, 1901, look back upon nineteen completed centuries, 

and look forward into the twentieth, upon which 

we have just entered. 

Few, if any, who read these words ever saw a new 
century born, and it occurs to us that as the Lord's 
people, daily and weekly and yearly, turn over new 
leaves of experience and repeatedly start afresh in 
their endeavors to copy the great character-pattern 
set before us by our heavenly Father in Jesus, so, 
too, we may specially profit by the thought that 
a new century has dawned, to encourage ourselves 
in fresh resolves to be and to do more than ever as 
would be pleasing and acceptable in the sight of our 
Lord. What more appropriate sentiments could we 
have than these! How could we hope better to please 
him who has called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, him who has lifted our feet out of the 
horrible pit and the miry clay, and set them upon the 
rock Christ Jesus, and established our goings, and 
shown unto us the path of life, and made us full of 
joy with the light of his countenance! The Lord's 
own expression on the subject is, "If ye love me keep 
my commandments;" and the Apostle, in the same 
strain, assures us that we are acceptable children of 
God if we do those things which please him, and do 
not find them grievous— if we do them gladly and of 
a willing heart— rejoicing both to know and to do the 
good pleasure of our God. 

SALUTATIONS, GREETINGS AND GOOD WISHES. 



We salute with Christian love and recognition all 
who trust in the precious blood of Jesus, justified by 
faith in his blood, and reckoned as members of the 
household of faith the world over— known to us and 
unknown to us. And even beyond these, we salute 
with loving sympathy those who yet in darkness are 
feeling after God, if haply they might find him (Acts 17:27) 
—who are seeking peace and righteousness, the 
ways of the Lord. Our best wish for these is that 
they may find the Lord, and obtain through his grace 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding, to 
rule in their hearts and to shed abroad in them the 
light of the knowledge of his goodness as it shines in 
the face of Jesus Christ our Lord.— 1 Cor. 4:4. 

But specially we salute and greet the brethren in 
Christ, members of the Royal Priesthood, heirs of 
God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord prospectively; 
—all those who, having believed in the Redeemer 



to the remission of their sins and their justification 
before God, have taken the next step of presenting 
their bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, 
and their reasonable service. We know and are in 
communication with a goodly number of these dear 
"brethren" (Heb. 2:1 1); yet we doubt not there are 
many others to whom we are as yet strangers; whom 
not having known we nevertheless love, knowing well 
that all who have this spirit of the Head of the Church 
must be indeed members of his Body, and therefore 
fellow-members with ourselves. We wish all such 
great blessing during the year beginning, and as it is 
now the harvest-time, in which the great Chief Reaper 
is gathering together into one barn of safety all the 
true wheat— as it is now the time when the messengers 
are gathering together the elect from the four 
quarters of the heavens (the nominal church) it is 
our hope that many of these dear brethren may be 
gathered during this year.— Matt. 24:31; 13:30. 
Not gathered into another denomination, with 

R2751 : page 4 

merely a change of name or change of creed or change 

of form of worship, but gathered to Christ, into oneness 

with him, in fellowship of spirit through the 

knowledge of his Word. And we are to expect this 

gathering to progress more and more, because two influences 

are at work, both calculated to effect the separation 

of these brethren from Babylon. (1) The 

increasing deflection of the nominal church people 

from the true standard of religion which God has provided, 

the Bible, into various subversive unbeliefs; 

viz., into Higher Criticism infidelity, Evolution infidelity, 

Christian Science infidelity, etc., etc. The 

further and the more rapidly these leave the Word of 

God, the greater will be the influence upon the Israelites 

indeed, who are in heart-union with the Lord, and 

full of faith in his Word; for they will perceive more 

and more clearly what they have endeavored heretofore 

to ignore; viz., that we are in the great day of 

trial of which the Apostle wrote: "Every man's work 

shall be made manifest: for the day shall declare it, because 

it shall be revealed by fire; and the fire shall try 

every man's work of what sort it is."— 1 Cor. 3:13. 

We are in this day of trial, have been in it for 
over twenty years, and each day brings us nearer to 
the culmination of testing, and tends to separate more 
and more widely between those who are really God's 
people begotten of the holy spirit, and those who are 
merely nominally and outwardly his, naming the name 
of Christ, and drawing nigh with their lips, but in 
heart are out of sympathy with him and his Word of 
righteousness. 

(2) As this true class is being thus forced 
out of sympathy with Babylon and the masses of all 



denominations, they are hungering and thirsting after 
righteousness— desiring the spiritual food, which the 
Lord has been meantime preparing for them, and 
which now, by his grace, is indeed "meat in due season" 
to all who belong to the true household of faith. 
Such, having been considerably weaned from the spirit 
of Babylon, will frequently be found in just that attitude 
of heart and mind in which the truth will appeal 
to them quickly and thoroughly, and sometimes 
accomplish as much in one year as was accomplished 
with others at an earlier period in several years of 
study and development. 

For these reasons we are expecting great things 
in the way of progress of the truth in the near future. 
We believe it the duty, as well as the pleasure, of all 
who have been enlightened of God through the harvest 
message, to spread the good tidings abroad,— to 
hand out to famishing brethren the meat in due season 
which has so strengthened our own hearts. And 
this seems to be more and more the spirit of the Lord's 
brethren, as they receive of the Lord's grace and truth 
and become more and more copies of God's dear Son, 
and have more and more of his spirit of willingness to 
serve the brethren, and, as the Apostle suggests, are 
willing to lay down their lives for the brethren (1 John 3:16) 
—not literally, but day by day and opportunity 
by opportunity— willing to sacrifice the comforts 
and advantages which, to the natural man, go to make 
up the sum of earthly life and happiness. They 
take pleasure in renouncing earthly privileges and 
luxuries, and even some of life's comforts, that they 
may spend the more of their substance and be the more 

R2752 : page 4 

spent themselves in doing good unto all men, especially 
to the household of faith, and especially in the higher 
spiritual good things which they have the inestimable 
privilege of dispensing as servants of our present 
Lord.-Matt. 24:45. 

And since this commendable spirit seems to be growing 
amongst the dear friends of the truth, everywhere, 
we may reasonably expect that the coming year will 
be one of still greater activities and still greater successes 
in the dispensing of the truth and the bringing 
of brethren out of darkness into the marvelous light, 
now shining for all who are the Lord's people. Just 
how this will be accomplished we do not yet see clearly; 
but we are encouraged by fresh proposals for the Colporteur 
work and an increasing interest in the Volunteer 
work both at home and abroad. If all of the 
deeply interested will join us in praying the Lord of 
the harvest to send forth more laborers into the harvest 
work, we may expect, as one result, that all who 
thus pray will themselves be granted fresh and larger 
opportunities for service. 



As we consider it not to be the Lord's will that 
we should beg for money, but merely that we should 
use as wisely as possible whatever he shall supply, so 
we feel that it would not be the Lord's will that we 
should press or urge upon any the matter of service 
to his cause. We merely call attention to the opportunities 
for service and the privileges connected with 
these, and to the advantages and blessings which accrue 
to those who embrace them. We can, however, 
speak confidently of a fact that experience has demonstrated, 
and to which many of our readers could testify; 
viz., that the Lord specially blesses those who, 
having received the light of truth, do not put it under 
a bushel, but let it shine, fearlessly and wisely, to all 
the household of faith. Many letters indicate that 
great blessing was received and spiritual progress 
made during the past year; and these came chiefly 
from those who have engaged in the Volunteer work 
—preaching the present truth Sunday after Sunday, 
to those professing to be children of God, by distributing 
to them literature as they returned home from 
their churches. So great has been the blessing upon 

R2752 : page 5 

many of these Volunteers that they have written to 
us urging that some kind of literature may be prepared 
so that they may engage in similar service during the 
year 1901. One dear sister, who was at first deterred 
by criticism (from one who should have helped instead 
of hindered her), declares that nothing she ever did 
in the Lord's service was so heavy a "cross" at first; 
but that having taken it up as a service to the Lord 
and his "brethren" she had received from it more 
blessing than from any other service ever performed. 
She and associates have thoroughly distributed the 
"Volunteer" TOWER to the Protestant church attendants 
of their city and even surrounding towns, and 
like true soldiers of the cross are waiting and calling 
for more of the love-and-truth ammunition which, under 
God's blessing, routing the powers of darkness, 
from some hearts at least, will deliver "brethren" and 
bring them into the clear sunlight of grace and truth. 

In compliance with these requests and suggestions, 
and with the belief that this is one of the best 
ways of reaching the professed "household of faith" 
with the meat in due season, we are preparing for 
another campaign in this holy war against the enslaving 
errors which hold so many of our dear brethren 
captive,— human traditions which both dishonor 
God and stultify those who in any degree give them 
allegiance. 

We are not seeking to have any engage in this 
work who do not love the truth, and desire at heart 
to serve it; for we believe that such service would not 
be very acceptable to our Lord, the Chief Reaper. But 



we do seek to encourage all those who have a heart's 

desire to serve our King, and who know of no better 

way of engaging in his service, and who have thus far 

been deterred, and have missed the blessing which goes 

with it, through fear of man, which bringeth a snare 

—through shame for the cross and the true Gospel, 

which are not popular now. We want to assure such 

that this will be a part of their "overcoming" which will 

probably help them more than anything else they have 

ever done to become strong in the Lord and in the 

power of his might as overcomers of their own weaknesses. 

It will assist them in making their calling 

and their election sure, by assisting them in the development 

of the character of overcomers, to whom the 

Lord has promised the crown of glory and the heavenly 

blessings.— Rev. 2:26-29. 

All who volunteer in this service during the coming 
year will be supplied with a booklet, entitled, 
"Food for Thinking Christians; Our Lord's Return, 
etc.," a neat, attractive little pamphlet, which, we 
trust, will feed many hungry brethren and sisters in 
Babylon, and thus give them strength to follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goeth. But whether we shall 
find many hungry ones, and learn of their refreshment 
with the truth or not, we are sure that those who dispense 
this food will have the Master's blessing, and 
that they themselves will become strong by the exercise 
of their wills, and the bringing of their bodies into 
subjection in service and sacrifice to the Lord and his 
cause. And loving you all, and realizing that such a 
service will be the greatest blessing to you all, we are 
desirous for this reason alone that so many as wish 
this service may have the opportunity, and may be encouraged 
to engage in it; but we are confident that 
good will be accomplished also for some yet bound in 
Babylon;— that God will use this means for calling 
them out.-Rev. 18:4. 

We are not urging this as instead of other means 
of work, as for instance, the Colporteur work, and the 
endeavor to interest friends through special tracts 
suited to their conditions, etc., etc. What we are suggesting 
is in addition to the other things. It is a 
method of preaching the Gospel— the true Gospel, of 
which no reasonable person need be ashamed. It appeals 
to all who know of no other way of preaching 
more likely to be effective in finding and assisting the 
brethren. While, therefore, we pray the Lord of the 
harvest for laborers in the vineyard in the Colporteur 
branch of the service, still, we remember that not all 
of the Royal Priesthood are so circumstanced in life 
as to be able to offer their sacrifices in this form. We 
thank the Lord, therefore, for the opportunity for their 
engagement in this preaching of the true Gospel 
through the printed page to church people; and we 
rejoice especially that in this service almost all of the 
Royal Priesthood can find opportunities for self-sacrifice, 



following closely in the footsteps of Jesus, and rejoicing 
proportionately as they follow; and proportionately 
growing stronger in the Lord and in the power 
of his might, and being made "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." 

Samples of the new literature mentioned will be 
sent to each one on our lists, as No. 52 of the OLD 
THEOLOGY series. We trust it will please you both in 
contents and in appearance; and we believe that it will 
be attractive to others who may through its perusal be 
led to "choose the better part," and to be taught of 
God, and refreshed in heart by the glorious things he is 
now dispensing to his faithful. We offer the suggestion 
therefore, that in every little group of the Lord's people 
meeting for the study of his Word, this Volunteer 
service be taken up and discussed; and that those who 
have not yet entered the work shall seek to do so (that 
they may have a part of the blessing), "while it is 
called day, for the night cometh wherein no man can 
work." Appoint one of your number as the captain, 
and let him bring to his assistance as many lieutenants 

R2752 : page 6 

as he may please to counsel and assist in the division 
of the work, the appointment of distributors, etc., that 
the work may be done systematically and thoroughly. 

Those who are without companionship and assistance 
in this work may engage in it, and we will be 
pleased to hear from them also; but let each little circle, 
so far as possible, act in harmony in the matter, not 
all attempting to be directors, but each willing to submit 
to the will of the majority and to act through 
whomsoever the majority may appoint the captain of 
the group. The responsibility falling upon one will 
be much more likely to be well discharged than if 
divided amongst many. Those who engaged in the 
work last year and the year before no doubt have memoranda 
which will be valuable to them in judging of 
the quantities of pamphlets needful for this work the 
coming year. We will be pleased to supply printed 
blanks useful in the guiding of the various distributors 
to the places of service to which their captains 
may appoint them week after week. We are pleased 
to hear from these captains at the close of each campaign, 
respecting the number of churches served, the 
average attendance, etc., and especially respecting any 
evidences of blessing, either amongst the distributors 
or on the part of those who receive the literature. 

THE SPIRITUAL HEALTH OF THE LORD'S FLOCK. 



Through our correspondence with the dear friends 
of the cause throughout the world we, so to speak, 



have our finger upon their spiritual pulse, and we are 

glad to inform you all that the indications are that the 

spiritual condition is good— better than ever before. 

During the past few years we were impressed with the 

thought that some of the dear readers of this journal 

had received more knowledge than they were making 

use of in their daily lives— that some of them were 

more interested in the letter of the truth, in the knowledge 

of God's plan, than in conforming their lives to 

the spirit of the Truth. In harmony with this conviction 

we have sought, during the last three years 

especially, to draw attention to the necessity for receiving 

not the grace of God in vain, but on the contrary 

permitting the truth which we so dearly love to 

work in our hearts both to will right and, so far as possible, 

to do right— God's good pleasure respecting us. 

-Phil. 2:13. 

Apparently the Lord has blessed these efforts, as 
no doubt he guided and led toward them. To him we 
gladly render the praise for the evidences we see 
through your correspondence that you are appreciating 
more and more not only the heavenly prize, but also 
the trials and difficulties which, under divine providence, 
are intended to develop our characters, and 
make us copies of our Lord, and thus to prepare us for 
the Kingdom and for the great privileges and work of 
blessing others through it. It is our desire, and we 
believe yours also, to still progress in this "narrow 
way" of self-sacrifice; to still recognize the Lord's 
hand in all of life's affairs toward "the called ones 
according to his purpose;" and the advantage of every 
trial and discipline rightly received; and to still be 
helpful to all who are in the way, assisting them to 
put on the armor of God, and to be clothed with all 
the graces of the spirit, and to be shod with the preparation 
of the Gospel of peace, that they may tread 
faithfully this royal way opened up by our Redeemer, 
walking in his footsteps, until the heavenly Kingdom 
has been attained. 

We do not mean to say that there are no drawbacks, 
no difficulties, no discouragements, in any part 
of the field. Quite to the contrary, there are many 
such; but these also, interpreted in the light of the 
divine Word, are encouragements to us, since we know 
that they are needful. We realize that the Lord himself 
is pruning his "Vine," taking away the branches 
that will not bear fruit, and that unto perfection, fully 
ripe. When we say, therefore, that the outlook is 
encouraging, we mean the broad view of the harvest-field, 
rather than every little microscopic view of a 
particular point in it. 

We have learned, too, that sometimes matters 
which seem to be dark clouds and troubles amongst 
the brethren are really, under divine providence, messengers 
of blessing, which, rightly received, do good 
in showing the brethren their own weaknesses and imperfections, 



and in leading them to seek more and 
more of the grace of God to overcome these, that they 
may be filled with all the fulness of God. It is along 
this line, then, that we congratulate you and bid you 
be of good courage and continue to press along the 
line toward the "mark" of perfect character— perfection 
in love: assured that if faithful we shall ultimately 
obtain blessings far beyond our present conceptions. 



R2753 : page 6 

PRESSING TOWARD THE MARK. 



"Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I 
do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forward 
to those things which are before, I press toward the mark 
for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus." 
-Phil. 3:13,14.- 

FEW IN the nominal church see any particular 
mark or any particular prize with definiteness; 
—to be sought and to be attained. The majority are 
merely fleeing from an imagined eternal torment, 
which pursues them as a fear, a dread, a nightmare, 
a horror, from the cradle to the tomb. Others of the 
Lord's people (chiefly of "this way") have had the 
eyes of their understanding illuminated by the holy 
spirit through the divine Word, and have gotten a 
glimpse of the great prize which God has set before 
the elect Church of this Gospel age. No wonder if 
these are enthused with the glorious spectacle which 
(the natural) eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man to conceive of, but 
which "God hath revealed unto us by his spirit!" 
No wonder, either, if they have given more attention 
to the prize than to the mark which must be attained 
ere the prize is won. 

R2753 : page 7 

Full of enthusiasm and appreciation of divine 
love, these have entirely lost the fear of eternal torment, 
and have learned that this doctrine is of Satan, 
and not of God; from man, and not of the holy spirit; 
from the dark ages, and not the teachings of the inspired 
words of Scripture. They have learned, too, 
that what scriptures seem to give any color of sanction 
to this blasphemy against God's character and 
plan are certain parables, symbols and dark sayings 
which misinterpretations have more or less glossed and 
colored in the common translations of the Scriptures. 

It is quite common for this latter class to think 



and to speak of "running for the prize," and to measurably 
lose sight of the fact that it is not the prize 
that we run toward, but the mark: that the prize is 
entirely beyond our grasp;— as the Apostle expresses 
it above, "I press toward the mark." Whoever reaches 
the mark of character which God has established for 
the elect will receive the prize; and whoever fails to 
reach that mark of character will fail to get the prize. 
It is therefore a very serious error to run for the prize 
and forget or ignore or disregard the "mark," which 
must first be attained. 

The thought that a certain standard or mark of 
character is necessary to all who will pass divine approval 
as "overcomers," and hear the Lord's "Well 
done!" is an astounding one to many. Many have 
thought of the Christian race as merely an avoidance 
of open sin; others have included an avoidance of 
secret faults; others have gone still further, and have 
included a general disposition to sacrifice many interests 
of the present life; others have gone still further, 
and have understood the test of discipleship to be full 
self-surrender to the Lord, a full sacrifice of earthly 
life and all of its interests to the will of our Head, the 
Lord;— but almost none have the thought that all our 
sacrificings and experiences and self-denials must lead 
up toward and eventually bring us to the "mark" of 
character which God has set for the "elect;"— else 
they will not get the prize of joint-heirship with Christ 
in the Millennial Kingdom. Nothing, probably, has 
contributed so much to this oversight of a "mark" or 
fixed standard of character than the false interpretation 
given to our Lord's conversation with the dying 
thief on Calvary.* 

It is indisputably reasonable, that God has some 
standard or test by which he will determine who are 
worthy to receive the great blessings and honors offered 
to the elect— who are worthy to be members of 
the body of Christ and to share his Millennial Kingdom 
—what shall constitute faithfulness in those who 
"seek for glory, honor and immortality," and who 
are "the called and chosen and faithful." The Apostle, 
in our text, unquestionably declares that there is 
such a mark, and that all who are running with any 
hope of attaining the desired prize must be running 
toward that mark, and must attain it or lose the prize. 
And we see, too, that the Apostle judges himself according 
to this standard, and declares that at the time 
he wrote he had not yet reached this mark or standard 
of character-development. Such reflections cannot 
but awaken in the hearts of all who are in this race 
earnest desires to see distinctly the mark toward which 
we must run: and it should stimulate each and all of 
us to run the more patiently and the more perseveringly, 
and to watch day by day the measure of our 
progress toward the grand mark which the Lord our 
God has set before us. 



We notice that the Apostle has in mind foot-races, 
and we see the forcefulness of the illustration: (1) 
As the racers must enter the race-course in a legitimate 
manner, so must we get on our race-course in 
a legitimate manner, through the only door— faith in 
the precious blood which redeemed us and justified us 
before God. (2) Those who enter the course must 
be regularly recorded or registered as runners; they 
must positively declare their intention, else they will 
not be in the race. So with us: having been "justified 
by faith," and having been informed of our privileges 
in connection with this race, and the attainment 
of its prize, it was incumbent upon us to declare our 
intention— to make a covenant with the Lord, and to 
thus be regularly entered— our names being written, 
not upon earthly church rolls, but in the Lamb's book 
of life— "written in heaven."— Heb. 12:23. 

With foot-racers there is a prize offered also, but 
it is not the prize that is hung out to their view while 
on the race-course; it is not the prize toward which 
they run, but the mark. There is the quarter-mile 
mark, the half-mile mark, the three-quarter-mile mark, 
and the mile mark at the close of the race; and each 
racer watches for and encourages himself as he passes 
one or another of these marks by the way, until finally 
he reaches the last one, the mark for the prize. 
And this watching of the marks by the way, and 
reckoning up to the standard, is a great incentive to 
him— an encouragement as he speeds along, a reminder 
if he is going slackly. So, too, it is with the 
Christian runner in the narrow way toward the mark 
of the great prize which God has promised— join t-heirship 
with his Son, the Lord of glory. It will encourage 
us to note the marks on our way, and to 
perceive our progress— if we are coming nearer and 
nearer and nearer to "the mark for the prize"— the 
mark which wins the prize. And if any be careless, 
indifferent, slack, in his running, nothing could be a 



*See our issue of June 1, 1896, "The Thief in Paradise." 

R2754 : page 8 

greater stimulus to him than the knowledge that only 
his own carelessness or slackness can lose him the 
prize. 

WHAT IS THIS GREAT "MARK" OF CHARACTER SET 
BEFORE US BY OUR GOD? 



We answer, it is stated under various names; as 
for instance, our Lord Jesus mentioned it when he 



said, "Be ye perfect, even as your Father in heaven 
is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) The same mark is mentioned 
by the Apostle when he says that God predestinated 
that all who will be of the elect must be "conformed 
to the image of his Son." (Rom. 8:29.) These 
two statements differ in form, but are the same in 
substance. The same mark is mentioned again by 
the Apostle when he says, "The righteousness of the 
Law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but 
after the spirit." And again he tells us that "Love is 
the fulfilling of the Law." (Rom. 8:4; 13:10.) Here, 
then, we have an aggregated definition of what constitutes 
the "mark" of Christian character, in the 
elect: it is godlikeness, Christ-likeness, Love. The 
requirement, therefore, would seem to be that the 
Lord's people, holy and elect, must attain to the same 
character or disposition of love that God possesses and 
that was manifested also by our Lord Jesus. 

But some one will say, How can we, "who by 
nature are children of wrath, even as others," ever 
hope to attain to so high a standard or mark of character 
as this, that we should love as God loves, as 
Christ loves? We answer, that we need never hope 
to attain to this high standard as respects the flesh, 
for so long as we are in these mortal bodies, and 
obliged to use their brains, we will necessarily be more 
or less opposed by the selfishness which through the 
fall has come to have such complete possession of our 
race through the mental, moral and physical derangements 
incidental to six thousand years of depravity. 

The attainment of this mark of perfect love is to 
be an attainment of the heart, of the will— the new 
will, "begotten, not of the will of the flesh, nor of the 
will of man, but of God," through the holy spirit. 
Nor do we find, nor should we expect that the new 
mind would come up to this standard at the beginning 
of our Christian experience. The new mind, altho 
inspired of God through the exceeding great and precious 
promises of his Word, is nevertheless our own 
will, and more or less circumscribed by its channel 
and instrument, the human brain. Hence the Apostle 
informs us that the new mind must constantly 
fight a battle against the flesh, and that its victory 
means the death of the flesh— that it cannot be actually 
perfect until the "change" shall come, by which this 
newly begotten will shall receive its spiritual body in 
the first resurrection. But since the receiving of a 
spiritual body in the first resurrection will be the receiving 
of the prize, we see that the race toward the 
mark and the attainment of that mark must be made 
by the new mind while it is still in this mortal body 
or "earthen vessel."— 2 Cor. 5:2-4. 

In a word, the new mind must grow, must develop. 
As the Apostle exhorts, we, as new creatures, 
must grow in grace and in the knowledge and love of 
God— the growth here corresponding to the running 



in the figure under consideration. We must run or 
press nearer and nearer to the mark day by day, week 
by week, year by year, until it shall be attained,— if 
we would gain the prize. Nor is it merely a question 
of time, for we all know some who have been a long 
time in the race and have made comparatively little 
progress in the cultivation of the gifts of the spirit, 
the sum of which is comprehended in the one word, 
perfect love— the mark. 

And we probably all know some others who have 
been a comparatively short time in the narrow way who 
have made great progress,— going from grace to grace, 
from knowledge to knowledge, from glory to glory- 
rapidly nearing the mark. And we know some who, 
so far as human judgment can discern, have reached 
the mark; but of these more anon. 

That we may clearly comprehend this subject, let 
us notice how small were the beginnings of this grace 
of love in our hearts; and let us hope that many, as 
they trace the matter here, and compare it with their 
own experiences, will be able to find large developments 
in their own characters— that they have passed 
one after another of the quarter-mile marks in the 
way, and that they are rapidly nearing, if they have 
not already reached, "the mark of the prize." 

(1) The beginning of our experience as Christians 
the Apostle expresses, saying, it was not that 

we first loved God, but that "he first loved us"— that 
attracted us to him. (1 John 4:19.) A sense of justice 
told us that since God had so loved us as to redeem 
us at so great a cost, and to provide for us so great 
salvation, it would be as little as we could do— it 
would be our duty to love and serve him in return. 
This beginning of love we will designate as duty-love. 
It lacked in many respects qualities which now permeate 
our love for God, which is of a higher, a more 
advanced character, because we have grown in grace, 
and in knowledge, and in love. The Apostle seems to 
speak again of this same duty-love, when he says, 
"The love of Christ constraineth us [draws out our 
love in return]; for we thus judge that if one died for 
all, then were all dead [under divine sentence, the 
curse]; and that we who live [who have been justified 
to life through faith in Jesus' redemption] should 

R2754 : page 9 

henceforth live not unto ourselves but unto him who 
died for us." (2 Cor. 5:14,15.) Here again it is the 
"should"-love or duty-love,— the first, the crudest, 
the simplest development of our love toward God, our 
starting-point in the race toward perfect love. 

(2) After we had exercised the duty-love and 
sought to obey God, not only in the avoidance of sin, 
but also in sacrificing our earthly interests and rights 
for his sake and the truth's sake, in obedience to his 



will— in obedience to duty-love— we began to find in 

our hearts an appreciation of the principles of righteousness; 

we began to love righteousness— justice, 

mercy, love: not at first with a fervency of love, but 

rather with respect for the glorious qualities of the 

divine character, plan and law. This was our first 

quarter-mile mark, so to speak— love of principles of 

righteousness. 

(3) The more we learned to love these elements 
of divine character, the principles of righteousness 
which find their perfect representation in the divine 
being, and through which the divine being is revealed 
to the eyes of our understanding— in that proportion 
the true love to God (based upon principles rather than 
upon duty), comes into our hearts. So to speak, here 

in the race-course we had gained the second quarter-mile 
mark— love of God's character; even tho we had 
not yet discerned the length and breadth and heights 
and depths of that character, we had begun to love the 
Lord in the true way— from appreciation not only of 
what he had done for us, but also and specially for 
what he is;— from appreciation of his character. 

(4) Love of God from this latter standpoint as 

the representative of every grace and every virtue, as 
the representative of righteousness, and the opponent 
of every injustice and inequity, led us to seek and to 
follow out these principles amongst our fellow-men, 
as well as in our own characters. As we began to 
love truth, purity, nobility of character, wherever it 
could be found, we found some of it in a mottled 
and streaked condition even in the world of mankind: 
we found that the original law of God, written in the 
heart of father Adam, altho largely erased and obliterated 
from the hearts and consciences of his children, 
is not wholly gone;— that to some extent, especially 
under the influence of Christianity in the past 
eighteen centuries, some features of this perfect law 
may be dimly discerned amongst men. 

But our scrutiny, backed by our increasing love 
of these principles of righteousness, found nothing 
satisfactory amongst natural men— nor even amongst 
those professing godliness— professing to be followers 
in the footsteps of Jesus. We found these all, like 
ourselves, far short of perfection, far short of the glory 
of God. But as the true love, of right principles, 
burned in our hearts more and more fervently, we 
learned to sympathize with the entire "groaning creation," 
and to "love the brethren;" for in the latter 
we perceived a class inspired by the same spirit by 
which we ourselves had been begotten of God, the 
spirit of the truth; we saw some of them struggling 
as we had struggled, with appreciation only of the 
duty-love; we saw others who had gained a higher 
conception than this, who had learned to appreciate 
the principles of righteousness and to love them, and 
to hate iniquity, and further, to love the God who is 



the embodiment of these. And the realization that 

these "brethren," like ourselves, were gradually approximating 

the divine standard— "pressing toward 

the mark"— filled us with interest in them and in 

their battle against sin and its weaknesses, and against 

the Adversary and his beguilements. We became 

more and more interested in their welfare and overcoming 

in proportion as we were striving and making 

progress in the same "narrow way." This love of 

the brethren we did not have at the beginning; it 

marks a distinct progress in our race toward the 

"mark;" we might term it the third quarter-mile 

mark. But altho a grand attainment was achieved 

when this love of the brethren reached the point of 

R2755 : page 9 

willingness to "lay down our lives for the brethren" 
(1 John 3:16), yet it was not the full attainment of 
the "mark" for which we are running. 

(5) The "mark of the prize" is a still higher 
attainment in love;— the one which we understand the 
Scriptures to point out as the very highest attainment 
is that of loving our enemies— not merely tolerating 
them, abstaining from injuring them, etc., while thinking 
evil of them; but far beyond this, it signifies the 
full purging out of all anger, malice, hatred, envy, 
strife, not only from our actions but also from our 
words, and even from our thoughts, our sentiments. 
It means such a complete triumph of love in our hearts 
as not only loves God supremely and delights to sacrifice 
in his service from love of the principles represented 
in his character, and love for the brethren, 
which makes us careful of their feelings and interests, 
and ready to lay down our lives on their behalf, to 
deliver them from evil, or to avoid putting a stumbling 
block in their way, but it means additionally that the 
love of God has been so thoroughly shed abroad in 
our hearts that we can love and do love every intelligent 
creature, and delight to do good unto all men, 
and to serve all men as we have opportunity, especially 
the household of faith.— Gal. 6:10. 

This does not mean that the love which we have 
for the world must be of the same kind that we have 
for the Lord, who is the personification of righteousness, 
and for the "brethren," who are striving to have 

R2755 : page 10 

Love, the righteousness of the Law, fulfilled in them 
through Christ. It means rather a sympathetic love; 
a benevolence such as God himself exercised toward 
the whole world of mankind. It does not mean that 
we are to love the world in the sense condemned by 
the Apostle when he said, "Love not the world, 
neither the things of the world." (1 John 2:15.) It 



does mean the attainment of the condition indicated 

in the expression, "God so loved the world that he 

gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever should 

believe on him might not perish, but have everlasting 

life." (John 3:16.) It is a love for the world, which 

will not only be glad to see them lifted up out of degradation 

and sin to holiness and purity and righteousness, 

but which will be glad to cooperate to these 

ends as opportunities may offer— not, however, anticipating 

God's love and the development of his plan 

of the ages; but co-working with God in that great 

plan which he has promised shall eventually bring, 

during the Millennial age, blessing to every creature 

through the elect class now running in this race for 

attainment of the "mark," to win the great prize of 

joint-heirship with his Son. This perfect love, which, 

including the other developments, extends even to 

enemies and those who injure us and speak evil of us 

falsely for Christ's and righteousness' sake, is the 

fourth mark in the race— "the mark for the prize." 

While it is well for us to notice these various steps 
in the progress of our race toward the "mark," we 
are to remember that the illustration does not fit perfectly, 
but that rather while there is this order of 
progression it is less distinctly marked in our experiences, 
in which duty-love but gradually leads into 
the higher forms, remaining, but subordinately, 
to the end. It is a part of the blessed arrangement 
of God that those who are running in this race are 
not reckoned with according to the flesh, but as "new 
creatures," according to the spirit, the mind, the will, 
the intention. We may never hope to attain to this 
grand "mark" of perfect Love in our flesh, so that 
every act and every word would give full proof of the 
real spirit of love which fills our hearts. Some may 
have greater weaknesses and defects in the flesh than 
others, and hence may be less able than others to uniformly 
and thoroughly show the real sentiments of 
their hearts. But God looketh at the heart; it is the 
heart that he sees running in this race; it is the heart 
which is to attain to this "mark" set before us in the 
Gospel— this mark of perfect love, which includes 
even our enemies. "Blessed are the pure in heart, 
for they shall see God." 

If now we see clearly that perfect love is "the 
mark of the prize," we see something to strive for in 
our daily lives; a condition which we can by God's 
grace attain, and which must be obtained if we would 
be counted worthy a place in the Kingdom. The 
Lord is not selecting the members of the Bride of 
Christ by an arbitrary election; neither is he selecting 
them on the lines of a mere sentimentality; he is selecting 
them on the lines of character, heart-development; 
and those who attain this likeness to his Son, 
this "mark" of the prize, this standard of what is pleasing 
and acceptable to the Father— these, and these 



alone, may have confident hope of joint-heirship with 
our Lord. How important, then, that each runner in 
this race follow closely the Apostle's injunction to lay 
aside every weight and hindrance, and to run with 
patience the race set before us in the Gospel— "looking 
unto Jesus," the author of our faith, until he shall 
have become the finisher of it (Heb. 12:1)— giving us 
grace to conquer, and keeping us through his Word 
and through his providence unto the end of the race. 

Each one on this race-course should examine 
himself, rather than examine others, in respect to 
progress in this narrow way; for each knows his own 
heart condition and the weaknesses of his own flesh 
better than any other knows these, the Lord alone 
excepted. Let us each note just where he is in the 
race-course, rejoicing that he is in the race at all; 
considering it a great privilege to be thus called and 
privileged to enter in this race. If we find that we 
have passed the first quarter-mark, let us rejoice and 
press on. If we find that we have passed the second 
also, let us rejoice so much the more, but not slack 
our running. If we find that we have passed the third 
quarter we may properly rejoice so much the more, 
and press with vigor on; and if we have attained to 
the fourth mark, of perfect love, which includes even 
enemies, we have indeed cause for great rejoicing. 
The prize is ours, if we but remain faithful. But, as 
the Apostle says, "Having done all, stand"— with all 
the armor on; stand in various testings which will 
then, as much as ever along the race-course, be brought 
to bear against us to divert us away from the mark, 
before the great Inspector and giver of rewards shall 
say, "Well done, good and faithful servant; enter 
thou into the joys of thy Lord."— Eph. 6:13-17. 

It is indispensable to those who have reached the 
mark of perfect love that they shall keep actively engaged 
in the service of the Lord, laying down their 
lives for the brethren; because he who loveth not his 
brother, whom he hath seen, what assurance hath he 
that he really loves God, whom he hath not seen? 
(1 John 4:20.) Such must stand, not only as representatives 
of God and of the principles of righteousness, 
but as representatives of those strong in the 
Lord and in the power of his might, and in the faith 
of his Word,— ready and willing and efficient in the 
encouragement of other runners in the race-course, 
that they likewise may attain to the "mark." As the 
Apostle says: "As many, therefore, as are perfect, 
should be of this mind; and if in anything you think 
differently, God will reveal this to you; but to what 
we have attained, let us walk by the same line. Brethren, 
become joint-imitators of me, and watch those 
who are thus walking, as you have us for a pattern." 
-Phil. 3:15-17, Diaglott. 



R2757 : page 1 1 

CHRIST THE MAGNET--'! WILL DRAW ALL MEN." 

JOHN 12:20-33.~JAN. 20. 

GOLDEN TEXT:-"We would see Jesus." 

OUR LORD continued his teachings in the Temple 

daily after his triumphal entry into Jerusalem 

on the ass,— going to Bethany at night, and returning 

to the Temple each morning during the few days that 

intervened prior to his arrest and crucifixion. It was 

at this time that certain Greeks sought an interview 

with Jesus, and made known their desires through Andrew 

and Philip, who were probably the only two of 

the disciples who spoke the Greek language, they coming 

from a city (Bethsaida) in which the Greek language 

was considerably used, and their names are of 

Greek origin. It was most natural, therefore, that these 

two should be the mouthpieces of the visitors, to communicate 

their wishes to our Lord. The reason for the 

request doubtless was that our Lord at this time was 

in a part of the Temple inaccessible to any except Jews 

by birth, and these Greeks were Jewish proselytes, 

hence were not permitted to approach nearer the holy 

places than the Court of the Gentiles. Their request 

therefore meant that Jesus should come out to where 

they were for an interview. 

What may have been the object of their visit we 
are not told; nor do we presume that our Lord's words 
recorded in the succeeding verses of our lesson were addressed 
to the Greeks, but rather that a break in the 
narrative occurs. Our Lord doubtless responded to their 
request for an interview, but the substance of their converse 
has not been considered necessary for the Church, 
and hence has not been recorded. It may not be amiss, 
however, to mention that Eusebius, a church historian 
of early days, relates that an embassy was sent to Jesus 
by the king of Edessa, Syria, inviting him to take up 
his abode with him, and promising him a royal welcome. 
It would not be surprising if there were truth 
in this statement, but we know well that our Lord would 
refuse any such overtures, for he himself had plainly 
declared to the disciples when he sent them forth, "I 
am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel." 

God had blessings in store for all the families of 
the earth; but not yet, and not in this way. All things 
must be done in a divine order and according to the 
divine plan, which provided for the selection of the 

R2758 :page 11 

Seed of Abraham (Gal. 3:16,29) before the general 



blessings could come upon the world; and the offer of 
membership in this Seed of Abraham must, according 
to divine arrangement, be to the Jew first. 

It was probably after the interview with the Greeks 
had ended, and while the hearts of the apostles were 
beating fast with anticipation that finally the world was 
waking up to recognize their Master in his true light, 
and would shortly exalt him to the high position foretold 
for the Messiah, and while their hopes on their own 
behalf were also running high that they should be joint-heirs 
with him in the Kingdom, that Jesus uttered the 
words constituting the remainder of the lesson. It was 
a good opportunity for him to show them how his sufferings 
of the immediate future were the foundation 
upon which all the future glory must rest. He well 
knew what bitter disappointments and heart-aches would 
come to his faithful few when they would realize the 
literalness of what he had already told them respecting 
his death. He would give them some suggestions which 
would be helpful to them subsequently, and enable 
them to look through the sufferings to the glories in 
reservation, unseeable except with the eye of faith. 

It was, we believe, with this thought in mind that 
our Lord declared, "The hour is come that the Son 
of Man should be glorified." The disciples at first 
would take this as intimating his earthly exaltation; 
but he speedily drew their attention to the fact that 
while the beginning of his glorification was near, it must 
be preceded by the suffering of death. His glorification 
began in his resurrection from the dead, when he was 
raised in incorruption, in power, a glorious spiritual 
body— "a quickening spirit," as the Apostle explains. 
(1 Cor. 15:42-45.) This glorification was enhanced 
when he was received up into glory in the Father's 
presence, there to appear on our behalf, and at the right 
hand of divine power to wait for the appointed time 
when he should take unto himself his great power and 
reign as King over all the earth, which he had redeemed 
with his own precious blood. 

"THE HOUR IS COME!" 



The expression, "The hour is come," is not necessarily 
to be understood as signifying sixty minutes; just 
as the word "day" does not always signify twenty-four 
hours, but a comparatively short period or epoch, as, 
for instance, "Noah's day," "Moses' day," "Jesus' 
day," etc. As compared with "Jesus' day" the experiences 
referred to were properly enough said to be occurring 
in that "hour," or short time. 

Having thus assured them that the beginning of 
his glorification was not far distant, our Lord makes 
very impressive the necessity of his death, by saying, 
"Verily, verily,"— that is, Truly, truly, most positively, 



emphatically, I give you the illustration that my glorification, 
according to the divine arrangement, must 
come through my death, even as a grain of wheat would 
remain but one grain unless it were planted, and through 
the dying of one grain life and being were given to a 
number. Had our Lord chosen to do so, he at one time 
had the privilege of remaining alone,— of not dying on 
our behalf. Had he followed this course we would still 
have been unredeemed and he could have brought forth 

R2758 :page 12 

no fruitage. But he had consecrated his life; he had 
voluntarily engaged to sacrifice himself on behalf of 
Adam and his race, in compliance with the Father's 
will, and hence he declares that if now he would love 
his life he would lose it; that on the contrary, instead 
of seeking to save himself he must indeed hate or despise 
the present life in comparison with the future and 
eternal one which the Father had promised him as a 
reward for obedience unto death. 

It will be noticed that in this understanding of it, 
this 25th verse is applicable to our Lord alone, and not 
to his followers, for they had no life to lose; they and 
the whole world were dead, under condemnation of 
death, because of father Adam's transgression. Our 
Lord alone had life, which he had a right to lay down 
or exchange in order to keep it unto eternal life. Such 
privileges could not come to his followers until first 
Jesus had given his life "a ransom for all." Then as 
soon as the ransom was given and had been accepted 
of the Father, the redeemed ones (believers justified by 
their faith) could be reckoned as having life-rights 
which they would be privileged to consecrate upon the 
Lord's altar, and to exchange for the heavenly life, following 
in the footsteps of Jesus. 

And in full accord with this interpretation is the 
next verse, which distinctly speaks of Jesus' followers, 
saying that all who desire to serve him, and to be with 
him, must follow him— follow him in this experience, 
which he, as the Forerunner in this way, was already 
passing through; viz., the consecration and then the despising 
of his earthly existence, as compared with the 
spirit life and heavenly glory promised. 

It is to their great disadvantage that Christian people 
so generally fail to discern that there are to be several 
different classes of saved ones— the overcomers, the 
great company and the restitution class. The benevolently 
disposed of those seeking to walk in the footsteps 
of Jesus, in earthly self-denials and sacrifices, and in 
despising the present life in comparison with the future 
one promised, are robbed of much of their joy and peace 
and consolation by the thought that only such footstep-followers 
can ever be with the Lord and honored by the 
Father; for they realize that such servants constitute a 
"little flock" indeed. The effect of their ignorance of 



the divine plan is, with many, a hardening of heart in 
an attempt to be more like what they understand God 
to be, as expressed in what they believe to be his plan 
of eternal torment for all except the little flock. Others, 
on the other hand, cultivating their benevolence, refuse 
to believe that the way to this association with Jesus 
and the divine glorification is so narrow— they widen 
it more and more to take in their friends, their families, 
their neighbors, and as many as possible of the 
heathen; and thus, unconsciously perhaps, gradually 
but surely they lower the standard of true discipleship, 
not only for others but also for themselves: they become 
more and more satisfied with outward forms and 
ceremonies and platitudes and moralities, and come 
more and more to consider that their former views were 
incorrect— when they supposed, in harmony with our 
Lord's words, that all who would be with him and be 
honored of the Father, must take up his cross and follow 
in his footsteps. 

The light of this harvest-time now shining upon 
the divine Word and plan makes clear to us, not only 
the height of the calling of the "elect" Church to joint-heirship 
with her Lord in his glory, but also the reality 
of the fact that all who would share that glory in the 
future, must suffer with him in the present life— must 
be crucified to sin and to self and to the world; must 
rise to newness of life in Christ Jesus reckonedly now, 
actually, if faithful, in the first resurrection. But this 
harvest light makes clear to us also that the class now 
called, now intended of the Father to be joint-sacrificers 
with his son and joint-heirs with him of his glory, is 
altogether but a small fraction of the human family, 
and that the others who receive not this high calling 
are to be otherwise blessed in due time under the Millennial 
Kingdom, by the glorified Jesus and his glorified 
Church and Bride. 

Those who have this light and appreciate it are saved 
from the discouragements common to others. They can 
see the reasonableness of making the way to so high a 
station as that to which they are called a very narrow 
one, which will admit at its opening only those who 
are justified through faith in Christ and who are desirous 
of pleasing and serving God, and which, at its 
furthest end, will admit to glory only those who have 
passed faithfully through the experiences of this time, 
and are found in heart and character copies of God's 
dear Son.— Rom. 8:29. 

"Now is my soul troubled"— my feelings are turbulent; 
I am in a commotion. Shall I pray, Father 
deliver me from this hour? Shall I not, on the contrary, 
remember that for this very cause I am come to 
this hour, that I might endure, and that willingly, 
rather than ask to be delivered? I might ask the Father 
for a certain kind of deliverance which would not invalidate 
the engagement which I made, that I would 
give my life in obedience to his will. I might ask him 



to permit some calamity to befall me which would result 

in my death and thus save me from the peculiarly 

trying and ignominious conditions incident to my apprehension 

and execution as a criminal— as the worst 

kind of a criminal, a blasphemer against my Heavenly 

Father. Such a deviation would seem to me not an 

unreasonable concession for one who has shown his 

faithfulness to the Father's will in all things. And yet 

R2758 : page 13 

I will not ask even this concession. Rather, I will 
submit my will to the Father's will most absolutely, 
and carry out to the very jot and tittle the spirit as well 
as the letter of my covenant. Let the Father's will be 
done in every particular; it must be the wisest and 
best, else it would not be his plan. It is for this very 
purpose that I came to this hour, that I might manifest, 
demonstrate, to the Father my devotion, my most 
implicit obedience to his will. Proceed, Father! Glorify 
thine own name and in thine own way, at whatever 
the cost to me! 

Then a voice was heard, a voice which some understood 
and which others misunderstood, as is always 
the case with the voice of God. The world heareth no 
message; believers hear the message partially; but the 
begotten sons, in perfect accord with the Father, hear 
and understand fully. No doubt our Lord received a 

R2759 : page 13 

blessing through this message from the Father, and yet 
he assures us that it was not specially sent for him, but 
rather as a demonstration for the benefit of the disciples 
—that they might note that God attested his teachings. 
God does not today speak to his people by such 
an audible voice; but he speaks none the less forcibly 
to us— through his Word and through his providences. 
Yet now, as then, some hear and appreciate more than 
others. Some, who have the word of God in their 
hands appreciate it only as another book, and likewise 
discern not God's providences in the affairs of his people. 
Others see in the Lord's Word a message, a good message, 
and reverence the book and see in his providences 
something of the divine care and provision in connection 
with the body of Christ. But only the spirit-begotten 
sons, the members of the body of Christ, today, like the 
Head eighteen hundred years ago, hear the Father's 
Word, with distinctness and clearness and understanding. 
These also note divine providences, and are enabled 
to rejoice in them, and to realize that all things are 
working together for good to them because they love 
God, and have been called according to his purpose, and 
are in the way of responding to that call, seeking to 
make their calling and their election sure. 



THE PRINCE OF THIS WORLD. 



When our Lord said, "Now is the judgment of this 
world,— now shall the prince of this world be cast out," 
he evidently meant by now the same as in his previous 
expression, "The hour is come." But a little space of 
time now intervened until this would be accomplished. 
The judgment of this world, so to speak, was in the balance 
and would speedily be decided. The first trial 
took place in Eden, father Adam being the one who 
was on trial, and the world of mankind, still in his 
loins, was in a certain sense on trial, in the balance, 
with him. That trial, as we know, resulted in disaster 
to Adam and all his posterity. "By one man's disobedience 
sin entered into the world, and death as a 
result of sin, and so death passed upon all men for all 
[through inherited weaknesses] are sinners." (Rom. 5:12.) 
That judgment (trial and sentence) of the world 
was unto death; and Adamic death had reigned up to 
the time that our Lord spoke, for 4161 years. But 
now under divine providence, under the grace of God, 
a substitute or ransom had been found, acceptable to 
God, and willing to give his life a ransom for Adam and 
his race. This one was now on trial, and the fate of the 
whole world was in the balance and depended upon his 
victory. Hence, as our Lord expressed it, now the world's 
krisis, or trial, was at its climax, and his decision to be 
faithful to the Father's will, and to despise the present 
life in obedience to that will, determined that trial 
favorably to the world; for the Apostle declares that as 
the world's condemnation was unto death through 
Adam, so the world's justification is unto life through 
Christ— that so far as the divine law was concerned 
Jesus paid the full penalty for the whole world, and 
hence will have both the right and the opportunity, not 
only to rescue mankind from the tomb by an awakening, 
but also to rescue fully and completely so many as will 
accept the favor, by raising them up fully out of sin 
and death to perfection and harmony with God during 
and at the close of the Millennial age.— Rom. 5:18,19. 

Our Lord's other statement is quite in accord with 
this: "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out." 
That is to say, the trial now in progress in my own person 
will result not only in a reversal and cancellation 
of the divine sentence of mankind unto death, but it 
will also result in the overthrow of the present rule of 
evil in the hands of Satan, the prince of this world. He 
shall be cast out; he shall be chained for the period of 
my Millennial reign, and shall subsequently be destroyed. 
Since the whole matter of the world's judgment 
and the removal of its present captor through sin 
was dependent upon our Lord's victory, it was quite 
proper that he should date all those results from that 
"hour," notwithstanding the fact that it would be centuries 



before these things would be accomplished;— the 

binding of Satan, the release of mankind from the 

Adamic sentence through the instrumentalities of the 

Millennial Kingdom (Christ and the glorified Church), 

into the glorious liberty (from these things) which 

belongs to all sons of God,— whatever their plane of 

being. Not that we are to suppose that all men will 

avail themselves of these heavenly mercies and privileges, 

but that all are to have a full opportunity to do 

so; so that whosoever will die the Second Death will 

die for his own sins and not through inherited imperfections 

—not because the fathers ate the sour grape of 

sin.-Jer. 31:29,30; 1 John 5:16. 

WHEN CHRIST WILL DRAW ALL MEN. 



The statement of the next verse is in absolute accord 
with this: "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men 
unto [toward] me." While, as the narrator records, 
these words signified by what manner of death Jesus 
should die— lifted up on the cross— nevertheless, they 
meant more than this. They meant, also, If I shall 
faithfully give my life according to my covenant, and 
shall receive of the Heavenly Father the high exaltation 
or lifting up which he has promised, that exaltation will 
bring with it the power to bless all the families of the 
earth; first, according to the Father's will and prearrangement, 

R2759 : page 14 

he himself will draw unto me a Church or 

Bride; I will not draw these, but the Father: "No man 

can come unto me [in the present time, in the narrow 

way] except the Father which sent me draw him, and I 

will raise him up [exalt him] at the last day"— the Millennial 

day, "early in the morning" of that day.— 

John 6:44; Psa. 46:5. 

And when these shall have been thus exalted as 
members of my body, raised up as sharers with me in 
the first resurrection, then I will begin my drawing work, 
which will not be confined to a special class, a Royal 
Priesthood, like the Father's drawing. Mine will be a 
general drawing: I will draw all men; it will be a universal 
opportunity to come unto me and receive from 
me, as the Father's representative, full remission of sins 
that are past, and such instructions in righteousness, 
such chastisements, such experiences, such judgments, 
as will tend to lift them up, up, up, to the glorious condition 
of human perfection from which all fell through 
Adam's transgression, and the right to restore to which 
I gained for them by not counting my earthly life precious 
unto me, but instead by despising it, that I might 
redeem men and gain this high heavenly condition in 
which, according to the divine arrangement, I and my 



servants who will be with me, and whom the Father 
will honor also, and whom I will call my Bride and 
brethren, and joint-heirs, shall bless all the families of 
the earth.-Rev. 22:17; Rom. 8:17; Gal. 3:16,29. 



R2755 : page 14 

"WHAT THINK YE OF CHRIST?" 

--MATT. 22:34-46.-JAN. 27.- 

OUR LORD'S public teaching evidently ended 

with the Tuesday prior to his death, and with 

the teachings of that day our lesson has to do. The 

incidents of the two days preceding tended to bring 

matters to a climax: the leaders realized that the new 

Teacher was undermining their influence with the people. 

They considered him a false claimant to the Messiahship, 

yet could not deny his purity of life, the high 

standard of his teaching, and his wisdom. Now they 

saw him boldly teaching in the Temple day after day, 

and altho his teachings were in parabolic form their 

significance was undoubtedly recognized by many of the 

people. This very morning he had given three forceful 

parables, which, if received by many, would correspondingly 

weaken the influence of those who "sat in 

Moses' seat," the doctors of the Law and the Pharisees. 

One of these parables represented God as a father, 
and two classes in Israel as sons: the one avowing his 
obedience to the Father's will, nevertheless was disobedient, 
and represented the Scribes and Pharisees; 
the other son, who, refusing to do the Father's will, but 
subsequently obeying it, got the Father's blessing and 
approval, represented the class of publicans and sinners 
who were now flocking to Jesus and becoming interested 
and seeking to do the divine will, and who were 
accepted of the Father, notwithstanding that previously 
they had shirked and even publicly denied their 
allegiance. 

R2756 : page 14 

The second parable represented Israel as the Lord's 
vineyard, and the Pharisees and doctors of the Law as 
the husbandmen, whose duty it was to care for the vineyard, 
that it should bring forth much fruit to the owner; 
but who appropriated the fruits to themselves— seeking 
honor one of another and not God's glory. The result 
the parable showed to be the complete overthrow of 
those husbandmen, and the giving of the vineyard into 
the care of others— the overthrow of the Jewish system 
or polity, and the establishment of a new order of things 
through other servants— our Lord Jesus and his apostles, 
who did not seek honors to themselves, but sought 



the glory of God and the welfare of his vineyard. 

The third parable, the marriage of the king's son, 
pressed home the truth still more strongly, indicating 
that Christ was the King's Son, and that the heavenly 
Father had sent forth the invitation to the wedding-feast 
first to the officials of the Jews, as the representatives 
of that people, the Doctors of the Law, the Pharisees, 
etc., and upon their refusal he found others to 
take their place at the feast, which was not at all 
interrupted. 

A consultation of the leading Jews showed that 
they were in accord in thinking that this Teacher must 
be interrupted in some manner; otherwise his influence 
would be too great; but the question was, who could 
meet him in argument? Who would confute and refute 
his propositions, and thus break his influence with the 
people? The counsellors were of different factions, quite 
opposed to each other, but they were drawn together 
by mutual interest in their opposition to Jesus. And 
thus it ever is with error; the most contrary theorists 
are ready to cooperate with each other in opposition to 
the truth. Nevertheless, truth is mighty and shall ultimately 
prevail against all its opponents; not always 
so quickly, however, as in the case before us, when the 
Truth himself, with superhuman wisdom, confounded 
and overthrew the machinations of error. 

Apparently the religious leaders, after conferring, 
decided that they would attempt to confuse the Lord 
and confound his teachings, and thus make a division 
amongst the people, getting some of them against him. 
First came the Herodians, who were not Jews at all, 
but, like Herod, Ishmaelites— sons of Abraham, through 
Hagar, as the Jews were his sons through Sarah. The 
Herodians, we may presume, were not very religious, 
but in considerable measure politicians; nevertheless, 
the desire to break the influence of Jesus was sufficient 
to unite with these Ishmaelites the Pharisees, who 
claimed to be the most strict and holy of the Jews. 
They had thought of a method of entrapping the Lord, 
which they felt sure would be a success. It was a simple 
method: they would ask him a question respecting 
taxation in which all the people were interested, high 
and low, rich and poor, publicans and Pharisees. They 
felt sure that in answering this question he would either 
lay himself open to the charge of teaching sedition, and 
therefore himself liable to arrest as an opponent of 
Herod and of Caesar, or by approving the taxes they 
esteemed that he would alienate from himself many of 
the Jews who were now regarding him favorably. Hence 
their question: "Is it lawful to pay tribute [taxes] to 
Caesar or not?" 

It would scarcely be right to say that our Lord 

R2756 : page 15 

avoided their question. Rather, we would say that he 



gave it a much broader and more comprehensive answer 

than they or anyone else would have supposed possible. 

He said, in the hearing of the people, "Why 

tempt ye me?" thus in a word showing that he perceived 

the real animus of the question, that it was an 

endeavor on their part to entangle him. Then he asked 

for a coin of the kind generally used for taxes, and having 

their assent to the authority which issued it, he 

said, "Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's, 

and to God the things which are God's." What a lesson 

in these words! How clearly they indicate that 

God's people are to be subject to the powers that be, 

and to wait for God's Kingdom, rather than to attempt 

opposition, insurrection, conflict with the laws of earthly 

authorities! 

In this respect our Lord's words are a lesson to his 
people today, to the effect that they should keep their 
religious affairs, which are of God and toward God, 
separate and distinct from worldly politics, which are 
of the Gentiles, during this period of the "Times of the 
Gentiles." "Ye are not of this world, even as I am 
not of this world." On the other hand, the Lord's 
people are to remember that, as originally created, man 
bore God's image stamped upon his very nature; and 
the persons addressed should have remembered also 
that God's superscription was upon them, that he had 
accepted them as his people,— Israel. The thought is 
that the heart, the life, the affections, belong to God, 
and should be rendered to him, and this being done the 
rendering of a little tribute-money to some earthly 
prince would be of comparative insignificance, and the 
will of God recognized in the heart would cause all 
things to work together for their good. 

The questioners found themselves answered in a 
manner they had never dreamed of; they were put to 
silence; they could take no exceptions to such an answer. 
It had lifted their quibble to a plane of thought 
which they must confess was far higher than had ever 
entered into their minds, and had settled it effectually. 

Next came the Sadducees, no doubt boastfully 
saying, We alone are competent to deal with this man, 
and to show up his faults, tho at the same time we will 
be showing up the errors and faults of you Pharisees 
respecting a future life through a resurrection. The 
Sadducees were what we might term the Agnostics or 
Rationalists of that time. They denied that there were 
any spirit beings, and denied a future life for mankind, 
claiming that there would be no resurrection of the dead, 
—that faith in a resurrection was not warranted by any 
satisfactory Scriptures, and that reason also repudiated 
the thought. 

By their question they would endeavor to show 
that Jesus' teachings as a whole were built upon a false 
foundation;— that the present life is everything, instead 
of nothing, and to be sacrificed to attain a future life 
by a better resurrection, as Jesus taught. They put 



what they supposed would be an unanswerable question 
respecting the condition of things in the resurrection 
age. Our Lord's reply was that the difficulty was 
with them, and not with the divine plan; that they had 
failed to understand the Scriptures, and did not properly 
understand the power of God, who is abundantly able 
to arrange for all the exigencies which will arise in the 
perfecting of his own gracious plans and promises. 
Then, going beyond this answer to their question, our 
Lord demonstrated to them that the resurrection is 
taught in the Old Testament Scriptures— not in so many 
words, but indirectly— that God's language with reference 
to the patriarchs implies that they are not annihilated, 
—implies that they are to be resurrected, to live 
again, because God would not use such language as he 
did use respecting beings who had passed totally out 
of existence, and were never to be in existence again. 
The answer was a complete one, as the first verse of 
our lesson shows. 

But our Lord's opponents still hoped that they 
might find some one capable of vanquishing in argument 
him who "spake as never man spake." And so 
we read that when the Pharisees heard that he had 
"muzzled the Sadducees" they were gathered together. 
Their disappointment at not seeing Jesus confounded by 
the Sadducees was off-set by their pleasure in having 
their Sadducee opponents thus effectually silenced. 
Then one of the Pharisees, who was a Doctor of the Law, 
a scribe, bethought him that he would test our Lord 
with a theological question much discussed amongst the 
Jewish rabbis; a question upon which they were very 
generally divided. He would at least get this great 
Teacher confused and show the people that, while the 
Scribes had such contentions amongst themselves respecting 
the Law, this Teacher also, when treating theological 
subjects, would be confused. Altho it is said that 
he propounded the question temptingly, this does not 
necessarily mean that this scribe was dishonest or in 
affiliation with others of the rulers who were conspiring 
merely to entrap Jesus; for our Lord himself testifies of 
him that he was "not far from the Kingdom of God." 
-Mark 12:34. 

His question was, Which one of the Ten Commandments 
is the most important, the greatest? Our Lord's 
answer was most direct. He divided the Law into two 
parts, as on the two tables of stone; the one part relating 
to God and man's obligations to his Creator; and the second 
part relating to man's responsibilities toward his 
fellow-men. Man's duty to God our Lord placed as 
supreme, yet the other as linked with it and necessary to 
perfect harmony with God. The force of our Lord's 
words is found in the fact that they are mainly a quotation 
from the Jewish Law.— Deut. 6:4,5. 

Matthew's account does not include all the words 
which our Lord spoke, as recorded by Mark, beginning, 
"Hear, O Israel! The Lord [Jehovah] our God is one 



Lord [Jehovah]." This declaration the Jews were in 
the habit of calling, "The Shama," because the first 
word in the sentence in Hebrew is Shama, translated in 
English, "Hear." This Shama declaration was considered 
a sacred one amongst the Jews and was enclosed in 
their phylacteries, repeated in their prayers, etc. The 
Scribe, therefore, could have not the slightest objection 
to our Lord's answer: it was conclusive, and, as recorded 
by Mark, he acknowledged the truth saying, 
"Well, Master, thou hast said the truth, for there is one 
God, and there is no other but he; and to love him with 
all the heart and with all the understanding and with 
all the soul [being] and with all the strength, and to 
love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole 
burnt offerings and sacrifices."— Mark 12:32-34. See 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, Vol. V., Chap. 2. 

R2757 : page 16 

No wonder, then, the inspired Apostle declares that 
"Love is the fulfilling of the Law!" We can readily 
see that only in proportion as love is in the heart can 
the divine law be fulfilled by any. This does not interfere 
with the Scriptural declaration that "the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled in us, who walk not 
after the flesh but after the spirit." The reason why 
the Jews could not keep the Law was that they did 
not have perfect love in their hearts, and the same difficulty 
would stand in the way of us who are of the 
New Covenant, were it not that our Covenant makes 
for us the favorable arrangement through the precious 
blood of Christ, that our intentions as new 
creatures are accepted of God as instead of our natural 
hearts. Those who have entered into covenant relationship 
with God through Christ, to follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, are walking "after the spirit," following after 
love, even tho they be not able to walk up to the spirit 
—up to the full standard of love in every thought and 
word. Their efforts in this direction are accepted as 
tho they were perfect, and day by day, week by week, 
and year by year, under the Lord's instruction and 
leading by his Word, and providence, they are making 
progress in this good way— learning more and more 
what love is, as they see it exhibited in the Lord's 
Word and plan and character, and seeking and attaining 
more and more to the likeness of God's dear Son, 
whose perfect love was a copy of the Father's. 

As shown elsewhere, it is this "mark" of perfect 
Love, which must be attained in the heart, so that our 
wills will be fully in accord with it (however imperfect 
our expression of those wills in words and deeds, by 
reason of imperfections of the flesh). And to grow in 
this grace of love to God necessarily implies a growth 
also in love toward mankind; and especially toward 
those who are in sympathy and harmony with righteousness. 
(1 John 4:8,20,21; 5:1). Truly the divine 



Law is grandly beautiful to those who see it; and none 

can see it fully except as he has gradually come to appreciate 

its lengths and breadths and heights and depths. 

And each additional step of knowledge and appreciation 

must be accompanied by efforts toward obedience 

in the practice of love toward God and fellow-men, 

otherwise progress is impossible. Our Lord's declaration 

is that all of the teachings of the Law, as well as 

all the teachings of the prophets, are in harmony with, 

and made dependent upon this Law;— that God's promises 

are not intended for any others than those who are 

in heart-accord with his Law, and if in heart-accord 

they will desire and endeavor to be good and do good 

in every sense of the word, as far and as rapidly as 

possible. 

Seeing the number of Pharisees in his audience, 
gathered by the question before mentioned, our Lord 
considered this a favorable opportunity to turn the 
tables, and to ask them a question— not that he was 
endeavoring to trap them as they had been endeavoring 
to do with him; but because there is no better method 
of presenting a truth strikingly to the attention of a person 
than through a wisely directed question. He saw 
that the difficulty of the Pharisees in respect to himself 
was, (1) that as a man he did not have the outward 
evidences of ability to establish himself as the King 
of Israel, the Messiah— he lacked wealth and soldiers 
and influence; and he lacked also that fierceness of disposition 
and haughty domineering manner recognized 
as the usual accompaniments of successful generals. 
(2) Their chief objection to him was, as they would 
put it, that he was bolstering up the weaknesses of his 
earthly conditions by claiming that he himself was of a 
heavenly origin, and that somehow or other the establishment 
of his Kingdom would be by spirit-power. 

When our Lord asked the question, "What think 
ye of Messiah? Of what family should he be expected?" 
he well knew what the answer would be;— that they 
would acknowledge that they were expecting Messiah 
to be of the tribe and family of David: and no doubt 
the Pharisees, while answering this question, expected 
that the next question would be, Do you not acknowledge 
that I am of the tribe and family of David, etc.? 
But our Lord desired to bring out another point. His 
earthly genealogy they knew, or could easily prove: 
he wished to show that the Scriptures taught that Messiah 
must be something more than the son of David, 
that he must be both the Son of David and Lord of 
David. Hence, when they answered that Messiah would 
be the Son of David, he enquired, What then is David's 
meaning when he makes use of the expression, "The 
Lord [Jehovah] said unto my Lord [adon, master], Sit 
thou at my right hand [associated with me in the 
Kingdom, highest in my favor]"? (Psa. 110:1.) The 
Pharisees had not studied the Scriptures sufficiently, 
else they would have seen this feature before, that 



Messiah was to be not only the son, or offspring of David, 
but also greater than David, the Root of David. No 
wonder they were unable to answer; there was nothing 
for them to say; the matter thoroughly upheld our 
Lord's claim that Messiah must have a divine origin, 
divine authority, and be backed by divine power in 
whatever he would do. 

It should be noticed in this connection that both 
this quotation from the Psalms and the previous quotation 
from Deuteronomy by our Lord, are against the 
Trinitarian view of several persons in divine power, 
"equal in power and glory." They are in full accord, 
however, with the Scriptural teachings of a heart-oneness 
between the Father and the Son, and the high origin 
as well as the high exaltation of the Son,— "that all men 
should honor the Son even as they honor the Father;" 
yet nevertheless keep the two distinctly separate, as our 
Lord did in his teachings. See "The At-one-ment Between 
God and Man," Chaps. 2 and 6. 

"From that time forth no man durst ask him any 
question." They were afraid to question him further 
in the sense of endeavoring to entrap him, having learned 
that he always got the advantage; the answers only resulted 
in greater honor to Jesus and the confusion of 
those who sought to entrap him. And so it is sometimes 
with the Lord's people today when armed with 
the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; it is 
so sharp that their adversaries stand in fear of it. And 
yet this sword should be always used as our Master 
used it, not in bitterness nor in wrath, nor with sarcasm; 
but in meekness in gentleness and patience and love, 
"In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, 
if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging 
of the truth, and that they may recover 
themselves out of the snare of the devil."— 2 Tim. 2:25. 



page 17 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JANUARY 15, 1901. No. 2. 
CONTENTS 

Which Is the True Gospel? 19 

Various Theories Found Wanting 20 

But One Stands the Tests of Scripture 
and Reason 22 

What Say the Scriptures About Hell? 25 

Erroneous Theories Exposed 26 

Hell in English, Hebrew and Greek 26 

The Rich Man and Lazarus 35 

The Sheep and the Goats 37 

Everlasting Punishment 39 

The Lake of Fire and Brimstone 40 

Parabolic and Symbolic Figures 42 



Forgivable and Unpardonable Sins 46 

Future Retribution 46 

Let Honesty and Truth Prevail 48 

page 18 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



THIS ISSUE IS A DOUBLE ONE-32 PAGES. 



NONE TOO POOR TO HAVE THIS JOURNAL REGULARLY. 

IF A developed child of God, you are interested in Bible study; and if 
so you cannot afford to deprive yourself of the helping hand God has 
provided for all such through the semi-monthly visits of this journal. If 
obliged to ask for it on credit, do so; if never able to pay you need not 
fear offending us. We will cancel the debt at any time on request. If 
you have no prospect of being able to pay, then say so as above and have 
it free— paid for out of a fund provided by loving "brethren" who desire 
thus to assist you and serve the Lord. Write at once and be sure to 
RENEW each December. 

HOW TO WRITE TO US. 

WRITE your name and full address very plainly at the head of your 
letter sheet if it is not printed there;— giving street and number. 
And do this on every letter. Write your order on a separate sheet from 
your letter,— or on a separate page. 

Address business communications to our Society as above, and personal 
or doctrinal queries to the Editor at same address. 



VOLUNTEERS-SERVICE FOR JESUS. 

OUR Society's object is— The Promulgation of Christian Knowledge: 
to the intent that the Lord's people may be sanctified by the Truth 
—the only genuine and acceptable sanctification. Everyone willing is 
invited to share this service as a true soldier of the cross. Ammunition 
in the form of tracts will be supplied free to all who will promise to use 
the same faithfully and judiciously. Write for samples free. 

"FOOD FOR THINKING CHRISTIANS." 

A Pamphlet by this title by the Editor of this journal, but now out of 
print, is much more than replaced by the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 
mentioned below. These volumes are invaluable aids to Bible study. 
They are sold at cost, and loaned to those too poor to purchase, who will 
promise a careful reading and to return them. 



R2759 : page 19 

WHICH IS THE TRUE GOSPEL? 



"I am not Ashamed of the Gospel of Christ."— Rom. 1:16. 



A Discourse by Pastor C. T. Russell of Allegheny, Pa., delivered at The 
Florida Chautauqua Assembly, Defuniak Springs, Fla., March 4, 1900, 
as reported by the Associated Press. 

NO APOLOGY seems necessary for our subject 
—"Which is the true Gospel of which the 
Apostle was not ashamed?" If time and 
thought may be profitably expended in the study of 
the earthly sciences— sociology, finance, etc., etc., 
built largely upon human inferences and conjectures 
—surely none could dispute the propriety of studying 
the science of divine revelation. If it be profitable to 
investigate the physical diseases of mankind and their 
causes, and the laws of medicine and of sanitation 
for the offset of these, it surely cannot be disputed 
that the Gospel which God has presented as the antidote 
for soul-sickness and soul-death, and as the 
science pertaining to life eternal, is worthy of still 
greater and more profound consideration. 

The greatest minds, the noblest specimens of our 
race, have admitted our topic to be the one above all 
others in importance; and have weighed it carefully 
—whether as a result they accepted or rejected it. We 
are not now discussing the weight of mental acumen 
enlisted for and against the Gospel: we are merely 
noting the fact that all men of ability have recognized 



that the subject is worthy of their careful consideration, 
and as having claims upon their attention paramount 
to any and all others. Indeed, it may be set 
down as a fact that whoever has given the subject of 
religion no consideration is one of three things,— a 
novice in mental exercise, or a near relative to "the 
fool who hath said in his heart there is no God," or 
a coward, preyed upon by fears, instigated by Satan 
to hinder honest investigation of the divine message 
of love and mercy. 

Even a hasty glance into the intelligent faces of 
this large audience assures me that you all have given 
some thought to our theme;— though experience assures 
me that comparatively few of you have ever 
reached conclusions on this subject fully satisfactory 
to yourselves. Hence your faith and love and zeal 
toward God and your zeal for the Gospel are less 
strong than you could desire. Let us hope that as 
we reason together on this great subject to-day, we 
may, by God's grace, see more clearly than ever before 
which is the true Gospel— the one of which the 
Apostle was not ashamed, and of which, therefore, 
none of us need feel ashamed,— the Gospel, therefore, 
which should more and more move and energize us, 
as the power of God unto salvation. 

No one of intelligence will dispute the meaning 
of the word "Gospel;" it signifies "good tidings," 
good news,— a good message. Nevertheless, in some 
unaccountable manner, by common consent, "a real 
Gospel sermon" is almost universally understood to 
signify bad tidings— tidings of eternal misery to the 
great mass of our race— to all except the little flock 
of God's faithful people. As a consequence the 
preacher of a "Gospel sermon" is expected to figuratively 
shake the congregation over an abyss of everlasting 
torture, making as strong an effort as possible 
to intimidate them thereby to a thorough reformation 
of life, in hope of thus escaping an awful eternity. 

True, this that we might term "the Gospel (?) of 
damnation" is not so generally preached as it once 
was, because more enlightened minds of cultured people 
repudiate it as a fetich of the past. Yet this perversion 
of the Gospel is still to be heard in country 
places, at camp meetings, occasionally in the city pulpit, 

R2759 : page 20 

and universally in Salvation Army meetings. 
Nothing is further from our intention than a criticism 
of the consciences and honesty of intention of 
those who thus preach. It is no part of our mission 
to criticise persons and motives, but "With malice 
toward none and with charity toward all" we consider 
it not only our privilege but our duty to criticise doctrines, 
that thereby the truth may be more firmly established, 
and error brought into disrepute. 



Before we proceed to the consideration of the 
Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed— the 
Gospel set forth in the Scriptures— it will be expedient 
for us to take a glance at the different Gospels set 
forth by the various denominations of Christendom. 
It is not our thought that each denomination represents 
a different Gospel, for the differences in many 
instances are chiefly respecting ceremonies, forms, 
methods of government, name, etc., and not in respect 
to the message or Gospel held forth. Nevertheless, 
there are three distinct lines of faith, or doctrine- 
three distinct Gospels set forth in Christendom, all 
recognized as "orthodox," because they all contain as 
their fundamental the doctrine of the eternal torment 
of all mankind, except the comparatively few "saved." 
Each of these three Gospels have millions of supporters, 
divided into numerous denominations. These 
in point of numbers are 

(1) The Roman Catholic faith, or Gospel, in 

which concur the Greek Catholics and Arminian Catholics, 
and some of the high-church Episcopalians. 

(2) The Calvinistic Gospel, which is held by the 
various Presbyterian denominations, the Congregationalists, 
Baptists, and many Lutherans and 

Episcopalians. 

(3) The Arminian Gospel, held and chiefly represented 
by the Methodists of various names and connections, 
and by the Free-Will Baptists: however, 

many of other denominations at heart accept the Arminian 
Gospel, while their church connections identify 
them with the Calvinistic Gospel. Hence we may say, 
so far as Protestantism is concerned, that the Arminian 
and the Calvinist Gospels are about equally 
supported. 

It may not be possible for us to handle our subject 
properly and thoroughly without offering some 
criticism of these three Gospels which for centuries 
have entrenched themselves in Christian minds, each 
fortified by the decisions of its own Councils, backed 
by voluminous opinions from their several theological 
seminaries, but we can and assuredly will 
strenuously avoid saying one solitary word in criticism 
of those who we believe conscientiously uphold these 
several conflicting Gospels. We call you to witness 
that we are all Scripturally enjoined to "Contend 
earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints" 
(the true Gospel), at the same time that we are enjoined 
by the same authority to "Speak evil of no man." 
We shall endeavor to keep strictly within these admittedly 
proper lines, and, additionally, as the Apostle 
admonishes, "Speak the truth in love." 

THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ROMAN CATHOLICISM. 



The Gospel according to Roman Catholicism is 
that all men fell into sin and under sentence of eternal 
torment: that Christ accomplished a redemptive work 
which, supplemented by the sacrifice of the mass, and 
by prayers and penances, permits all believers (Roman 
Catholics) to escape that eternal torment, which 
will be the sure portion of all heretics, regardless of 
their good works or morals. As for its own people, 
it holds that even its highest officials, including 
Bishops and Popes, go to Purgatory for refinement, 
purification from sin and to be prepared for heaven. 
It claims that some will spend only a short time in 
Purgatory, assisted out of it by the merit of prayers, 
masses, etc., on their behalf by their friends after 
death. But their expectation is that ultimately Purgatory 
will be no more, its thousands of millions being 
prepared for a better and happier condition. But 
according to all the great theologians of Papacy, and 
according to all the Papal bulls, all Protestants, all 
rejecters of Papacy's teachings, will suffer endless 
torment. This is the Roman Catholic Gospel fairly 
presented, as we understand it. It does not seem to us 
to be very good news— not very good tidings, even to 
those who get the very best it has to offer, and it 
certainly would be very bad tidings to all out of 
harmony with Papacy. 

Let us next look at the great Protestant doctrine 
represented in the word Calvinism— the doctrine of 
the election of the Church and the reprobation of all 
others. 

THE GOSPEL PRESENTED BY CALVINISM. 



Calvinism claims that faith in Christ is essential 
to salvation and it admits that faith comes by hearing 
and hearing by the Word of God. Calvinism requires 
more than a mere knowledge of Christ and belief in 
him as a good and exemplary man, who died a martyr 
to his too extreme convictions. It requires faith in 
Christ's death as a sacrifice for man's sin, and at least 
some manifestation towards righteousness of life before 
any could be recognized as being of the elect 
Church. Consequently, according to Calvinism, the 
elect Church could not include the heathen of the 
present time and all the way back through the past, 
who have never heard of the only name given under 
heaven or amongst men whereby we must be saved. 
Stretched to its very broadest, Calvinism could not 
include more than one in twenty of earth's fifty thousand 
millions that are estimated to have lived from 
Adam's day until the present time. In other words, 
according to the broadest possible estimate of this 
view, more than forty-seven thousand millions of humanity 
were, in the language of the Westminster Confession 



of Faith, "passed by" as non-elect in the divine 
plan. 

And what does this mean— "passed by" or 
"non-elect?" It means, according to Calvinism, that 
God, who knew the end from the beginning, before 
creating this world and mankind upon it, determined 
that he would "pass by" and not elect those forty-seven 
thousand millions of his creatures to life and 
happiness, but would predestine them to an eternity of 
torture, and that carrying out this diabolical plan, he 
prepared a great place large enough to hold forty-seven 
thousand millions, and fuel sufficient to produce 
the necessary combustion there to all eternity— did 
all this with a full appreciation of all the awful facts 
and circumstances of the case. 

R2759 : page 21 

Moreover, we remember the statement of Calvinism 
which many of us learned in our youth, to the 
effect that God's favor toward the elect is not because 
of any worthiness on their part, nor because of any 
works which they had done, but "of his own sovereign 
grace" he saves them from all the horrible conditions 
which he has predestined shall be upon the others. 
Now if the salvation of the elect is not because of 
their works or worthiness, but because of God's sovereign 
grace only, the simplest mind can see that God 
might without any violation of principle have extended 
that sovereign grace to others— to all, since it was 
not because of worthiness nor because of works, but 
merely of his own volition that any are saved,— according 
to Calvinism. 

The celebrated Jonathan Edwards, when preaching 
upon this subject in New England years ago, after 
picturing the awful torment of the non-elect, was 
asked the question, Would not the thought of the 
anguish of the lost mar the bliss of God's people in 
glory? His answer in substance was, No; you will 
be so changed that such matters will not affect you; 
you will look over the battlements of heaven and see 
in torment your neighbors and friends, yea, your own 
parents and children, brothers and sisters, and turning 
round will praise God the louder because his justice 
is made manifest. 

Now, my dear friends, I do not charge any who 
are here present with having so false a view of the 
divine character and plan as this. Indeed, I am glad 
to note that our Calvinistic friends in general are repudiating 
this doctrine, realizing that there is in it 
a serious lack, not only as respects divine love, but 
also as respects divine justice. I was glad some years 
ago to note that some of our Presbyterian friends 
were so moved by higher and nobler conceptions of 
the Almighty that they wished to rid themselves of 
any part in so blasphemous a statement respecting 



his character and his plan. I was sorry, however, 
that when the matter of "the revision of the Presbyterian 
standards" was taken up it was found that only 
a minority was in favor of revision, and I was still 
more sorry to note that that minority of intelligent, 
godly people was willing to continue to confess to 
such a horrible mis-statement of their true views- 
willing, shall I say, to continue to "blaspheme that 
holy name" because a majority of their brethren were 
unwilling that such blasphemous misrepresentations 
should be discontinued. 

I am glad to believe that if this matter were 
brought to the intelligent attention of Presbyterians 
in general, a large majority would be found willing, 
nay, anxious, to undo the wrong and to make such 
reparation as would be within their power, by way 
of honoring the great Jehovah and attesting their 
appreciation of his love and his justice, as well as of 
his wisdom and of his power. This is just the point: 
Calvinism, in its anxiety to establish the wisdom and 
power of God, his foreknowledge and his ability to 
carry out his plan, has conceived of a plan which is 
far from the correct one, lacking both injustice and 
in love. 

It may be argued that Love is a grace and that 
its exercise is not incumbent upon Jehovah; that all 
that could be asked or expected of him would be simple 
Justice, and some might be ready to claim that 
for God to eternally torment these forty-seven thousand 
millions "passed by" would be in strict accord 
with Justice. This we deny! We claim that having 
the power to create mankind would not justify their 
creation if the Creator saw that the result would be 
the everlasting torture of a single creature. Justice 
would say that power is not to be exercised to 
the injury of another, and that to exercise the creative 
power under such foreknown conditions would be 
injustice. And Wisdom attuned to Justice would say, 
Better a thousand times never to have created anybody 
than to have created one being to suffer unjustly 
eternally. 

This statement, dear friends, is a fair, impartial 
statement of the Gospel according to our beloved 
brother, John Calvin, and those who subscribe to the 
Westminster Confession, and their allies. This surely 
is not the Gospel of which the Apostle Paul, in 
our text, declared, "I am not ashamed of the Gospel 
of Christ." Paul would assuredly have been ashamed 
of such a Gospel, and so are all true Christians, who 
have the true spirit of love and justice,— none more 
so, perhaps, than those who unfortunately, through 
circumstances of birth, etc., and hitherto without realizing 
what it meant, have been lending their name 
and influence to this great blasphemy against the divine 
character. 



THE ARMINIAN VIEW OF THE GOSPEL. 



Let us now examine the Arminian view. This 
view is growing popular. Its message or Gospel is, 
God is love— he loves you; he loves everybody; he 
is doing all that he can to save everybody; if you are 
lost it will not be God's fault, but your own. On 
the surface, at least, this theory seems much more 
loving and much more just than the one already examined, 
but before we go far we will also find it very 
defective, very far from being either a reasonable or a 
Scriptural Gospel. We will find it inconsistent with 
its own statement— illogical. 

For instance, while it sounds nice theoretically 
to say that God is doing all that he can do to save 
the whole world at the present time, everybody knows 
that this is not true; that on the contrary you or I 
or any other intelligent human being if possessed 
of the one-thousandth part of the divine power and 
wisdom could speedily accomplish the evangelization 
of the whole world. Nor will it do to say that God 
has committed himself to a certain mode of procedure 
through his Church, and that if the Church fails to 
contribute with sufficient liberality both money and 
evangelists the heathen will not hear of "the only name 
given under heaven or amongst men whereby we 
must be saved," but will go to eternal torment, etc. 
Neither will it do to say that God is doing all that 
he can do and is hampered by the lack of interest in 
the Church; because his wisdom and foreknowledge 
foresaw all these conditions as they are, and he could 
not justly be excused from the real responsibility of 
the matter, since he is the Creator, and in him is 
vested the all-power as well as the all-wisdom. Such 
a claim as this would be tantamount to saying that 
God has erred in wisdom when he thought to leave 
the conversion of the world to the Church, seeing 
that the Church has not accomplished this. Such a 

R2759 : page 22 

claim would be merely excusing God from doing all 
that he can do, instead of showing that he is doing all 
that he can do. 

But let us look more critically into this matter. 
If this view we are criticising is correct, if God is 
doing all that he can to save the world, and if he has 
been doing this during all the past ages, then without 
question the world's conversion is a hopeless 
thing, and we can never expect to see better results 
than at present. This theory presupposes a race or 
battle between the Almighty and Satan, each seeking 
to capture the human family, and to the discredit 
of the theory it shows Satan the victor thus far. Starting 



out with one pair, both on the Lord's side, the first 

1656 years ended with a flood in which the whole 

world of mankind was blotted out because of wickedness, 

and only eight persons reckoned sufficiently 

righteous to be preserved. Starting again with those 

eight persons counted sufficiently righteous for preservation, 

we find that there are in the world to-day sixteen 

hundred millions, and that out of that whole 

number there are about two hundred millions nominal 

Roman Catholics and one hundred millions nominal 

Protestants, and a very much smaller number of true 

"saints of God." 

What would be the lesson from this if the Arminian 
theory be correct, that God is doing all that 
he can do to save the world? The lesson would be 
that with all his good intentions of love and mercy 
our God is thoroughly incapable of the work he undertook 
to do. And if these are the results in six 
thousand years, what could we hope for in the future? 
How many hundreds of millions of years would it 
be before the whole world would be converted? We 
answer that according to statistics it would never be, 
for statistics show that the natural increase of population 
throughout the world is far, far beyond the 
proportion of even nominal conversions from heathendom. 
Indeed, according to some good reckonings, 
the percentage of Christians every year is decreasing, 
the births of heathen lands so far outnumbering 
the births of Christian lands— even counting all the 
children born in Christendom as Christians. 

Is any Christian, in view of these facts, prepared 
to claim that our God has been doing all that he 
could do for the conversion of the world? If so, that 
Christian may as well write upon his hopes at once 
the word "Ichabod." If we saw that the Calvinistic 
view magnifies the wisdom and power of God at the 
expense of his justice and love, we find on the other 
hand that the Arminian view magnifies the love of God 
at the expense of his wisdom and power. The true 
Gospel must show divine Wisdom and Power in full 
accord with divine Justice and Love: of any other 
we must needs be ashamed. 

DISTINCTIONS WITHOUT PRACTICAL DIFFERENCE. 



But, my dear friends, we may as well now as at 
any time concede that there is comparatively little 
difference in the outcome of these two popular 
Protestant Gospels— the difference is merely a theoretical 
one respecting how the results are to be 
reached. The results themselves are the same in both 
cases— the eternal doom and torment of over forty-seven 
thousand millions of human creatures. For 
our Arminian friends no less than Calvinists agree 



that there is no salvation aside from faith in Christ, 
the only name given; and they admit also that of 
those who believe in Christ only the sanctified are 
of the real Church; and their Gospel is also that only 
the real Church is to be saved and that all others are 
to be eternally and most horribly tormented;— some 
claim in literal flames, others say by the torments 
and gnawings of conscience and remorse, which they 
proceed to say will be worse than the literal flames,— 
and we respond, if worse, so much worse for the 
argument. 

All will surely agree as respects these two 
theories or Gospels held out to the world by Protestant 
Christendom that it would make no difference 
to the forty-seven thousand millions, whether they got 
into that awful state of hopeless woe by divine predestination 
and lack of love and justice, or by divine 

incapacity and lack of foreknowledge and proper arrangements. 
We believe that no true Christian will 
be ready after examining the subject thus far to say 
that he fully approves either of these theories, and 
that he is not ashamed of both of them. 

CONSIDER NOW THE TRUE GOSPEL. 



Let us now proceed to examine what is the true 
Gospel, presented to us in the Word of God— the 
Gospel of which the Apostle was not ashamed. 

The word "gospel" itself should be the clue- 
should save the intelligent Christian from being misled 
by the various theories of bad tidings of great 
misery for nearly all people, miscalled "gospel." He 
who thinks it good news that one out of a thousand of 
the human family is to be saved and the remaining 
999 to be eternally tormented, is either not a Christian 
at all, or he is decidedly undeveloped in Christian 
character, in mercy, in love, in justice. In our opinion 
he is at most only a "babe in Christ" who has need 
first of the milk of the Word and subsequently of the 
"strong meat" thereof, that he may grow up into 
Christ in all things, and be able to comprehend with 
all saints the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the love of God which passeth all understanding. 
-Eph. 3:18,19. 

When occasionally we come across some one 
who gives evidence of being a Christian, and who still 
entertains such horribly blasphemous views respecting 
the Heavenly Father's character, we feel like quoting 
to him the Lord's words through the Prophet, "My 
ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your 
thoughts, for as the heavens are higher than the earth 
so are my ways higher than your ways and my plans 
higher than your plans." (Isa. 55:8,9.) And part 
of our object in this discourse, dear friends, is to have 



those, whose eyes are anointed of the Lord, that they 
may see spiritual things, discern some of the Lord's 
higher ways and higher plans which he presents to 
us in his Word under the name "gospel"— good 
tidings. 

NOT UNIVERSAL SALVATION BUT A UNIVERSAL 
OPPORTUNITY FOR SALVATION. 



The Apostle tells us that God preached the Gospel 
beforehand to Abraham, "beforehand" signifying 

R2759 : page 23 

before it was due to begin; for the Gospel did not begin 

with Abraham, but with our Lord Jesus Christ, 

as the Apostle again declares, this salvation "began 

to be declared by our Lord and was confirmed unto 

us by them that heard him." (Heb. 2:3.) All that 

ever went before our Lord's preaching was not the 

Gospel, but merely types and promises which foreshadowed 

it. Let us notice next what, according to 

the Apostle, constituted this forestatement of the Gospel 

to Abraham: he says that it was couched in the 

words, "In thee and in thy seed shall all nations be 

blessed." (Gal. 3:16,29.) Note this carefully: it does 

not say, In thy seed shall one out of a thousand out 

of the families of the earth be blessed, and the remainder 

be doomed to an indescribably horrible eternity, 

but that the whole Gospel is a Gospel of blessing, applicable 

to all the families of the earth— through 

Christ, the true seed of Abraham. 

When our Lord Jesus was born into the world, 
the Heavenly Father sent a message respecting him, 
and the angels who bore that message declared that 
it was a Gospel message. Let us hearken to what 
the angels said about the eternal torment of the vast 
majority of our race. They said to the shepherds, 
"Behold we bring you good tidings [gospel] of great 
joy, which shall be unto all people." (Luke 2:10.) 
Let it be distinctly noted that the Gospel of the angels, 
like the Gospel communicated to Abraham, contains 
no reference to the damnation and eternal misery of 
any of the Lord's creatures, and that consequently 
our friends of the Salvation Army and others, who in 
ignorance preach damnation and call it the Gospel, 
are doing so in utter violation of the meaning of the 
word and of all the uses of that word throughout the 
Scriptures. However well they may mean, they are 
in this certainly committing a wrong, a grievous 
wrong, and we long to see the light of the knowledge 
of the goodness of God shine into their hearts and relieve 
them of this blindness which comes not from 
God nor from his Word, but from the prince of darkness. 



-2 Cor. 4:4. 

It will require all the Millennial age (which is 
to follow this Gospel age in which we live) to bless 
all the families of the earth with the joyful knowledge 
of divine grace in Christ. Just so surely as the forty-seven 
thousand millions went down into death without 
hearing of the Saviour, without coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, without the good tidings of 
great joy reaching their ears,— just so surely must 
they all come forth from the grave that this very Gospel 
message of "good tidings" may be declared to 
them, and that they may be tested thereby and either 
be accepted to eternal life or destroyed, as unworthy 
of life, in the Second Death. We say just so surely, 
for three reasons: 

(1) The announcement of the Gospel to Abraham 
says, "In thy seed shall all the families of the 

earth be blessed," and all of these forty-seven thousand 
millions belong to this very class specified, the 
families of the earth— and they have not yet been 
blessed with this knowledge of the only name wherein 
is the blessing. 

(2) The same is true of the message by the angels, 
—the good tidings of great joy is for all people, 

and these forty-seven thousand millions of humanity 
are surely the great bulk of all people. 

(3) We are sure that this testimony must be 
given to them in the future because the Scriptural 
declaration is that "Christ died for the ungodly;" "he 
tasted death for every man," and as a consequence 
every man must have an opportunity granted him for 
benefitting by that death, and of availing himself of 
the privilege of eternal life which was secured by 
our Lord's ransom sacrifice. 

DID CHRIST DIE FOR THE CHURCH ONLY? 



But some one would perhaps say, Christ died 
only for the sins of the Church and not for the sins 
of the world, and consequently the sins of the world 
cannot be forgiven them. We answer, No; the Scriptural 
declaration most positively is that "Jesus Christ 
by the grace of God tasted death for every man," "to 
be testified in due time." And, additionally, the Apostle 
says, "He is a propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
[the Church's] sins, and not for ours only, but also for 
the sins of the whole world."— 1 John 2:2. 

What could be plainer than this? If the price 
for the sins of the whole world has been paid to Justice, 
we may rest well assured that Justice will furnish 
opportunity through the Redeemer whereby all these 
whose sins were atoned for may come to a knowledge 
of Christ, and to an opportunity of accepting divine 
grace through him. 



But some one will say, Why should God adopt 
a plan which would necessitate a resurrection of the 
dead, and a post-resurrection trial for eternal life except 
for all the elect Church of this Gospel age? 

We answer,— (1) It is not for us to inquire why 
the Lord adopts certain plans which differ from those 
which our poor finite minds might arrange for him: 
rather it is for us to acknowledge that our wisdom is 
insufficient on such a subject and that we should come 
humbly to the Lord to hear from his Word whatever 
he may be pleased to inform us respecting his purposes. 
(2) As a matter of fact only those who approach 
the question from this standpoint need expect 
to see the truth or to "comprehend with all saints 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the love of God."-Eph. 3:18; 1 Cor. 2:12. 

God has been pleased, however, to reveal to us 
some of his reasons for arranging his plan as we see 
it. He assures us of his full wisdom and power to 
manage every feature of his own work according to 
his own good pleasure, assuring us that he knows the 
end from the beginning, and that the end will fully 
justify every step that he has taken. His Word, no 
less than observation, shows us that during all these 
six thousand years the world has been getting a lesson 
respecting the exceeding sinfulness of sin and its 
wages of sorrow and death. His Word assures us also 
that during the next age, the Millennium, the whole 
world will be brought to a knowledge of the way of 
righteousness and love and peace, and will see the 
divine law in practical operation, and witness its beneficent 
results in all those who will come into harmony 
with the great Mediator. 

Thus mankind learns the lesson of evil and its 
consequences first in the present life, and the lesson 
of righteousness and its blessed results under divine 

R2759 : page 24 

providence, in the Millennium; and when thus fully 
equipped with knowledge on both sides of the question 
and instructed by the Royal Priesthood, (the 
completed and glorified elect Gospel Church), mankind 
will be ready for the tests, that will be applied 
by the Lord Jesus, under which the obedient and faithful 
will be granted full perfection and eternal life, and 
the disobedient and incorrigible will "be destroyed 
from amongst the people."— Acts 3:22,23. 

"IF YE BE CHRIST'S, THEN ARE YE ABRAHAM'S 
SEED AND HEIRS." 



Another matter, really the key to the whole question 
which we are discussing, is revealed in God's 



Word, viz., that in the divine purpose the promised 

"Seed of Abraham" that should perform the great 

work of blessing all the families of the earth, is to be 

one, in the sense of one kind, but not in the sense 

of one person— that is to say, that the seed of Abraham 

consists of Jesus Christ the Head, and of the 

Church which is the body. Not the nominal or professing 

church, but the true Church, "whose names 

are written in heaven," and who walk in the footsteps 

of their Lord, and are found faithful unto death, and 

shall be granted with their Lord the crown of life. 

This Gospel age intervening between the time of 
the great sin offering and the time when the blessing 
of earth's billions will commence, God has set 
apart for the work of selecting or electing the body of 
Christ, the Church, the Bride, the "little flock," the 
"royal priesthood," the joint heirs with Christ in his 
kingdom. These, like their Head, are called with a 
"high calling," a "heavenly calling," and the salvation 
provided for them is higher than that which God 
purposes for the world in general. He is selecting 
this "little flock" and trying them and 
proving them, fitting them and polishing them 
for the heavenly Kingdom, and it is to these, as 
the Apostle Peter declares, God has given "exceeding 
great and precious promises [far beyond any 
promises given to any other of his creatures] that by 
these [promises] we might become partakers of the 
divine nature," and joint-heirs with his Son. This is 
denominated a "heavenly calling" in contrast with 
the earthly salvation intended for whosoever will "in 
due time." 

This true view of the calling and election of the 
Church is another feature of the Gospel. If it is 
splendid, good news to know that ultimately all families 
of the earth are to be blessed with opportunities 
for salvation through the Christ, it is still an additional 
feature to the good news to know that God has invited 
us to become members of the Christ company, "members 
in particular of the body of Christ." No wonder 
the Apostle calls this our "high calling," our 
"heavenly calling": it is to the attainment of this great 
prize that the Apostle exhorts all the faithful to lay 
aside every weight and every besetment and to run 
with patience the race set before us in the Gospel, 
looking unto Jesus, the author, until he shall have 
become the finisher of our faith. 

This is the true Gospel, dear friends, the one we 
find set forth in the Scriptures, set forth by Paul himself, 
and of which he was not ashamed. This Gospel 
shows the character of our Creator in a most wonderful 
light,— his Wisdom, able to discern the end from 
the beginning; his Power, able to accomplish that 
which he pleases; his Justice, squaring every feature 
of the plan from first to last, according to the most 
absolute features of righteousness; his Love, whose 



lengths and breadths and heights and depths we have 
not yet been able to explore; a love which sympathizes 
with his creatures in their fallen estate; a love which 
provided a Saviour, and a great one; a love which 
prompted that Saviour to give his life as our ransom 
price; a love which met all the requirements of divine 
justice for us; a love which still pursues mankind, 
and in this Gospel age calls us to joint heirship 
with his Son in a nature and kingdom far above angels, 
principalities and powers, of which the Apostle 
says: 

"Behold what manner of love the Father hath 
bestowed upon us that we should be called the sons 
of God." This divine love, still pursuing its original 
plan for man's salvation, will use the "elect" glorified 
house of sons, of which Christ Jesus is the Head (Eph. 1:22), 
in blessing all families of the earth with full opportunity 
of knowledge and full assistance up the 
highway of holiness (Isa. 35:8) that so many as will 
may attain to restitution to all that was lost in Adam 
by coming back into harmony with God through the 
great Mediator.-Acts 3:19-23. 

NONE NEED BE ASHAMED OF THE TRUE GOSPEL. 



Verily, dear friends, of this Gospel we are not 
ashamed, "for it is the power of God unto salvation 
to everyone that believeth." It has in our hearts a 
transforming and renewing power, a sanctifying power 
which no error could possibly have, and which all 
the theories of eternal torment have never equaled 
and never will. Let us more and more "show forth 
the praises of our God, who hath called us out of 
darkness into his marvelous light," by renouncing 
all God-dishonoring creeds and theories, and instead 
hold forth the Word of life, and witness the good 
confession— the "good tidings of great joy which 
shall be to all people." 

All who will declare the true Gospel will need 
to be well shod with the preparation of the gospel 
of peace (gentleness, patience, meekness) for, strange 
to say, they will find bitter opposition from professed 
servants of the Lord who have been blinded and prejudiced 
by Satan's misrepresentations of the Gospel,— 
by which he seeks to drive from the Lord all who have 
a remnant of reason in their religious thinking. All 
who have ears to hear, and who do hear the true Gospel, 
will quickly distinguish it from the miserable counterfeits 
which for so long have passed current among 
God's people. Let all such remember that ability 
to hear is an evidence of divine favor, and let them 
not be ashamed, but glorify God on this behalf. Let 
such remember, also, that their acceptance of truth 
as due, in the face of unpopularity, is a part of their 



testing. The Lord puts his plan, his Word, as his 
representative, saying— He that is ashamed of me 
and my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, 
when he cometh in the glory of his Father with his 
holy angels. -Mark 8:38. 



R2759 : page 25 
WHAT SAY THE SCRIPTURES CONCERNING HELL? 



"To the Law and to the Testimony: If they speak not according to 
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them."— Isa. 8:20. 

A CORRECT understanding of this subject has 
become almost a necessity to Christian steadfastness. 
For centuries it has been the 

teaching of "orthodoxy," of all shades, that God, before 
creating man, had created a great abyss of fire 
and terrors, capable of containing all the billions of the 
human family which he purposed to bring into being; 
that this abyss he had named "hell;" and that all of the 
promises and threatenings of the Bible were designed 
to deter as many as possible (a "little flock") from such 
wrong-doing as would make this awful place their 
perpetual home. 

As knowledge increases and superstitions fade, 
this monstrous view of the divine arrangement and 
character is losing its force; and thinking people cannot 
but disbelieve the legend, which used to be illustrated 
on the church walls in the highest degree of art 
and realism, samples of which are still to be seen in 
Europe. Some now claim that the place is literal, but 
the fire symbolic, etc., etc., while others repudiate the 
doctrine of "hell" in every sense and degree. While 
glad to see superstitions fall, and truer ideas of the 
great, and wise, and just, and loving Creator prevail, 
we are alarmed to notice that the tendency with all 
who abandon this long revered doctrine is toward 
doubt, skepticism, infidelity. 

Why should this be the case, when the mind is 
merely being delivered from an error,— do you ask? 
Because Christian people have so long been taught 
that the foundation for this awful blasphemy against 
God's character and government is deep-laid, and 
firmly fixed, in the Word of God— the Bible— and, 
consequently, to whatever degree that belief in "hell" 
is shaken, to that extent their faith in the Bible, as the 
revelation of the true God, is shaken also;— so that 
those who have dropped their belief in a "hell," of some 
kind of endless torment, are often open infidels, and 
scoffers at God's Word. 

Guided by the Lord's providence to a realization 



that the Bible has been slandered, as well as its divine 
Author, and that, rightly understood, it teaches nothing 
on this subject derogatory to God's character nor 
to an intelligent reason, we will attempt to lay bare 
the Scripture teaching on this subject, that thereby 
faith in God and his Word may be re-established, in 
the hearts of his people, on a better, a reasonable 
foundation. Indeed, it is our opinion that whoever 
shall hereby find that his false view rested upon human 
misconceptions and misinterpretations, will, at the 
same time, learn to trust hereafter less to his own and 
other men's imaginings, and, by faith, to grasp more 
firmly the Word of God, which is able to make wise 
unto salvation. 

That the advocates of the doctrine of eternal torment 
have little or no faith in it is very manifest from 
the fact that it has no power over their course of action. 
While all the denominations of Christendom 
sustain the doctrine that eternal torment and endless, 
hopeless despair will constitute the punishment of the 
wicked, they are mostly quite at ease in allowing the 
wicked to take their course, while they pursue the 
even tenor of their way. Chiming bells and pealing 
organs, artistic choirs, and costly edifices, and upholstered 
pews, and polished oratory which more and 
more avoids any reference to this alarming theme, 
afford rest and entertainment to fashionable congregations 
that gather on the Lord's day and are known 
to the world as churches of Christ and representatives 
of his doctrines. But they seem little concerned about 
the eternal welfare of the multitudes, or even of themselves 
and their own families, though one would naturally 
presume that with such awful possibilities in view 
they would be almost frantic in their efforts to rescue 
the perishing. 

The plain inference is that they do not believe it. 
The only class of people that to any degree show their 
faith in it by their works is the Salvation Army; and 
these are the subjects of ridicule from almost all other 
Christians, because they are somewhat consistent with 
their belief. Yet their peculiar, and often absurd, 
methods, so strikingly in contrast with those of the 
Lord of whom it was written, "He shall not cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street" (Isa. 42:2), 
are very mild compared with what might be 
expected if they were fully convinced of the doctrine. 
We cannot imagine how sincere believers of this terrible 
doctrine go from day to day about the ordinary 
affairs of life, or meet quietly in elegance every Sunday 
to hear an essay from the pulpit on the peculiar 
subjects often advertised. Could they do so while 
really believing all the time that fellow mortals are 
dying at the rate of one hundred a minute, and 
entering 

"That lone land of deep despair," where 
"No God regards their bitter prayer"? 



If they really believed this few saints could complacently 
sit there and think of those hurrying every 
moment into that awful state described by that good, 
well-meaning, but greatly deluded man, Isaac Watts 
(whose own heart was immeasurably warmer and 
larger than that he ascribed to the great Jehovah), 
when he wrote the hymn— 

"Tempests of angry fire shall roll 

To blast the rebel worm, 
And beat upon the naked soul 
In one eternal storm." 

People often become frantic with grief when 
friends have been caught in some terrible catastrophe, 
as a fire, or a wreck, though they know they will 
soon be relieved by death; yet they pretend to believe 
that God is less loving than themselves, and that he 
can look with indifference, if not with delight, at billions 
of his creatures enduring an eternity of torture 
far more terrible, which he prepares for them and prevents 
any escape from forever. Not only so, but they 
expect that they will get literally into Abraham's bosom, 
and will then look across the gulf and see and hear 
the agonies of the multitudes (some of whom they now 
love and weep over); and they imagine that they will 
be so changed, and become so like their present idea 
of God, so hardened against all pity, and so barren of 
love and sympathy, that they will delight in such a 
God and in such a plan. 

It is wonderful that otherwise sensible men and 
women, who love their fellows, and who establish hospitals, 
orphanages, asylums, and societies for the prevention 
of cruelty even to the brute creation, are so 
unbalanced mentally that they can believe and subscribe 

R2759 : page 26 

to such a doctrine, and yet be so indifferent 
about investigating its authority! 

Only one exception can we think of— those who 
hold the ultra-Calvinistic doctrine; who believe that 
God has decreed it thus, that all the efforts they 
could put forth could not alter the result with a single 
person; and that all the prayers they could offer would 
not change one iota of the awful plan they believe 
God has marked out for his and their eternal pleasure. 
These indeed could sit still, so far as effort for their 
fellows is concerned: but why sing the praises of such 
a scheme for the damnation of their neighbors whom 
God has told them to love as themselves? 

Why not rather begin to doubt this "doctrine of 
devils," this blasphemy against the great God, hatched 
in the "dark ages," when a crafty priesthood taught 
that it is right to do evil that good may result? 

The doctrine of eternal torment was undoubtedly 
introduced by Papacy to induce pagans to join her 
and support her system. It flourished at the same 



time that "bull fights" and gladiatorial contests were 

the public amusements most enjoyed; when the Crusades 

were called "holy wars," and when men and 

women were called "heretics" and were often slaughtered 

for thinking or speaking contrary to the teachings 

of the Papacy; at a time when the sun of gospel 

truth was obscure; when the Word of God had fallen 

into disuse and was prohibited to be read by any but 

the clergy, whose love of their neighbors was often 

shown in torturing "heretics" to induce them to recant 

and deny their faith and their Bibles— to save 

them, if possible, they explained, from the more awful 

future of "heretics,"— eternal torture. They did not 

borrow this doctrine from the heathen, for no heathen 

people in the world have a doctrine so cruel, so fiendish 

and so unjust. Find it, whoever can, and show 

it up in all its blackness, that, if possible, it may be 

shown that the essence of barbarism, malice, hate and 

ungodliness has not been exclusively appropriated by 

those whom God has most highly favored with light 

from every quarter, and to whom he has committed 

the only oracle— his Word. Oh! the shame and confusion 

that will cover the faces of many, even good 

men, who verily thought that they did God service 

while propagating this blasphemous doctrine, when 

they awake in the resurrection, to learn of the love 

and justice of God, and when they come to know that 

the Bible does not teach this God-dishonoring, love-extinguishing, 

truth-beclouding, saint-hindering, sinner-hardening, 

"damnable heresy" of eternal torment. 

-2 Pet. 2:1. 

But we repeat that, in the light and moral development 
of this day, sensible people do not believe this 
doctrine. However, since they think that the Bible 
teaches it, every step they progress in real intelligence 
and brotherly kindness, which hinders belief in eternal 
torment, is in most cases a step away from God's 
word, which is falsely accused of being the authority 
for this teaching. Hence the second crop of evil 
fruit, which the devil's engraftment of this error is producing, 
is skepticism. The intelligent, honest thinkers 
are thus driven from the Bible into vain philosophies 
and sciences, falsely so-called, and into infidelity. Nor 
do the "worldly" really believe this doctrine, nor is it 
a restraint to crime, for convicts and the lower classes 
are the firmest believers in it. 

But, says one, Has not the error done some good? 
Have not many been brought into the churches by 
the preaching of this doctrine in the past? 

No error, we answer, ever did real good, but always 
harm. Those whom error brings into a church, 
and whom the truth would not move, are an injury 
to the church. The thousands terrorized, but not at 
heart converted, which this doctrine forced into Papacy, 
and which swelled her numbers and her wealth, 
diluted what little truth was held before, and mingled 



it with their unholy sentiments and errors so that, to 
meet the changed condition of things, the "clergy" 
found it needful to add error to error, and resorted to 
methods, forms, etc., not taught in the Scriptures and 
useless to the truly converted whom the truth controls. 
Among these were pictures, images, beads, vestments, 
candles, grand cathedrals, altars, etc., to help the unconverted 
heathen to a form of godliness more nearly 
corresponding to their former heathen worship, but 
lacking all the power of vital godliness. 

The heathen were not benefited, for they were still 
heathen in God's sight, but deluded into aping what 
they did not understand or do from the heart. They 
were added "tares" to choke the "wheat," without being 
profited themselves. The Lord tells who sowed 
the seed of this enormous crop. (Matt. 13:39). The 
same is true of those who assume the name "Christian" 
to-day, who are not really at heart converted 
by the truth, but merely frightened by the error, or 
allured by promised earthly advantages of a social or 
business kind. Such add nothing to the true Church: 
by their ideas and manners they become stumbling 
blocks to the truly consecrated, and by their inability 
to digest the truth, the real food of the saints, they 
lead even the few true pastors to defraud the true 
"sheep" in order to satisfy the demands of these 
"goats" for something pleasing to their unconverted 
tastes. No: in no way has this error accomplished 
good except in the sense that God is able to make 
even the wrath of man to praise him. So also he will 
overrule this evil thing eventually to serve his purposes. 
When by and by all men (during the Millennium) 
shall come to see through this great deception by 
which Satan has blinded the world to God's true character, 
it will perhaps awaken in them a warmer, 
stronger love for God. 

Seeing, then, the unreasonableness of man's view, 
let us lay aside human opinions and theories and come 
to the Word of God, the only authority on the subject, 
remembering that 

"God is His own interpreter, and He will make it plain." 

"HELL," AS AN ENGLISH WORD. 



In the first place bear in mind that the Old Testament 
Scriptures were written in the Hebrew language, 
and the New Testament in the Greek. The word 
"hell" is an English word sometimes selected by the 
translators of the English Bible to express the sense 
of the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek words hades, 
tartaroo and gehenna,— sometimes rendered "grave" 
and "pit." 

The word "hell" in old English usage, before 
Papal theologians picked it up and gave it a new and 



special significance to suit their own purposes, simply 
meant to conceal, to hide, to cover; hence the concealed, 

R2759 : page 27 

hidden or covered place. In old English literature 
records may be found of the helling of potatoes 
—putting potatoes into pits; and of the helling of a 
house— covering or thatching it. The word hell was 
therefore properly used synonymously with the words 
"grave" and "pit," to translate the words sheol and 
hades as signifying the secret or hidden condition 
of death. However, the same spirit which was willing 
to twist the word to terrorize the ignorant is willing 
still to perpetuate the error;— presumably saying— 
"Let us do evil that good may follow." 

If the translators of the Revised Version Bible 
had been thoroughly disentangled from the Papal 
error, and thoroughly honest, they would have done 
more to help the English student than merely to substitute 
the Hebrew word sheol and the Greek word 
hades as they have done. They should have translated 
the words. But they were evidently afraid to tell 
the truth, and ashamed to tell the lie; and so gave us 
sheol and hades untranslated, and permitted the inference 
that these words mean the same as the word 
"hell" has become perverted to mean. Their course, 
while it for a time shields themselves, dishonors God 
and the Bible, which the common people still suppose 
teaches a "hell" of torment in the words sheol 
and hades. Yet anyone can see that if it was proper 
to translate the word sheol thirty-one times "grave" 
and three times "pit," it could not have been improper 
to have so translated it in every other instance. 

A peculiarity to be observed in comparing these 
cases, as we will do shortly, is that in those texts where 
the torment idea would be an absurdity the translators 
of the King James version have used the words 
"grave" or "pit"; while in all other cases they have 
used the word "hell;" and the reader, long schooled 
in the Papal idea of torment, reads the word "hell" 
and thinks of it as signifying a place of torment, instead 
of the grave, the hidden or covered place or condition. 
For example, compare Job 14:13 with Psa. 86:13. 
The former reads,— "Oh, that thou wouldst 
hide me in the grave [sheol] etc.," while the latter 
reads,— "Thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest 
hell [sheol]." The Hebrew word being the same in 
both cases, there is no reason why the same word 
"grave" should not be used in both. But how absurd 
it would have been for Job to have prayed to God to 
hide him in a hell of eternal torture! The English 
reader would have asked questions and the secret 
would have gotten out speedily. 

While the translators of the Reformation times 
are somewhat excusable for their mental bias in this 



matter, as they were just breaking away from the old 
Papal system, our modern translators, specially those 
of the recent Revised Version, are not entitled to any 
such consideration. Theological professors and pastors 
of congregations consider that they are justified 
in following the course of the revisers in not explaining 
the meaning of either the Hebrew or Greek words 
sheol or hades and by their use of the words they also 
give their confiding flocks to understand that a place 
of torture, a lake of fire, is meant. While attributing 
to the ignorant only the best of motives, it is manifestly 
only duplicity and cowardice which induces educated 
men, who know the truth on this subject, to 
prefer to continue to teach the error inferentially. 

But not all ministers know of the errors of the 
translators, and deliberately cover and hide those errors 
from the people. Many, indeed, do not know of 
them, having merely accepted, without investigation, 
the theories of their seminary professors. It is the 
professors and learned ones who are most blameworthy. 
These have kept back the truth about "hell" 
for several reasons. First, there is evidently a sort 
of understanding or etiquette among them, that if they 
wish to maintain their standing in the "profession" 
they "must not tell tales out of school;" i.e., they must 
not divulge professional secrets to the "common people," 
the "laity." Second, they all fear that to let it 
be known that they have been teaching an unscriptural 
doctrine for years would break down the popular respect 
and reverence for the "clergy," the denominations 
and the theological schools, and unsettle confidence 
in their wisdom. And, oh, how much depends 
upon confidence and reverence for men, when God's 
Word is so generally ignored! Third, they know that 
many of the members of their sects are not constrained 
by "the love of Christ" (2 Cor. 5:14), but merely by 
the fear of hell, and they see clearly, therefore, that 
to let the truth be known now would soon cut loose 
the names and the dollars of many in their flocks; and 
this, to those who "desire to make a fair show in the 
flesh" (Gal. 6:12) would seem to be a great calamity. 

But what will be the judgment of God, whose 
character and plan are traduced by the blasphemous 
doctrine which these untranslated words help to support? 
Will he commend these unfaithful servants? 
Will he justify their course? Will the Chief Shepherd 
call these his beloved friends, and make known to them 
his further plans (John 15:15) that they may misrepresent 
them also to preserve their own dignity and 
reverence? Will he continue to send forth "things 
new and old," "meat in due season," to the household 
of faith, by the hand of the unfaithful servants? No, 
such shall not continue to be his mouthpieces or to 
shepherd his flock. (Ezek. 34:9,10.) He will choose 
instead, as at the first advent, from among the laity— 
"the common people"— mouthpieces, and will give 



them words which none of the chief priests shall be 
able to gainsay or resist. (Luke 21:15.) And, as foretold, 
"the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and 
the understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." 
-Isa. 29:9-19. 

"HELL" IN THE OLD TESTAMENT. 



The word "hell" occurs thirty-one times in the 
Old Testament, and in every instance it is sheol in the 
Hebrew. It does not mean a lake of fire and brimstone, 
nor anything at all resembling that thought: 
not in the slightest degree! Quite the reverse: instead 
of a place of blazing fire it is described in the context 
as a state of "darkness" (Job 10:21); instead of a place 
where shrieks and groans are heard, it is described in 
the context as a place of "silence" (Psa. 115:17); instead 
of representing in any sense pain and suffering, 
or remorse, the context describes it as a place or condition 
of forgetfulness. (Psa. 88:1 1,12.) "There is no 
work, nor device, nor knowledge, in the grave [sheol] 
whither thou goest."— Eccles. 9:10. 

The meaning of sheol is "the hidden state," as 
applied to man's condition in death, in and beyond 
which all is hidden, except to the eye of faith; hence, 

R2759 : page 28 

by proper and close association, the word was often 
used in the sense of grave— the tomb, the hidden 
place, or place beyond which only those who have the 
enlightened eye of the understanding can see resurrection, 
restitution of being. And be it particularly 
noted that this identical word sheol is translated 
"grave" thirty-one times and "pit" three times in our 
common version by the same translators— more times 
than it is translated "hell"; and twice, where it is translated 
"hell," it seemed so absurd, according to the present 
accepted meaning of the English word "hell," that 
scholars have felt it necessary to explain in the margin 
of modern Bibles, that it means grave. (Isa. 14:9 and 
Jonah 2:2.) In the latter case, the hidden state, or 
grave, was the belly of the fish in which Jonah was 
buried alive, and from which he cried to God. 

ALL TEXTS IN WHICH "SHEOL" IS TRANSLATED 
"HELL." 

(1) Amos 9:2.— "Though they dig into hell, thence 
shall mine hand take them." [A figurative expression; 
but certainly pits of the earth are the only hells men 
can dig into.] 

(2) Psa. 16: 10.— "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hell; neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see 



corruption." [This refers to our Lord's three days 
in the tomb. --Acts 2:31; 3:15.] 

(3,4) Psa. 18:5 and 2 Sam. 22:6-margin.-"The 
cords of hell compassed me about." [A figure in 
which trouble is represented as hastening one to the 
tomb.] 

(5) Psa. 55:15.— "Let them go down quick into hell" 
—margin, "the grave." 

(6) Psa. 9:17.— "The wicked shall be turned into 
hell, and all the nations that forget God." This text 
will be treated later, under a separate heading. 

(7) Psa. 86:13.— "Thou hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest hell"— margin, "the grave." 

(8) Psa. 116:3.— "The sorrows of death compassed 
me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me." [Sickness 
and trouble are the figurative hands of the grave 

to grasp us.] 

(9) Psa. 139:8.— "If I make my bed in hell, behold, 
thou art there." [God's power is unlimited: even 
over those in the tomb he can and will exert it and 
bring forth all that are in the graves.— John 5:28.] 

(10) Deut. 32:22.— "For a fire is kindled in mine 
anger, and shall burn into the lowest hell." [A figurative 
representation of the destruction, the utter ruin, 

of Israel as a nation— "wrath to the uttermost," as 
the Apostle called it, God's anger burning that nation 
to the "lowest deep," as Leeser here translates the 
word sheol.— 1 Thes. 2:16.] 

(11) Job 11:8.— "It [God's wisdom] is as high as 
heaven; what canst thou do? deeper than hell [than 
any pit]; what canst thou know?" 

(12) Job 26:6. -"Hell [the tomb] is naked before 
him, and destruction hath no covering." 

(13) Prov. 5:5.— "Her feet go down to death; 

her steps take hold on hell [i.e., lead to the grave]." 

(14) Prov. 7:27.— "Her house is the way to hell 
[the grave], going down to the chambers of death." 

(15) Prov. 9: 18. -"He knoweth not that the dead 

are there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell." 
[Here the harlot's guests are represented as dead, diseased 
or dying, and many of the victims of sensuality 
in premature graves from diseases which also hurry 
off their posterity to the tomb.] 

(16) Prov. 15:11.— "Hell and destruction are before 
the Lord." [Here the grave is associated with 
destruction and not with a life of torment] 

(17) Prov. 15:24.— "The path of life (leadeth) upward 
for the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath." 
[This illustrates the hope of resurrection from 

the tomb.] 

(18) Prov. 23:14. -"Thou shalt beat him with the 
rod, and shalt deliver his soul from hell" [i.e., wise 
correction will save a child from vicious ways which 
lead to premature death, and may also possibly prepare 
him to escape the "Second Death"]. 

(19) Prov. 27:20.— "Hell [the grave] and destruction 



are never full: so the eyes of man are never 
satisfied." 

(20) Isa. 5:14.— "Therefore hell hath enlarged herself 
and opened her mouth without measure." [Here 
the grave is a symbol of destruction.] 

(21,22) Isa. 14:9,15.— "Hell [margin, grave] from 
beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming." 
..."Thou shalt be brought down to hell" [the 
grave— so rendered in verse 11]. 

(23) Isa. 57:9.— "And didst debase thyself even 
unto hell." [Here figurative of deep degradation.] 

(24,25) Ezek. 31:15-17. -"In the day when he 
went down to the grave,... I made the nations to 
shake at the sound of his fall, when I cast him down 
to hell with them that descend into the pit.... 
They also went down into hell with him, unto them 
that be slain with the sword." [Figurative and prophetic 
description of the fall of Babylon into destruction, 
silence, the grave.] 

(26) Ezek. 32:21.— "The strong among the mighty 
shall speak to him out of the midst of hell with them 
that help him." [A continuation of the same figure 
representing Egypt's overthrow as a nation to join 
Babylon in destruction— buried.] 

(27) Ezek. 32:27. -"And they shall not lie with 

the mighty that are fallen of the uncircumcised, which 
are gone down to hell with their weapons of war: and 
they have laid their swords under their heads; but 
their iniquities shall be upon their bones, though they 
were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living." 
[The grave is the only "hell" where fallen ones 
are buried and lie with their weapons of war under 
their heads.] 

(28) Hab. 2:5.— "Who enlargeth his desire as hell 
[the grave] and as death, and cannot be satisfied." 

(29) Jonah 2:1,2.— "Then Jonah prayed unto the 
Lord his God, out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried 
by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he 
heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou 
heardest my voice." [The belly of the fish was for 

a time his grave— see margin.] 

(30,31) Isa. 28:15-18.— "Because ye have said, 
We have made a covenant with death, and with hell 
[the grave] are we at agreement; when the overflowing 
scourge shall pass through, it shall not come unto 
us, for we have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves: Therefore, saith the Lord, 
...Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, 
and your agreement with hell [the grave] shall not 
stand." [God thus declares that the present prevalent 

R2759 : page 29 

idea, by which death and the grave are represented 
as friends, rather than enemies, shall cease; and men 
shall learn that death is the wages of sin, now and 



that it is in Satan's power (Rom. 6:23; Heb. 2:14,) and 
not an angel sent by God.] 

ALL OTHER TEXTS WHERE "SHEOL" OCCURS- 
RENDERED "GRAVE" AND "PIT." 



Gen. 37:35.— "I will go down into the grave unto 
my son." 

Gen. 42:38.— "Then shall ye bring down my gray 
hairs with sorrow to the grave." [See also the same 
expression in 44:29,31- The translators did not like 
to send God's servant, Jacob, to hell simply because 
his sons were evil.] 

1 Sam. 2:6.— "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive: 
he bringeth down to the grave, and bringeth up." 

1 Kings 2:6,9.— "Let not his hoar head go down to 
the grave with peace. ...His hoar head bring thou 
down to the grave with blood." 

Job 7:9.— "He that goeth down to the grave." 

Job 14:13.— "Oh, that thou wouldst hide me in 
the grave, that thou wouldst keep me secret until thy 
wrath be past, that thou wouldst appoint me a set 
time, and remember me [resurrect me]!" 

Job 17:13.— "If I wait, the grave is mine house: 
I have made my bed in the darkness." [Job waits for 
resurrection— "in the morning."] 

Job 17:16.— "They shall go down to the bars 
of the pit [grave], when our rest together is in the 
dust." 

Job 21:13.— "They spend their days in mirth, 
and in a moment go down to the grave." 

Job 24:19,20.— "Drought and heat consume the 
snow waters: so doth the grave those which have 
sinned." [All have sinned, hence "Death passed upon 
all men," and all go down to the grave. But all have 
been redeemed by "the precious blood of Christ"; 
hence all shall be awakened and come forth again in 
God's due time— "in the morning," Rom. 5:12,18,19.] 

Psa. 6:5.— "In death there is no remembrance of 
thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks?" 

Psa. 30:3.— "O Lord, thou hast brought up my 
soul from the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I 
should not go down to the pit." [This passage expresses 
gratitude for recovery from danger of death.] 

Psa. 31:17.— "Let the wicked be ashamed; let 
them be silent in the grave." 

Psa. 49:14,15, margin.— "Like sheep they are laid 
in the grave: death shall feed on them; and the upright 
[the saints— Dan. 7:27] shall have dominion over 
them in the morning [the Millennial morning]; and 
their beauty shall consume, the grave being an habitation 
to every one of them. But God will redeem my 
soul from the power of the grave." 

Psa. 88:3.— "My life draweth nigh unto the grave." 



Psa. 89:48.— "Shall he deliver his soul from the 
hand of the grave?" 

Psa. 141:7.— "Our bones are scattered at the 
grave's mouth." 

Prov. 1:12.— "Let us swallow them up alive as 
the grave: and whole, as those that go down into the 
pit" [i.e., as of an earthquake, as in Num. 16:30-33]. 

Prov. 30:15,16.— "Four things say not, it is 
enough: the grave," etc. 

Eccl. 9:10.— "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, 
do it with thy might; for there is no work, nor device, 
nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither 
thou goest." 

Song of Solomon 8:6.— "Jealousy is cruel as the 
grave." 

Isa. 14:11.— "Thy pomp is brought down to the 
grave." 

Isa. 38:10.— "I shall go to the gates of the grave: 
I am deprived of the residue of my years." 

Isa. 38: 18.— "The grave cannot praise thee, death 
cannot celebrate thee: they that go down into the pit 
cannot hope for thy truth." 

Num. 16:30-33.— "If.. .they go down quick 
into the pit, then shall ye understand. ...The ground 
clave asunder that was under them, and the earth 
opened her mouth and swallowed them up, and their 
houses, and all the men that appertained unto Korah, 
and all their goods. They and all that appertained to 
them went down alive into the pit, and the earth 
closed upon them: and they perished from among the 
congregation." 

Ezek. 31:15.— "In the day when he went down 
to the grave." 

Hosea 13:14.— "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. 
O death, I will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be 
thy destruction. Repentance shall be hid from mine 
eyes." [The Lord did not ransom any from a place 
of fire and torment, for there is no such place; but he 
did ransom all mankind from the grave, from death, 
the penalty brought upon all by Adam's sin, as this 
verse declares.] 

The above list includes every instance of the use 
of the English word "hell" and the Hebrew word sheol 
in the Old Testament. From this examination it must 
be evident to all readers that God's revelations for 
four thousand years contain not a single hint of a 
"hell," such as the word is now understood to signify. 

"HELL" IN THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



In the New Testament, the Greek word hades 
corresponds exactly to the Hebrew word sheol. As 
proof see the quotations of the Apostles from the Old 



Testament, in which they render it hades. For instance, 
Acts 2:27, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in 
hades," is a quotation from Psa. 16:10, "Thou wilt 
not leave my soul in sheol." And in 1 Cor. 15:54,55, 
"Death is swallowed up in victory. O death, where 
is thy sting? O grave [hades], where is thy victory?" 
is an allusion to Isa. 25:8, "He will swallow up death 
in victory," and to Hos. 13:14, "O death, I will be 
thy plagues; O sheol, I will be thy destruction." 

"HELL" FROM THE GREEK WORD "HADES." 



Matt. 11:23.— "And thou, Capernaum, which art 
exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell;" 
Luke 10:15: "Shall be thrust down to hell." 
[In privileges of knowledge and opportunity the city 
was highly favored, or, figuratively, "exalted unto 
heaven;" but because of misuse of God's favors, 
it would be debased, or, figuratively, cast down to 
hades, overthrown, destroyed. It is now so thoroughly 
buried in oblivion, that even the site where 

R2759 : page 30 

it stood is a matter of dispute. Capernaum is certainly 
destroyed, thrust down to hades.] 

Luke 16:23.— "In hell he lifted up his eyes, being 
in torments." [A parabolic figure explained further 
along, under a separate heading.] 

Rev. 6:8.— "And behold a pale horse: and his 
name that sat on him was Death, and Hell followed 
with him." [Symbol of destruction or the grave.] 

Matt. 16:18.— "Upon this rock I will build my 
church; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against 
it." [Although bitter and relentless persecution, even 
unto death, should afflict the Church during the Gospel 
age, it should never prevail to her utter extermination; 
and eventually, by her resurrection, accomplished 
by her Lord, the Church will prevail over 
hades— the tomb.] 

CHRIST IN "HELL" (HADES) AND RESURRECTED FROM 
"HELL" (HADES).-ACTS 2:1,14,22-31. 



"And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, 
...Peter. ..lifted up his voice and said,. ..Ye 
men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, 
a man approved of God among you, ...being delivered 
by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge 
of God ['He was delivered for our offenses'], ye have 
taken and by wicked hands have crucified and slain: 
whom God hath raised up, having loosed the pains 



[or bands] of death, because it was not possible that 

he should be holden of it [for the Word of Jehovah 

had previously declared his resurrection]; for David 

speaketh concerning him [personating or speaking for 

him], 'I [Christ] foresaw the Lord [Jehovah] always before 

my face; for he is on my right hand, that I should 

not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my 

tongue was glad; moreover also my flesh shall rest 

in hope, because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell 

[hades, the tomb, the state of death], neither wilt thou 

suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Thou [Jehovah] 

hast made known to me [Christ] the ways of 

life.'" Here our Lord, as personified by the prophet 

David, expresses his faith in Jehovah's promise of 

a resurrection and in the full and glorious accomplishment 

of Jehovah's plan through him, and rejoices 

in the prospect. 

Peter then proceeds, saying— "Men and brethren, 
let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David, 
that he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher is 
with us unto this day [so that this prophecy could not 
have referred to himself personally; for David's soul 
was left in "hell"— [hades, the tomb, the state of death 
—and his flesh did see corruption]: Therefore being 
a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an 
oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins according to 
the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne; 
he, seeing this before [prophetically], spake of the resurrection 
of Christ [out of "hell"— hades, the tomb- 
to which he must go for our offenses], that his soul 
was not left in hell [hades— the death state], neither 
his flesh did see corruption." Thus Peter presents a 
strong, logical argument, based on the words of the 
prophet David— showing first, that Christ, who was 
delivered by God for our offenses, went to "hell," the 
grave, the condition of death, destruction (Psa. 16:10;) 
and, second, that according to promise he had been 
delivered from hell, the grave, death, destruction, 
by a resurrection— a raising up to life; being created 
again, the same identical being, yet more glorious, 
and exalted even to "the express image of the Father's 
person." (Heb. 1:3.) And now "this same Jesus" 
(Acts 2:36), in his subsequent revelation to the 
Church, declares— 

Rev. 1:18.— "I am he that liveth, and was dead, 
and, behold, I am alive forevermore, Amen; and 
have the keys of hell [hades, the grave] and of death." 

Amen! Amen! our hearts respond; for in his resurrection 
we see the glorious outcome of the whole 
plan of Jehovah to be accomplished through the power 
of the Resurrected One who now holds the keys of 
the tomb and of death and in due time will release 
all the prisoners who are, therefore, called the "prisoners 
of hope." (Zech. 9:12; Luke 4:18.) No craft 
or cunning can by any possible device wrest these 
Scriptures entire and pervert them to the support of 



that monstrous and blasphemous Papal tradition of 
eternal torment. Had that been our penalty, Christ, 
to be our vicarious sacrifice, must still, and to all 
eternity, endure such torment, which no one will 
claim. But death was our penalty, and "Christ died 
for our sins," and "also for the sins of the whole world." 
-1 Cor. 15:3; 1 John 2:2. 

Rev. 20:13,14.— "And the sea gave up the dead 
which were in it; and death and hell [the grave] delivered 
up the dead which were in them: and they were 
judged, every man, according to their works. And 
death and hell [the grave] were cast into the lake of 
fire: this is the Second Death." [The lake of fire is 
the symbol of final and everlasting destruction. 
Death and hell [the grave] both go into it. There 
shall be no more death; "the last enemy that shall be 
destroyed is death."— 1 Cor. 15:26; Rev. 21:4.] 

OTHER OCCURRENCES OF THE WORD "HELL." 



Having examined the word sheol, the only word 
in the Old Testament rendered "hell," and the word 
hades, most frequently in the New Testament rendered 
"hell" we now notice every remaining instance 
in Scripture of the English word "hell." In the New 
Testament two other words are rendered "hell;" 
namely, gehenna and tartaroo, which we will consider 
in the order named. 

"GEHENNA" RENDERED "HELL." 



This word occurs in the following passages— in 
all twelve times:-Matt. 5:22,29,30; 10:28; 18:9; 23:15,33; 
Mark 9:43-47; Luke 12:5; Jas. 3:6. It is the 
Grecian mode of spelling the Hebrew words which 
are translated "Valley of Hinnom." This valley lay 
just outside the city of Jerusalem, and served the purpose 
of sewer and garbage burner to that city. The 
offal, garbage, etc., were emptied there, and fires were 
kept continually burning to consume utterly all things 
deposited therein, brimstone being added to assist 
combustion and insure complete destruction. But 
no living thing was ever permitted to be cast into 
Gehenna. The Jews were not allowed to torture any 
creature. 

When we consider that in the people of Israel 
God was giving us object lessons illustrating his dealings 
and plans, present and future, we should expect 

R2759 : page 31 

that this Valley of Hinnom, or Gehenna, would also 



play its part in illustrating things future. We know 
that Israel's priesthood and temple illustrated the Royal 
Priesthood, the Christian Church as it will be, the 
true temple of God; and we know that their chief city 
was a figure of the New Jerusalem, the seat of kingdom 
power and center of authority— the city (government) 
of the Great King, Immanuel. We remember, 
too, that Christ's government is represented in the 
book of Revelation (Rev. 21:10-27) under the figure 
of a city— the New Jerusalem. There, after describing 
the class permitted to enter the privileges and 
blessings of that Kingdom— the honorable and glorious, 
and all who have right to the trees of life— we find 
it also declared that there shall not enter into it anything 
that defileth, or that worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie; but only such as the Lamb shall write 
as worthy of life. This city, which thus will represent 
the entire saved world in the end of the Millennium, 
was typified in the earthly city, Jerusalem; and the 
defiling, the abominable, etc., the class unworthy of 
life everlasting, who do not enter in, were represented 
by the refuse and the filthy, lifeless carcasses cast 
into Gehenna outside the city,— whose utter destruction 
was thus symbolized— the Second Death. Accordingly, 
we find it stated that those not found worthy 
of life are to be cast into the "lake of fire" (Rev. 20: 15) 
—fire here, as everywhere, being used as a 
symbol of destruction, and the symbol, lake of fire, 
being drawn from this same Gehenna, or Valley of 
Hinnom. 

Therefore, while Gehenna served a useful purpose 
to the city of Jerusalem as a place for garbage burning, 
it, like the city itself, was typical, and illustrated 
the future dealings of God in refusing and committing 
to destruction all the impure elements, thus preventing 
them from defiling the holy city, the New Jerusalem, 
after the trial of the Millennial age of judgment 
shall have fully proved them and separated with unerring 
accuracy the "sheep" from the "goats." 

So, then, Gehenna was a type or illustration of 
the Second Death— final and complete destruction, 
from which there can be no recovery; for after that, 
"there remaineth no more sacrifice for sins," but only 
"fiery indignation which shall devour the adversaries." 
-Heb. 10:26. 

Let us remember that Israel, for the purpose of 
being used as types of God's future dealing with the 
race, was typically treated as though the ransom had 
been given before they left Egypt, though only a typical 
lamb had been slain. When Jerusalem was built, 
and the Temple— representative of the true temple, the 
Church, and the true kingdom as it will be established 
by Christ in the Millennium— that people typified the 
world in the Millennial age. Their priests represented 
the glorified Royal Priesthood, and their Law and its 
demands of perfect obedience represented the law and 



conditions under the New Covenant, to be brought 
into operation for the blessing of all the obedient, and 
for the condemnation of all who, when granted fullest 
opportunity, will not heartily submit to the righteous 
ruling and laws of the Great King. 

Seeing then, that Israel's polity, condition, etc., 
prefigured those of the world in the coming age, how 
appropriate that we should find the valley or abyss, 
Gehenna, a figure of the Second Death, the utter destruction 
in the coming age of all that is unworthy of 
preservation; and how aptly, too, is the symbol, "lake 
of fire burning with brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), drawn 
from this same Gehenna, or Valley of Hinnom, burning 
continually with brimstone. The expression, 
"burning with brimstone," adds force to the symbol, 
"fire," to express the utter and irrevocable destructiveness 
of the Second Death; for burning brimstone is 
the most deadly agent known. How reasonable, too, 
to expect that Israel would have courts and judges 
resembling or prefiguring the judgments of the next 
age; and that the sentence of those (figurative) courts 
of that (figurative) people under those (figurative) laws 
to that (figurative) abyss, outside that (figurative) 
city, would largely correspond to the (real) sentences 
of the (real) court and judges in the next age. If 
these points are kept in mind, they will greatly assist 
us in understanding the words of our Lord in reference 
to Gehenna; for though the literal valley just at 
hand was named and referred to, yet his words carry 
with them lessons concerning the future age and the 
antitypical Gehenna— the Second Death. 

SHALL BE IN DANGER OF GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 5:21,22. 



"Ye have heard that it was said by them of old 
time, 'Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill 
shall be amenable to the judges:' but I say unto you, 
that whosoever is angry with his brother without a 
cause shall [future— under the regulations of the real 
Kingdom] be amenable to the judges; and whosoever 
shall say to his brother, 'Raca' [villain], shall be in danger 
of the high council; but whosoever shall say, 
'Thou fool,' shall be in danger of hell [Gehenna] fire." 

To understand these references to council and 
judges and Gehenna, all should know something of 
Jewish regulations. The "Court of Judges" consisted 
of seven men (or twenty-three,— the number is in 
dispute), and had power to judge some classes of 
crimes. The High Council, or Sanhedrin, consisted of 
seventy-one men of recognized learning and ability. 
This constituted the highest court of the Jews, and its 
supervision was over the gravest offenses. The most 
serious sentence was death; but certain very obnoxious 



criminals were subjected to an indignity after 
death, being refused burial and cast with the carcasses 
of dogs, the city refuse, etc., into Gehenna, there to 
be consumed. The object of this burning in Gehenna 
was to make the crime and the criminal detestable in 
the eyes of the people, and signified that the culprit 
was a hopeless case. It must be remembered that 
Israel hoped for a resurrection from the tomb, and 
hence they were particular in caring for the corpses 
of their dead. Not realizing fully God's power, they 
apparently thought he needed their assistance to that 
extent. (Exod. 13:19; Heb. 11:22; Acts 7:15,16.) 
Hence the destruction of the body in Gehenna after 
death (figuratively) implied the loss of hope of future 
life by a resurrection. Thus to such Gehenna represented 
the Second Death in the same figurative way 
that they as a people represented or illustrated a future 
order of things under the New Covenant. 

Notice that our Lord, in the above words, 
pointed out to them that their construction of the 
Law, severe though it was, was far below the real import 

R2759 : page 32 

of that Law, as it shall be interpreted under the 
real Kingdom and Judges, which theirs only typified. 
He shows that the command of their Law, "Thou 
shalt not kill," reached much farther than they supposed; 
that malicious anger and vituperation "shall 
be" considered a violation of God's Law, under the 
New Covenant; and that such as, under the favorable 
conditions of that new age, will not reform so thoroughly 
as to fully observe God's Law will be counted 
worthy of that which the Gehenna near them typified 
—the Second Death. However, the strict severity 
of that Law will be enforced only in proportion as the 
discipline, advantages and assistance of that age, enabling 
each to comply with its laws, shall be 
disregarded. 
The same thought is continued in 

MATTHEW 5:22-30. 



"Ye have heard," etc., "but I say unto you. ..it 
is better for thee to lose one of thy members, than that 
thy whole body should be cast into Gehenna." 

Here again the operation of God's Law under 
the New Covenant is contrasted with its operation 
under the Old or Jewish Covenant, and the lesson of 
self-control is urged by the statement that it is far 
more profitable that men should refuse to gratify depraved 
desires (though they be dear to them as a right 
eye, and apparently indispensable as a right hand) 
than that they should gratify these, and lose, in the 



Second Death, the future life provided through the 
atonement for all who will return to perfection, holiness 
and God. 

These expressions of our Lord not only serve to 
show us the perfection (Rom. 7:12) of God's Law, 
and how fully it will be defined and enforced in the 
Millennium, but they served as a lesson to the Jews 
also, who previously saw through Moses' commands 
only the crude exterior of the Law of God. Since 
they found it difficult in their fallen state to keep inviolate 
even the surface significance of the Law, they 
must now see the impossibility of their keeping the 
finer meaning of the Law revealed by Christ. Had 
they understood and received his teaching fully, they 
would have cried out, Alas! if God judges us thus, 
by the very thoughts and intents of the heart, we are 
all unclean, all undone, and can hope for naught but 
condemnation to Gehenna (to utter destruction, as 
brute beasts). They would have cried, "Show us a 
greater priesthood than that of Aaron, a High Priest 
and Teacher able fully to appreciate the Law, and 
able fully to appreciate and sympathize with our fallen 
state and inherited weaknesses, and let him offer for 
us 'better sacrifices,' and apply to us the needed 
greater forgiveness of sin, and let him as a great physician 
heal us and restore us, so that we can obey the 
perfect Law of God from our hearts." Then they 
would have found Christ. 

But this lesson they did not learn, for the ears 
of their understanding were "dull of hearing;" hence 
they knew not that God had already prepared the 
very priest and sacrifice and teacher and physician 
they needed, who in due time redeemed those under 
the typical Law, as well as all not under it, and who 
also "in due time," shortly, will begin his restoring 
work— restoring sight to the blind eyes of their understanding, 
and hearing to their deaf ears. Then the 
"vail shall be taken away"— the vail of ignorance, 
pride and human wisdom which Satan now uses to 
blind the world to God's true law and true plan of 
salvation in Christ. 

And not only did our Lord's teaching here show 
the Law of the New Covenant, and teach the Jew a 
lesson, but it is of benefit to the Gospel Church also. 
In proportion as we learn the exactness of God's 
Law, and what would constitute perfection under its 
requirements, we see that our Redeemer was perfect, 
and that we, totally unable to commend ourselves to 
God as keepers of that Law, can find acceptance with 
the Father only in the merit of our Redeemer, while 
none can be of that "body," covered by the robe of his 
righteousness, except the consecrated who endeavor 
to do only those things well pleasing to God, which 
includes the avoidance of sin to the extent of ability. 
Yet their acceptability with God rests not in their perfection, 
but upon the perfection of Christ, so long as 



they abide in him. These, nevertheless, are benefited 
by a clear insight into the perfect Law of God, even 
though they are not dependent on the perfect keeping 
of it. They delight to do God's will to the extent of 
their ability, and the better they know his perfect Law, 
the better they are able to rule themselves and to conform 
to it. So, then, to us also the Lord's words have 
a lesson of value. 

The point, however, to be specially noticed here 
is that Gehenna which the Jews knew, and of which 
our Lord spoke to them, was not a lake of fire to be 
kept burning to all eternity, into which all would be 
cast who get "angry with a brother" and call him a 
"fool." No; the Jews gathered no such extreme idea 
from the Lord's words. The eternal torment theory 
was unknown to them. It had no place in their theology, 
as will be shown. It is a comparatively modern 
invention, coming down, as we have shown, from 
Papacy— the great apostasy. The point is that Gehenna 
symbolizes the Second Death— utter, complete 
and everlasting destruction. This is clearly shown 
by its being contrasted with life as its opposite. "It 
is better for thee to enter into life halt, or maimed, 
than otherwise to be cast into Gehenna." It is better 
that you should deny yourselves sinful gratifications 
than that you should lose all future life, and perish in 
the Second Death. 

ABLE TO DESTROY BOTH SOUL AND BODY IN 
GEHENNA. 
MATTHEW 10:28; LUKE 12:5. 



"Fear not them which kill the body, but are not 
able to kill the soul: but rather fear him which is able 
to destroy both soul and body in hell [Gehenna]." See 
also another account of the same discourse by 
Luke- 12:4,5. 

Here our Lord pointed out to his followers the 
great cause they had for courage and bravery under 
the most trying circumstances. They were to expect 
persecution, and to have all manner of evil spoken 
against them falsely, for his sake, and for the sake of 
the "good tidings" of which he made them the ministers 
and heralds; yea, the time would come, that whosoever 
would kill them would think that he did God 
a service. Their consolation or reward for this was 

R2759 : page 33 

to be received, not in the present life, but in the life 
to come. They were assured, and they believed, that 
he had come to give his life a ransom for many, and 
that all in their graves must in consequence, in due 
time, hear the Deliverer's voice and come forth, either 



to reward (if their trial had been passed in this life 
successfully), future trial, or judgment, as must be the 
case with the great majority who do not, in this present 
life, come to the necessary knowledge and opportunity 
essential to a complete trial. 

Under present conditions men are able to kill our 
bodies, but nothing that they can do will affect our 
future being (soul),* which God has promised shall 
be revived or restored by his power in the resurrection 
day— the Millennial age. Our revived souls will have 
new bodies (spiritual or natural— "to each 'seed' his 
own [kind of] body"), and these none will have liberty 
to kill. God alone has power to destroy utterly— soul 
and body. He alone, therefore, should be feared, and 
the opposition of men even to the death is not to be 
feared, if thereby we gain divine approval. Our 
Lord's bidding then is, Fear not them which can 
terminate the present (dying) life in these poor dying 
bodies. Care little for it, its food, its clothing, its 
pleasures, in comparison with that future existence or 
being which God has provided for you, and which, if 
secured, may be your portion forever. Fear not the 
threats, or looks, or acts of men, whose power can 
extend no farther than the present existence; who 
can harm and kill these bodies, but can do no more. 
Rather have respect and deference to God, with whom 
are the issues of life everlasting— fear him who is able 
to destroy in Gehenna, the Second Death, both the 
present dying existence and all hope of future 
existence. 

UNDYING WORMS AND QUENCHLESS FIRES. 
MATTHEW 18:8,9; MARK 9:43-48. 



Here it is conclusively shown that Gehenna as a 
figure represented the Second Death— the utter destruction 
which must ensue in the case of all who, 
after having fully received the opportunities of a future 
being or existence through our Lord's sacrifice, prove 
themselves unworthy of God's gift, and refuse to accept 
it, by refusing obedience to his just requirements. 
For it does not say that God will preserve soul or body 
in Gehenna, but that in it he can and will "destroy" 
both. Thus we are taught that any who are condemned 
to the Second Death are hopelessly and forever 
blotted out of existence. 

[Since these two passages refer to the same discourse, 
we quote from Mark— remarking that verses 44 and 46, 
and part of 45, are not found in the oldest 
Greek MSS., though verse 48, which reads the same, 
is in all manuscripts. We quote the text as found 
in these ancient and reliable MSS.] "If thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 



Gehenna, into the fire that never shall be quenched. 
And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for 
thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be 
cast into Gehenna. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck 
it out: it is better for thee to enter into the Kingdom 
of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast 
into Gehenna, where the worm dies not and the fire 
is not quenched." 

After reading the above, all must agree with the 
prophet that our Lord opened his mouth in figures 
and obscure sayings. (Psa. 78:2; Matt. 13:35.) No 
one for a moment supposes that our Lord advised the 
people to mutilate their bodies by cutting off their 
limbs, or gouging out their eyes. Nor does he mean 
us to understand that the injuries and disfigurements 
of the present life will continue beyond the grave, 
when we shall "enter into life." The Jews, whom the 
Lord addressed, having no conception of a place of 
everlasting torment, and who knew the word Gehenna 
to refer to the valley outside their city, which was not 
a place of torment, nor a place where any living 
thing was cast, but a place for the utter destruction 
of whatever might be cast into it, recognizing the 
Lord's expression regarding limbs and eyes to be 
figurative, knew that Gehenna also was used in the 
same figurative sense, to symbolize utter destruction. 

The Lord meant simply this: The future life, 
which God has provided for redeemed man, is of inestimable 
value, and it will richly pay you to make any 
sacrifice to receive and enjoy that life. Should it 
even cost an eye, a hand or a foot, so that to all 
eternity you would be obliged to endure the loss of 
these, yet life would be cheap at even such a cost. 
That would be better far than to retain your members 
and lose all in Gehenna. Doubtless, too, the hearers 
drew the lesson as applicable to all the affairs of life, 
and understood the Master to mean that it would 
richly repay them to deny themselves many comforts, 
pleasures and tastes, dear to them as a right 
hand, precious as an eye, and serviceable as a foot, 
rather than by gratification to forfeit the life to come 
and be utterly destroyed in Gehenna— the Second 
Death. 

But what about the undying worms and the unquenchable 
fire? 

We answer, In the literal Gehenna, which is the 
basis of our Lord's illustration, the bodies of animals, 
etc., frequently fell upon ledges of rocks and not into 
the fire kept burning below. Thus exposed, these 
would breed worms and be destroyed by them, as 
completely and as surely as those which burned. No 
one was allowed to disturb the contents of this valley; 
hence the worm and the fire together completed the 
work of destruction— the fire was not quenched and 
the worms died not. This would not imply a never-ending 
fire, nor everlasting worms. The thought is 



that the worms did not die off and leave the carcasses 
there, but continued and completed the work of destruction. 
So with the fire: it was not quenched, it 
burned on until all was consumed. Just so if a house 
were ablaze and the fire could not be controlled or 
quenched, but burned until the building was destroyed, 
we might properly call such an "unquenchable 
fire." 

Our Lord wished to impress the thought of the 
completeness and finality of the Second Death, symbolized 
in Gehenna. All who go into the Second 
Death will be thoroughly and completely and forever 
destroyed; no ransom will ever again be given for any 
(Rom. 6:9); for none worthy of life will be cast into 
the Second Death, or lake of fire, but only those who 



*We will supply free on application a tract on "What is the Soul?" 

R2759 : page 34 

love unrighteousness after coming to the knowledge 
of the truth. 

Not only in the above instances is the Second 
Death pointedly illustrated by Gehenna, but it is evident 
that the same Teacher used the same figure to 
represent the same thing in the symbols of Revelation, 
—though there it is not called Gehenna, but a "lake 
of fire." 

The same valley was once before used as the basis 
of a discourse by the Prophet Isaiah. (Isa. 66:24.) 
Though he gives it no name, he describes it; and all 
should notice that he speaks, not as some with false 
ideas might expect, of billions alive in flames and torture, 
but of the carcasses of those who transgressed 
against the Lord, who are thus represented as utterly 
destroyed in the Second Death. 

The two preceding verses show the time when 
this prophecy will be fulfilled, and it is in perfect 
harmony with the symbols of Revelation: it appertains 
to the new dispensation, the Millennium, the "new 
heavens and new earth" condition of things. Then 
all the righteous will see the justice as well as the wisdom 
of the utter destruction of the incorrigible, wilful 
enemies of righteousness, as it is written: "They shall 
be an abhorring unto all flesh." 

MATTHEW 23:15,33. 



The class here addressed was not the heathen who 
had no knowledge of the truth, nor the lowest and 
most ignorant of the Jewish nation, but the Scribes 
and Pharisees, outwardly the most religious, and the 



leaders and teachers of the people. To these our 

Lord said, "How can ye escape the judgment of Gehenna?" 

These men were hypocritical: they were 

not true to their convictions. Abundant testimony of 

the truth had been borne to them, but they refused to 

accept it, and endeavored to counteract its influence 

and to discourage the people from accepting it. And 

in thus resisting the holy spirit of light and truth, they 

were hardening their hearts against the very agency 

which God designed for their blessing. Hence they 

were wickedly resisting his grace, and such a course, 

if pursued, must eventually end in condemnation to 

the Second Death, Gehenna. Every step in the direction 

of wilful blindness and opposition to the truth 

makes return more difficult, and makes the wrongdoer 

more and more of the character which God abhors, 

and which the Second Death is intended to 

utterly destroy. The Scribes and Pharisees were 

progressing rapidly in that course: hence the warning 

inquiry of our Lord, "How can ye escape?" etc. The 

sense is this,— Although you boast of your piety, you 

will surely be destroyed in Gehenna, unless you 

change your course. 

SET ON FIRE OF GEHENNA. 

JAMES 3:6. 

"So [important] is the tongue among our members, 
that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on 
fire the course of nature, and [or when] it is set on 
fire of Gehenna." 

Here, in strong, symbolic language, the Apostle 
points out the great and bad influence of an evil tongue 
—a tongue set on fire (figuratively) by Gehenna (figuratively). 
For a tongue to be set on fire of Gehenna 
signifies that it is set going in evil by a perverse disposition, 
self-willed, selfish, hateful, malicious, the sort 
of disposition which, in spite of knowledge and opportunity, 
unless controlled and reformed, will be 
counted worthy to be destroyed— the class for whom 
the "Second Death," the real "lake of fire," the real 
Gehenna, is intended. One in that attitude may by 
his tongue kindle a great fire, a destructive disturbance, 
which, wherever it has contact, will work evil in 
the entire course of nature. A few malicious words 
often arouse all the evil passions of the speaker, engender 
the same in others and react upon the first. 
And continuance in such an evil course finally corrupts 
the entire man, and brings him under sentence 
as utterly unworthy of life. 

"TARTAROO" RENDERED "HELL." 



The Greek word tartaroo occurs but once in the 
Scriptures, and is translated hell. It is found in 
2 Pet. 2:4, which reads thus: 

"God spared not the angels who sinned, but cast 
[them] down to hell [tartaroo], and delivered them 
into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto 
judgment." 

Having examined all other words rendered "hell," 
in the Bible, and all the texts in which they occur, we 
conclude the examination with this text, which is the 
only one in which the word tartaroo occurs. In the 
above quotation, all the words shown in Italic type 
are translated from the one Greek word tartaroo. 
Evidently the translators were at a loss to know how 
to translate the word, but concluded they knew where 
the evil angels ought to be, and so they made bold 
to put them into "hell," though it took six words to 
twist the idea into the shape they had pre-determined 
it must take. 

The word tartaroo, used by Peter, very closely 
resembles tartarus, a word used in Grecian mythology 
as the name for a dark abyss or prison. But tartaroo 
seems to refer more to an act than to a place. The 
fall of the angels who sinned was from honor and 
dignity, into dishonor and condemnation, and the 
thought seems to be— "God spared not the angels 
who sinned, but degraded them, and delivered them 
into chains of darkness." 

This certainly agrees with the facts known to 
us through other Scriptures; for these fallen spirits 
frequented the earth in the days of our Lord and the 
apostles. Hence they were not down in some place, 
but "down" in the sense of being degraded from former 
honor and liberty, and restrained under darkness, 
as by a chain. Whenever these fallen spirits, in 
spiritualistic seances, manifest their powers through 
mediums, pretending to be certain dead human beings, 
they must always do their work in the dark, because 
darkness is the chain by which they are bound until 
the great Millennial day of judgment. Whether this 
implies that in the immediate future they will be able 
to materialize in daylight is difficult to determine. If 
so, it would greatly increase Satan's power to blind 
and deceive for a short season— until the Sun of 
Righteousness has fully risen and Satan is fully 
bound. 

Thus we close our investigation of the Bible use 

R2759 : page 35 

of the word "hell." Thank God, we find no such place 
of everlasting torture as the creeds and hymn-books, 
and many pulpits, erroneously teach. Yet we have 
found a "hell," sheol, hades, to which all our race were 
condemned on account of Adam's sin, and from which 
all are redeemed by our Lord's death; and that "hell" 



is the tomb— the death condition. And we find 
another "hell" (Gehenna— the Second Death— utter 
destruction) brought to our attention as the final 
penalty upon all who, after being redeemed and 
brought to the full knowledge of the truth, and to 
full ability to obey it, shall yet choose death by choosing 
a course of opposition to God and righteousness. 
And our hearts say, Amen! True and righteous are 
thy ways, thou King of nations! Who shall not venerate 
thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou 
art entirely holy. And all nations shall come and 
worship before thee, because thy righteous dealings 
are made manifest— Rev. 15:3,4. 

PARABLE OF THE RICH MAN AND LAZARUS. 

-LUKE 16:19-31.- 

The great difficulty with many in reading this 
scripture is that, though they regard it as a parable, 
they reason on it and draw conclusions from it as 
though it were a literal statement. To regard it as a 
literal statement involves several absurdities; for instance, 
that the rich man went to "hell" because he had 
enjoyed many earthly blessings and gave nothing but 
crumbs to Lazarus. Not a word is said about his 
wickedness. Again, Lazarus was blessed, not because 
he was a sincere child of God, full of faith and trust, 
not because he was good, but simply because he was 
poor and sick. If this be interpreted literally, the 
only logical lesson to be drawn from it is, that unless 
we are poor beggars full of sores, we will never enter 
into future bliss; and that if now we wear any fine 
linen and purple, and have plenty to eat every day, 
we are sure of future torment. Again, the coveted 
place of favor is "Abraham's bosom;" and if the whole 
statement be literal, the bosom must also be literal, 
and it surely would not hold very many of earth's 
millions of sick and poor. 

But why consider absurdities? As a parable, it 
is easy of interpretation. In a parable the thing said 
is never the thing meant. We know this from our 
Lord's own explanations of his parables. When he 
said "wheat," he meant "children of the kingdom;" 
when he said "tares," he meant "the children of the 
devil;" when he said "reapers" his servants were to be 
understood, etc. (Matt. 13.) The same classes were 
represented by different symbols in different parables. 
Thus the "wheat" of one parable correspond 
to the "faithful servants," and the "wise virgins" of 
others. So, in this parable, the "rich man" represents 
a class, and "Lazarus" represents another class. 

In attempting to expound a parable such as this, 
an explanation of which the Lord does not furnish 
us, modesty in expressing our opinion regarding it 
is certainly appropriate. We therefore offer the following 



explanation without any attempt to force our 

views upon the reader, except so far as his own truth-enlightened 

judgment may commend them as in accord 

with God's Word and plan. To our understanding, 

Abraham represented God, and the "rich man" represented 

the Jewish nation. At the time of the utterance 

of the parable, and for a long time previous, the 

Jews had "fared sumptuously every day"— being the 

especial recipients of God's favors. As Paul says: 

"What advantage, then, hath the Jew? Much every 

way: chiefly, because to them were committed the 

oracles of God [Law and Prophecy]." The promises 

to Abraham and David and their organization as a 

typical Kingdom of God invested that people with 

royalty, as represented by the rich man's "purple." 

The typical sacrifices of the Law constituted them, in 

a typical sense, a holy (righteous) nation, represented 

by the rich man's "fine linen,"— symbolic of righteousness. 

-Rev. 19:8. 

Lazarus represented the outcasts from divine 
favor under the Law, who, sin-sick, hungered and 
thirsted after righteousness. "Publicans and sinners" 
of Israel, seeking a better life, and truth-hungry 
Gentiles who were "feeling after God" constituted 
the Lazarus class. These, at the time of the utterance 
of this parable, were entirely destitute of those 
special divine blessings which Israel enjoyed. They 
lay at the gate of the rich man. No rich promises of 
royalty were theirs; not even typically were they 
cleansed; but, in moral sickness, pollution and sin, 
they were companions of "dogs." Dogs were regarded 
as detestable creatures in those days, and the typically 
clean Jew called the outsiders "heathen" and "dogs," 
and would never eat with them, nor marry, nor have 
any dealings with them.— John 4:9. 

As to how these ate of the "crumbs" of divine 
favor which fell from Israel's table of bounties, the 
Lord's words to the Syro-Phoenician woman give us 
a key. He said to this Gentile woman— "It is not 
meet [proper] to take the children's [Israelites'] bread 
and to cast it to dogs [Gentiles];" and she answered, 
"Truth, Lord, but the dogs eat of the crumbs that 
fall from their master's table." (Matt. 15:26,27.) 
Jesus healed her daughter, thus giving the desired 
crumb of favor. 

But there came a great dispensational change in 
Israel's history when as a nation they rejected and 
crucified the Son of God. Then their typical righteousness 
ceased— then the promise of royalty ceased 
to be theirs, and the kingdom was taken from them 
to be given to a nation bringing forth the fruits thereof 
—the Gospel Church, "a holy nation, a peculiar people." 
(Titus 2:14; 1 Pet. 2:7,9; Matt. 21:43.) Thus 
the "rich man" died to all these special advantages, 
and soon he (the Jewish nation) found himself in a 
cast-off condition,— in tribulation and affliction. In 



such condition that nation has suffered from that day 
to this. 

Lazarus also died: the condition of the humble 
Gentiles and the God-seeking "outcasts" of Israel 
underwent a great change, being carried by the angels 
(messengers— apostles, etc.) to Abraham's bosom. 
Abraham is represented as the father of the faithful, 
and receives all the children of faith, who are thus 
recognized as the heirs of all the promises made to 
Abraham; for the children of the flesh are not the 
children of God, "but the children of the promise are 
counted for the seed" (children of Abraham); "which 
seed is Christ;"— and "if ye be Christ's, then are ye 
[believers] Abraham's seed [children], and heirs according 
to the [Abrahamic] promise."— Gal. 3:29. 

Yes, the termination of the condition of things 

R2759 : page 36 

then existing was well illustrated by the figure, death 
—the dissolution of the Jewish polity and the withdrawal 
of the favors which Israel had so long enjoyed. 
There they were cast off and have since been 
shown "no favor," while the poor Gentiles, who before 
had been "aliens from the commonwealth [the 
polity] of Israel and strangers from the covenant of 
promise [up to this time given to Israel only] having 
no hope and without God in the world," were then 
"made nigh by the blood of Christ" and reconciled to 
God.-Eph. 2:12,13. 

To the symbolisms of death and burial used 
to illustrate the dissolution of Israel and their burial 
or hiding among the other nations, our Lord added 
a further figure— "In hell [hades, the grave] he lifted 
up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham 
afar off," etc. The dead cannot lift up their eyes, nor 
see either near or far, nor converse; for it is distinctly 
stated, "There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom, in the grave;" and the dead are 
described as those who "go down into silence." 
(Eccl. 9:10; Psa. 115:17.) But the Lord wished to 
show that great sufferings or "torments" would be 
added to the Jews as a nation after their national dissolution 
and burial amongst the other peoples dead 
in trespasses and sins; and that they would plead in 
vain for release and comfort at the hand of the formerly 
despised Lazarus class. 

And history has borne out this parabolic prophecy. 
For eighteen hundred years the Jews have 
not only been in distress of mind over their casting 
out from the favor of God and the loss of their temple 
and other necessaries to the offering of their sacrifices, 
but they have been relentlessly persecuted by 
all classes, including professed Christians. It was 
from the latter that the Jews have expected mercy, 
as expressed in the parable— "Send Lazarus, that he 



may dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my 
tongue;" but the great gulf fixed between them 
hinders that. Nevertheless, God still recognizes the 
relationship established in his covenant with them, 
and addresses them as children of the covenant. 
(Verse 25.) These "torments" have been the penalties 
attached to the violation of their covenant, and 
were as certain to be visited upon them as the blessings 
promised for obedience.— See Lev. 26. 

The "great gulf fixed" represents the wide difference 
between the Gospel Church and the Jew— the 
former enjoying free grace, joy, comfort and peace, 
as true sons of God, and the latter holding to the Law, 
which condemns and torments. Prejudice, pride and 
error, from the Jewish side, form the bulwarks of 
this gulf which hinder the Jew from coming into the 
condition of true sons of God by accepting Christ and 
the gospel of his grace. The bulwark of this gulf 
which hinders true sons of God from going to the 
Jew— under the bondage of the Law— is their knowledge 
that by the deeds of the Law none can be justified 
before God, and that if any man keep the Law 
(put himself under it to try to commend himself to 
God by reason of obedience to it), Christ shall profit 
him nothing. (Gal. 5:2-4.) So, then, we who are 
of the Lazarus class should not attempt to mix the 
Law and the Gospel, knowing that they cannot be 
mixed, and that we can do no good to those who still 
cling to the Law and reject the sacrifice for sins 
given by our Lord. And they, not seeing the change 
of dispensation which took place, argue that to deny 
the Law as the power to save would be to deny all 
the past history of their race, and to deny all of 
God's special dealings with the "fathers," (promises 
and dealings which through pride and selfishness they 
failed rightly to apprehend and use); hence they cannot 
come over to the bosom of Abraham, into the true 
rest and peace— the portion of all the true children 
of faith. -John 8:39; Rom. 4:16; Gal. 3:29. 

True, a few Jews probably came into the Christian 
faith all the way down the Gospel age, but so few 
as to be ignored in a parable which represented the 
Jewish people as a whole. As at the first, Dives represented 
the orthodox Jews, and not the "outcasts of 
Israel," so down to the close of the parable he continues 
to represent a similar class, and hence does not 
represent such Jews as have renounced the Law Covenant 
and embraced the New Covenant, or such as have 
become infidels. 

The plea of the "rich man" for the sending of 
"Lazarus" to his five brethren we interpret as follows: 

The people of Judea, at the time of our Lord's 
utterance of this parable, were repeatedly referred to 
as "Israel," "the lost sheep of the house of Israel," 
"cities of Israel," etc., because all of the tribes were 
represented there; but actually the majority of the 



people were of the two tribes, Judah and Benjamin, 
but few of the ten tribes having returned from Babylon 
under Cyrus' general permission. If the nation 
of the Jews (chiefly two tribes) were represented in 
the one "rich man," it would be a harmony of numbers 
to understand the "five brethren" to represent the ten 
tribes chiefly scattered abroad. The request relative 
to them was doubtless introduced to show that all 
special favor of God ceased to all Israel (the ten 
tribes, as well as to the two more directly addressed). 
It seems to us evident that Israel only was meant, 
for no other nation than Israel had "Moses and the 
prophets" as instructors. (Verse 29.) The majority 
of the ten tribes had so far disregarded Moses and the 
prophets that they did not return to the land of promise, 
but preferred to dwell among idolaters; and hence 
it would be useless to attempt further communication 
with them, even by one from the dead— the figuratively 
dead, but now figuratively risen, Lazarus class. 
-Eph. 2:5. 

Though the parable mentions no bridging of this 
"great gulf," other portions of Scripture indicate that 
it was to be "fixed" only throughout the Gospel age, 
and that at its close the "rich man," having received 
the measurement of punishment for his sins,* will 
walk out of his fiery troubles over the bridge of God's 
promises yet unfulfilled to that nation. 

Though for centuries the Jews have been bitterly 
persecuted by pagans, Mohammedans and professed 
Christians, they are now gradually rising to political 
freedom and influence; and although much of "Jacob's 
trouble" is just at hand, yet as a people they will be 
very prominent among the nations in the beginning 
of the Millennium. The "vail" (2 Cor. 3:13-16) of 
prejudice still exists, but it will be gradually taken 
away as the light of the Millennial morning dawns; 



*See Isa. 40:1,2, margin; Rom. 11:27-31, and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. II, page 227. 

R2759 : page 37 

nor should we be surprised to hear of great awakenings 
among the Jews, and many coming to acknowledge 
Christ. They will thus leave their hadean state 
(national death) and torment, and come, the first of 
the nations, to be blessed by the true seed of Abraham, 
which is Christ, Head and body. Their bulwark of 
race prejudice and pride is falling in some places, and 
the humble, the poor in spirit, are beginning already 
to look upon him whom they have pierced, and to 
inquire, Is not this the Christ? And as they look 
the Lord pours upon them the spirit of favor and 
supplication. (Zech. 12:10.) Therefore, "Speak ye 



comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her 
appointed time is accomplished."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

In a word, this parable seems to teach precisely 
what Paul explained in Rom. 11:19-32. Because of 
unbelief the natural branches were broken off, and 
the wild branches grafted into the Abrahamic root-promise. 
The parable leaves the Jews in their 
trouble, and does not refer to their final restoration 
to favor— doubtless because it was not pertinent to 
the feature of the subject treated; but Paul assures us 
that when the fulness of the Gentiles— the full number 
from among the Gentiles necessary to make up the 
bride of Christ— is come in, "they [natural Israel] shall 
obtain mercy through your [the Church's] mercy." He 
assures us that this is God's covenant with fleshly 
Israel (who lost the higher, spiritual promises, but 
are still the possessors of certain earthly promises), 
to become the chief nation of earth, etc. In proof of 
this statement, he quotes from the prophets, saying: 
"The deliverer shall come out of Zion [the glorified 
Church], and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob 
[the fleshly seed]." "As concerning the Gospel [high 
calling], they are enemies [cast off] for your sakes; 
but as touching the election, they are beloved for the 
fathers' sakes." "For God hath concluded them all in 
unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O the 
depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God!"-Rom. 11:26-33. 



R2759 : page 37 

PARABLE OF THE SHEEP AND THE GOATS. 



"These shall go away into everlasting punishment, but 
the righteous into life eternal."— Matt. 25:31-46. 

WHILE the Scriptures, as we have shown, do not 
teach the blasphemous doctrine of everlasting 
torment, they do most emphatically teach the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked, the class represented in 
the parable as "goats." Let us examine the parable, 
and then the sentence pronounced at its close. 

It has been truly said that "Order is Heaven's 
first law;" yet few, we think, have realized how emphatically 
this is true. In glancing back over the 
plan of the ages, there is nothing which gives such 
conclusive evidence of a Divine Director as the order 
observed in all its parts. 

God has had definite and stated times and seasons 
for every part of his work; and in the end of each of 
these seasons there has been a finishing up of its 
work and a clearing off of the rubbish, preparatory 



to the beginning of the new work of the dispensation 
to follow. Thus in the end of the Jewish age order 
is observed— a harvesting and complete separation of 
the "wheat" class from the "chaff," and an entire rejection 
of the latter class from God's favor. With the few 
judged worthy in the end of that age, a new age— the 
Gospel age— began. And now we find ourselves amidst 
the closing scenes, the "harvest," of this age: the 
"wheat" and the "tares" which have grown together 
during this age are being separated. With the former 
class, of which our Lord Jesus is the Head, a new 
age is about to be inaugurated, and these "wheat" are 
to reign as kings and priests in that new dispensation, 
while the "tare" element is judged as utterly unworthy 
of that favor. 

While observing this order with reference to the 
Jewish age and the one just closing, our Lord informs 
us through the parable under consideration that the 
same order will be observed with reference to the age 
to follow this Gospel age. 

The harvest of the Jewish age was likened to the 
separation of wheat from chaff; the harvest of this age 
to the separation of wheat from tares; and the harvest 
of the Millennial age to the separation of sheep from 
goats. 

That the parable of the sheep and the goats 
refers to the Millennial age is clearly indicated in 
verses 31 and 32— "When the son of man shall come 
in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then 
shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before 
him shall be gathered all nations; and he shall separate 
them one from another, as a shepherd divideth 
his sheep from the goats." As in the present age 
every act of those on trial (the Church) goes to make 
a part of that character which, in due time, will determine 
the final decision of the Judge in our case, so 
will it be with the world (the "nations") in the age to 
come. As in the present age the trial of the majority 
of the individual members of the Church ends, and 
the decision of their case is reached, long before the 
end of the age (2 Tim. 4:7,8), so under the Millennial 
reign the decision of some individual cases will be 
reached long before the end of the age (Isa. 65:20); 
but in each age there is a "harvest" or general separating 
time in the end of the age. 

In the dawn of the Millennial age, after the "time 
of trouble," there will be a gathering of the living 
nations before Christ, and, in their appointed time and 
order, the dead of all nations shall be called to appear 
before the judgment seat of Christ— not to receive 
an immediate sentence, but to receive a fair and impartial, 
individual trial (Ezek. 18:2-4,19,20) under 
the most favorable circumstances, the result of which 
trial will be a final sentence, as worthy or unworthy 
of everlasting life.* 

The scene of this parable, therefore, is laid after 



the time of trouble, when the nations shall have been 
subdued, Satan bound (Rev. 20:1,2) and the authority 
of Christ's kingdom established. Ere this, the bride 
of Christ (the overcoming Church) will have been 
seated with him in his throne of spiritual power and 
will have taken part in executing the judgments of the 



*See THE PLAN OF THE AGES, Chapter 8. 

R2759 : page 38 

great day of wrath. Then the Son of man and his 
bride, the glorified Church, will be revealed and be seen 
by men, with the eyes of their understanding and shall 
"shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their 
Father. "-Matt. 13:43. 

Here is the New Jerusalem as John saw it (Rev. 21), 
"that holy city [symbol of government]. ..coming 
down from God out of heaven." During the time 
of trouble it will be coming down, and before the end 
of it, it will have touched the earth. This is the stone 
cut out of the mountains without hands (but by the 
power of God), and it will then have become a great 
mountain (kingdom), filling the whole earth (Dan. 2:35), 
its coming having broken to pieces the evil kingdoms 
of the prince of darkness.— Dan. 2:34,35. 

Here is that glorious city (government), prepared 
as a bride adorned for her husband (Rev. 21:2), and 
early in the dawn of the Millennium the nations will 
begin to walk in the light of it. (Verse 24.) These 
may bring their glory and honor into it, but "there 
shall in no wise enter into it [or become a part of it] 
anything that defileth," etc. (Verse 27.) Here, from 
the midst of the throne, proceeds a pure river of water 
of life (truth unmixed with error), and the Spirit and 
the Bride say, Come, and take it freely. (Rev. 22:17.) 
Here begins the world's probation, the world's great 
judgment day— a thousand years.* 

But even in this favored time of blessing and 
healing of the nations, when Satan is bound, evil 
restrained, mankind in process of release from the 
grasp of death, and when the knowledge of the Lord 
fills the earth, two classes will be developed, which our 
Lord here likens to sheep and goats. These, he tells 
us, he will separate. The sheep class— those who are 
meek, teachable and willing to be led, shall, during 
the Millennial age, be gathered at the Judge's 
right hand— symbol of his approval and favor; but 
the goat class, self-willed and stubborn, always climbing 
on the rocks— seeking prominence and approval 
among men— and feeding on miserable refuse, while 
the sheep graze in the rich pastures of the truth furnished 
by the Good Shepherd— these are gathered to 
the Judge's left hand, the opposite of the position of 



favor— as subjects of his disfavor and condemnation. 

This work of separating sheep and goats will require 
all of the Millennial age for its accomplishment. 
During that age, each individual, as he comes gradually 
to a knowledge of God and his will, takes his place 
at the right hand of favor or the left hand of disfavor, 
according as he improves or misimproves the opportunities 
of that golden age. By the end of that age, 
all the world of mankind will have arranged themselves, 
as shown in the parable, into two classes. 

The end of that age will be the end of the world's 
trial or judgment, and then final disposition will be 
made of the two classes. The reward of this "sheep" 
class will be granted them because, during the age of 
trial and discipline, they cultivated and manifested the 
beautiful character of love, which Paul describes as 
the fulfilling of the Law of God. (Rom. 13:10.) They 
will have manifested it to each other in their times of 
sorest need; and what they will have done for one 
another the Lord will count as done unto him, counting 
them all as his brethren— children of God, though 
they will be of the human nature, while he is of the 
divine. 

The condemnation of the "goat" class is shown 
to be for the lack of this spirit of love. Under the 
same favorable circumstances as the "sheep," they 
wilfully resist the moulding influence of the Lord's 
discipline, and harden their hearts. The goodness 
of God does not lead them to true repentance; but, 
like Pharaoh, they take advantage of his goodness and 
do evil. The "goats," who will not have developed 
the element of love, the law of God's being and Kingdom, 
will be counted unworthy of everlasting life, and 
will be destroyed; while the "sheep," who will have 
developed God-likeness (love), and who will have exhibited 
it in their characters, are to be installed as the 
subordinate rulers of earth for future ages. 

In the end of the Millennial age, in the final adjustment 
of human affairs, Christ thus addresses his 
sheep: "Come, ye blessed,. ..inherit the kingdom 
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." 

It is manifest the "sheep" here addressed, at the 
close of the Millennium, are not the sheep of the Gospel 
age, the Gospel Church, but those "other sheep" 
to whom the Lord referred in John 10:16. And the 
kingdom prepared for them in the divine plan, from 
the foundation of the world, is not the kingdom prepared 
for the Gospel Church. The Church will receive 
her kingdom at the beginning of the Millennium; 
but this is the kingdom prepared for the "sheep" of the 
Millennial age. Their kingdom will be the dominion 
of earth which was originally given to Adam, but 
which was lost through sin, and which is again to be 
restored when man is brought to perfection, and so 
made fit to receive and enjoy it. That dominion will 
not be a dominion of some of the race over others, but 



a joint dominion, in which every man will be a king, 

and all will have equal rights and privileges in appropriating 

and enjoying every earthly good. It will be 

a sovereign people— a great and grand republic on a 

basis of perfect righteousness, wherein the rights of 

every man will be conserved; because the golden rule 

will be inscribed on every heart, and every man will 

love his neighbor as himself. The dominion of all 

will be over the whole earth, and all its rich and 

bountiful stores of blessing. (Gen. 1:28; Psa. 8:5-8.) 

The kingdom of the world, to be given to the perfected 

and worthy ones of the redeemed race at the close of 

the Millennium, is clearly distinguished from all others 

by being called the kingdom prepared for them "from 

the foundation of the world," the earth having been 

made to be the everlasting home and kingdom of perfect 

men. But the kingdom bestowed upon Christ, 

of which the Church, his "bride," becomes joint-heir, 

is a spiritual kingdom, "far above angels, principalities 

and powers," and it also shall "have no end"— 

Christ's Millennial Kingdom, which will end, being 

merely a beginning of Christ's power and rule. (1 Cor. 15:25-28.) 

This endless heavenly, spiritual kingdom 

was prepared long before the earth was founded— its 

inception being recognized in Christ, "the beginning 

of the creation of God." It was intended for Christ 

Jesus, the First Begotten; but even the Church, his 

bride and joint-heir, was chosen or designed also, 

in him, before the foundation of the world.— Eph. 1:4. 

The kingdom or rule of earth, is the kingdom 
that has been in preparation for mankind from the 
foundation of the world. It was expedient that man 
should suffer six thousand years under the dominion 
of evil, to learn its inevitable results of misery and 
death, in order by contrast to prove the justice, wisdom 
and goodness of God's law of love. Then it will 



See THE PLAN OF THE AGES, Chap. 8, The Day of Judgment. 

R2759 : page 39 

require the seventh thousand-years, under the reign 
of Christ, to restore him from ruin and death, to the 
perfect condition, thereby fitting him to "inherit the 
kingdom prepared for him from the foundation of the 
world." 

That kingdom, in which all will be kings, will be 
one grand, universal republic, whose stability and 
blessed influence will be assured by the perfection of 
its every citizen, a result now much desired, but an 
impossibility because of sin. The kingdom of Christ 
during the Millennium will be, on the contrary, a theocracy, 
which will rule the world (during the period of 
its imperfection and restoration) without regard to its 



consent or approval. 

The brethren of the Gospel Church are not the 
only "brethren" of Christ. All who at that time will 
have been restored to perfection will be recognized as 
sons of God— sons in the same sense that Adam was a 
son of God (Luke 3:38)— human sons. And all of 
God's sons, whether on the human, the angelic or the 
divine plane, are brethren. Our Lord's love for these, 
his human brethren, is here expressed. As the world 
now has the opportunity to minister to those who are 
shortly to be the divine sons of God, and brethren of 
Christ, so they will have abundant opportunity during 
the age to come to minister to (each other) the human 
brethren. 

The dead nations when again brought into existence 
will need food, raiment and shelter. However 
great may have been their possessions in this life, 
death will have brought all to a common level: the 
infant and the man of mature years, the millionaire 
and the pauper, the learned and the unlearned, the 
cultured and the ignorant and degraded: all will have 
an abundant opportunity for the exercise of benevolence, 
and thus they will be privileged to be co-workers 
with God. We are here reminded of the illustration 
given in the case of Lazarus: Jesus only awakened 
him from death, and then were the rejoicing friends 
permitted to loose him from his grave clothes and to 
clothe and feed him. 

Further, these are said to be "sick and in prison" 
(more properly, under ward or watch). The grave is 
the great prison where the millions of humanity have 
been held in unconscious captivity; but when released 
from the grave, the restoration to perfection is not to 
be an instantaneous work. Being not yet perfect, 
they may properly be termed sick, and under ward: 
not dead, neither are they yet perfected in life: and 
any condition between those two may be properly 
symbolized by sickness. And they will continue to be 
under watch or ward until made well— physically, 
mentally and morally perfect. During that time there 
will be abundant opportunity for mutual helpfulness, 
sympathy, instruction and encouragement, and 
any failure to assist will mark a lack of the Lord's 
spirit of love. 

Since all mankind will not be raised at once, but 
gradually, during the thousand years, each new group 
will find an army of helpers in those who will have preceded 
it. The love and benevolence which men will 
then show to each other (the brethren of Christ) the 
King will count as shown to him. No great deeds 
are assigned as the ground for the honors and favors 
conferred upon the righteous: they will have simply 
come into harmony with God's law of love and proved 
it by their works. "Love is the fulfilling of the law" 
(Rom. 13:10), and "God is love." So, when man 
is restored again to the image of God— "very good"— 



man also will be a living expression of love. 

"Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the 
foundation of the world," does not signify a rule independent 
of the divine law and supremacy: for although 
God gave earth's dominion to man at first, and designs 
restoring it to him when he has prepared him for 
the great trust, we are not to suppose that God intends 
man to rule it, otherwise than as under, or in harmony 
with, his supreme law. "Thy will be done in earth as 
in heaven," must forever be the principle of government. 
Man thenceforth will rule his dominion in harmony 
with the law of heaven— delighting continually 
to do his will in whose favor is life, and at whose 
"right hand [condition of favor] there are pleasures 
forevermore." (Psa. 16:11.) Oh! who would not say, 
"Haste ye along, ages of glory!" and give glory and 
honor to him whose loving plans are blossoming 
into such fulness of blessing? 

Let us now examine the message to those on the 
left— "Depart from me, ye cursed" (condemned)— 
condemned as unfit vessels for the glory and honor of 
life, who would not yield to the moulding and shaping 
influences of divine love. When these, "brethren," 
were hungry and thirsty, or naked, sick, and in 
prison, ye ministered not to their necessities, thus 
continually proving yourselves out of harmony with 
the heavenly city (Kingdom); for "there shall in no 
case enter into it anything that defileth." The decision 
or sentence regarding this class is— "Depart 
from me into everlasting fire [symbol of destruction], 
prepared for the devil and his angels." Elsewhere 
(Heb. 2:14) we read without symbol that Christ "will 
destroy. ..him that had the power of death, that is, 
the devil." 

"And these [the "goats"] shall go away into everlasting 
[Greek, aionios— lasting] punishment, but the 
righteous into life eternal [Greek, aionios— lasting.]" 
The punishment will be as lasting as the reward. 
Both will be everlasting. 



R2759 : page 39 

EVERLASTING PUNISHMENT. 



THE EVERLASTINGNESS of the punishment 
being thus established, only one point is left open 
for discussion; namely, the nature of the punishment. 
Take your Concordance and search out what saith the 
great Judge regarding the punishment of wilful sinners 
who despise and reject all his blessed provisions for 
them through Christ. What do you find? Does God 
there say— All sinners shall live in torture forever? 



No; we find not a single text where life in any condition 
is promised to that class. 

God's declarations assure us that ultimately he 
will have a clean universe, free from the blight of sin 
and sinners,— because "All the wicked will he destroy." 
-Psa. 145:20. 

But while we do not find one verse of the Bible 
saying that this class can have life in torment, or in 
any other condition, we do find numerous passages 
teaching the reverse. Of these we give a few merely 
as samples— "The wages of sin is death" (Rom. 6:23.) 
"The soul that sinneth, it shall die." (Ezek. 18:4,20.) 

R2759 : page 40 

"The wicked shall perish." (Psa. 37:20.) "Yet a little 
while and the wicked shall not be." (Psa. 37:10.) 
Thus God has told us plainly the nature of the everlasting 
punishment of the wicked— that it will be 
death, destruction. 

The false ideas of God's plan of dealing with the 
incorrigible, taught ever since the great "falling away," 
which culminated in Papacy, and instilled into our 
minds from childhood, are alone responsible for the 
view generally held, that the everlasting punishment 
provided for wilful sinners is a life of torment. This 
view is held, notwithstanding the many clear statements 
of God's Word that their punishment is to be 
death. Hear Paul state very explicitly what the punishment 
is to be. Speaking of the same Millennial Day, 
and of the same class, who, despite all the favorable 
opportunities and the fulness of knowledge then, will 
not come into harmony with Christ, and hence will 
"know not God," in the true sense and "obey not," 
he says— "Who shall be punished." Ah, yes! but how 
punished? He tells us how: They "shall be punished 
with everlasting destruction [a destruction from which 
there shall be no recovery, no redemption or resurrection 
— Heb. 10:26-29] from the presence of the Lord 
and from the glory of his power." (2 Thes. 1:9.) This 
destruction is represented in the parable as the everlasting 
"fire" prepared for the devil and his angels: 
it is "the lake of fire and brimstone," which is the 
Second death (Rev. 20:14), into which the "goat" 
class of this parable are sent— Matt. 25:41. 

Thus the meaning and reasonableness of this 
statement concerning everlasting punishment are 
readily seen when looked at from the correct standpoint. 
The fire of the parable, by which the punishment 
(destruction) is to be accomplished, will not be 
literal fire, for the "fire" is as much a symbol as the 
"sheep" and "goats" are symbols. Fire here, as elsewhere, 
symbolizes destruction, and not in any sense 
preservation. 

We might well leave this subject here, and consider 
that we have fully shown that the everlasting 



punishment of the "goat" class will be destruction; but 

we direct attention to one other point which clinches 

the truth upon this subject. We refer to the Greek 

word kolasin, translated "punishment," in verse 46. 

This word has not in it the remotest idea of torment. 

Its primary signification is to cut off, or prune, or lop 

off, as in the pruning of trees; and a secondary meaning 

is to restrain. The wicked will be everlastingly 

restrained, cut off from life in the Second death. Illustrations 

of the use of kolasin can easily be had from 

Greek classical writings. The Greek word for "torment" 

is basinos, a word totally unrelated to the word 

kolasin. 

Kolasin, the word used in Matt. 25:46, occurs in 
but one other place in the Bible, viz., 1 John 4:18, 
where it is improperly rendered "torment" in the common 
version, whereas it should read, "Fear hath restraint." 
Those who possess a copy of Young's Analytical 
Concordance will see from it (page 995) that the 
definition of the word kolasis is "pruning, restraining, 
restraint." And the author of the Emphatic Diaglott, 
after translating kolasin in Matt. 25:46 by the words 
"cutting off," says in a foot note: 

"The common version and many modern ones 
render kolasin aionion 'everlasting punishment,' conveying 
the idea, as generally interpreted, of basinos, 
torment. Kolasin in its various forms occurs in only 
three other places in the New Testament: Acts 4:21; 
2 Pet. 2:9; 1 John 4: 18. It is derived from kolazoo, 
which signifies, 1. To cut off; as lopping off branches 
of trees, to prune. 2. To restrain, to repress. The 
Greeks write— 'The charioteer restrains [kalazei] his 
fiery steeds.' 3. To chastise, to punish. To cut off 
an individual from life, or from society, or even to restrain, 
is esteemed as a punishment; hence has arisen 
this third or metaphorical use of the word. The 
primary signification has been adopted [in the Diaglott], 
because it agrees better with the second member 
of the sentence, thus preserving the force and 
beauty of the antithesis. The righteous go to life, the 
wicked to the cutting off from life, death.— 
2Thes. 1:9." 

Now consider carefully the text, and note the 
antithesis, the contrast, shown between the reward of 
the "sheep" and the reward of the "goats," which the 
correct idea of kolasin gives— the one class goes into 
everlasting life, while the other is everlastingly cut off 
from life— forever restrained in death. And this exactly 
agrees with what the Scriptures everywhere else declare 
concerning the wages or penalty of wilful sin. 

Consider for a moment the words of verse 41: 
"Depart from me, ye cursed [once redeemed by Christ 
from the Adamic curse or condemnation to death, but 
now condemned or cursed, as worthy of the Second 
death, by the One who redeemed them from the first 
curse], into everlasting fire [symbol of everlasting destruction], 



prepared for the devil and his messengers 
[servants]." 

Remember that this is the final sentence at the 
close of the final trial— at the close of the Millennium; 
and that none will then be servants of Satan ignorantly 
or unwillingly, as so many now are; for the great 
Deliverer, Christ, will remove outside temptations, and 
provide assistance toward self-improvement, which 
will enable all who will to overcome inherent weaknesses 
and to attain perfection. These "goats," who 
love evil and serve Satan, are the messengers ("angels") 
of Satan. For these and Satan, and for no 
others, God has prepared Second death— the everlasting 
destruction. Fire will come from God out of 
heaven and consume them. Consuming fire and devouring 
fire all can appreciate, unless their eyes are 
holden by false doctrine and prejudice. No one ever 
knew of a preserving fire; and as fire never preserves, 
but always consumes, God uses it as a symbol of 
utter destruction.— Rev. 20:9. 

"THE LAKE OF FIRE AND BRIMSTONE, WHICH IS THE 
SECOND DEATH." 

-REV. 19:20; 20:10,14,15; 21:8.- 

"The lake of fire and brimstone" is several times 
mentioned in the book of Revelation, which all Christians 
admit to be a book of symbols. However, they 
generally think and speak of this particular symbol 
as a literal statement giving strong support to the torment 
doctrine, notwithstanding the fact that the symbol 
is clearly defined as meaning the Second death: 
"And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire. 
This is the Second Death," etc. (Rev. 20:14.) It is 
sometimes spoken of as "a lake of fire burning with 
brimstone" (Rev. 19:20), the element brimstone being 

R2759 : page 41 

mentioned to intensify the symbol of destruction, the 
Second death: burning brimstone being one of the 
most deadly elements known. It is destructive to all 
forms of life. 

The symbolism of this lake of fire is further shown 
by the fact that the symbolic "beast" and the symbolic 
"false prophet," and death and hell [hades], as well as 
the devil and his followers, are destroyed in it— Rev. 19:20; 
20:10,14,15; 21:8. 

This destruction or death is called the Second 
death in contradistinction to the First or Adamic 
death, and not to signify that everything which goes 
into it dies a second time. For instance, death (the 
first or Adamic death), and hades, the grave, are to be 
cast into it;— this work will require the entire Millennium 
to accomplish it; and in no sense will they ever 



have been destroyed before. So also "the devil," "the 
beast," and "the false prophet," will never have been 
destroyed before. 

From the first, or Adamic death, a resurrection 
has been provided. All that are in their graves shall 
therefore come forth. The Revelator prophetically 
declares: "The sea gave up the dead which were in 
it, and death and hell [hades, the grave] gave up the 
dead which were in them. ...And I saw the dead, 
small and great, stand before God, and the books were 
opened." (Rev. 20:13,12.) It was in view of God's 
plan for redeeming the race from Adamic death that in 
both the Old and New Testaments it is called a "sleep." 
In Israel's history of the good and the wicked it is repeatedly 
stated that they "slept with their fathers." 
The Apostles used the same symbol, and our Lord 
also. But no such symbol is used in reference to the 
Second death. On the contrary, the strongest figures 
of total and utter destruction are used to symbolize 
it; viz., "fire and brimstone;" because that will be a 
destruction from which there will be no recovery. 

Blessed thought! the Adamic death (which claimed 
the whole race for the sin of their progenitor) shall be 
forever swallowed up, and shall cease in this Second 
death into which it is to be cast by the great Redeemer 
who bought the whole world with the sacrifice of 
himself. Thus God tells us through the Prophet, "I 
will ransom them from the power of the grave [sheol]. 
I will redeem them from death.... O grave [sheol] 
I will be thy destruction." (Hos. 13:14.) The first 
or Adamic death shall no longer have liberty or power 
over men, as it has had for the past six thousand years; 
no longer shall any die for Adam's sin. (Rom. 5:12; 
Jer. 31:29,30; Ezek. 18:2.) Thenceforth the New 
Covenant, sealed with the precious blood, shall be in 
force, and only wilful transgressions will be counted 
as sin and punished with the wages of sin— death— 
the Second death. Thus will the Adamic death be cast 
into and swallowed up by the Second death. 

And hades and sheol— the dark, secret condition, 
the grave, which in the present time speaks to us of a 
hope of future life by God's resurrection power in 
Christ— shall be no more; for the Second death will 
devour no being fit for life— none for whom there 
remains a shadow of hope, but such only as, by the 
unerring Judge, have been fully, impartially and individually 
found worthy of destruction. And Satan, 
that lying tempter who deceived and ruined the race, 
and who, with persistent energy and cunning, has 
sought continually to thwart the purpose of God for 
our salvation through Christ, and with him all who 
are of his spirit, "his angels," shall be destroyed, and 
shall never awake from death to trouble the world 
again. Here he is said to be cast into "the lake of 
fire,"— the Second death; and Paul in Heb. 2:14, referring 
to the same thing, calls it destruction— "that he 



might destroy death, and him that hath the power 
of death, that is the devil." And "the beast and the 
false prophet," the great false systems which have 
long oppressed and misled nominal Christendom, shall 
never escape from it. These systems are said to be 
cast "alive" (that is, while they are still organized and 
operative) into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. 
-Rev. 19:20. 

The great time of trouble, the Lord's judgment, 
which will utterly destroy these systems, will undoubtedly 
cause great social, financial and religious difficulty 
and pain to all those identified with these deceived 
and deceiving systems, before they are utterly destroyed. 
These systems will be cast in, destroyed, at 
the beginning of the Millennium, while Satan's destruction 
is reserved until its close, when all the 
"goats" shall have been separated from the "sheep," 
and they shall perish with Satan in the Second death, 
as "his angels," messengers or servants. None of 
those abominable characters among men, who, knowing 
the truth, yet love unrighteousness— none of "the 
fearful and unbelieving"— those who will not trust 
God after all the manifestations of his grace afforded 
during the Millennial reign of Christ; nor the 
abominable, who, at heart are murderers and whoremongers 
and sorcerers and idolaters and liars: none 
of these shall escape from the Second death, to defile 
the earth again. All such, after a full and abundant 
opportunity for reformation, will be judged unworthy 
of life, and will be forever cut off in the Second death, 
symbolized by the lake of fire and brimstone. 

Several prophetic pen pictures of the Millennial 
age and its work, in chapters 20 and 21 of Revelation, 
clearly show the object and result of that age of trial, 
in harmony with the remainder of the Scriptures already 
noted. 

Chapter 20, verses 2,4,11, with verses 1,2,10,11 of chapter 21, 
show the beginning of that Age of 
Judgment, and the restraining of blinding errors and 
misleading systems. The "beast" and the "false 
prophet" are the chief symbols, and represent the organizations 
or systems of error which, together, constitute 
"Babylon." This judgment against the 
"thrones" of the present time, and against "the beast 
and the false prophet" systems follows speedily upon 
the introduction of this Millennial judgment reign. The 
thrones of the present dominion of earth will be "cast 
down," and the dominion transferred to the great 
Prophet, Priest, King and Judge, "whose right it is." 
(Compare Dan. 7:14,22; Ezek. 21:27.) Then the 
systems of error will be speedily judged worthy of 
destruction, "the lake of fire," "the Second death."— 
Rev. 19:20. 

Thus the second destruction (or death) begins 
quite early in the new judgment: it begins with the 
false systems symbolized by the beast, false prophet, 



etc., but it will not reach the world of mankind, as 
individuals, until they have first had full trial, with full 
opportunity to choose life and live forever. Chapters 20:12,13, 
and 21:3-7, indicate the blessed, favorable 

R2759 : page 42 

trial in which all, both dead and living (except 
the Church, who, with Jesus Christ, are kings, priests, 
joint-heirs and judges), will be brought to a full 
knowledge of the truth, relieved from sorrow and pain, 
and freed from every blinding error and prejudice, 
and tried "according to their works." 

The grand outcome of that trial will be a clean 
universe. As the Revelator expresses it, "Every creature 
which is in heaven and on the earth. ..heard I 
saying, Blessing and honor and glory and power be 
unto him that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the 
Lamb forever." But this result will be accomplished 
in harmony with all God's dealings past and present, 
which have always recognized man's freedom of will 
to choose good or evil, life or death. 

We cannot doubt then that in the close of the 
Millennial age, God will again for a "little season" permit 
evil to triumph, in order thereby to test his creatures 
(who will by that time have become thoroughly 
acquainted with both good and evil, and the consequences 
of each, and will have had his justice and love 
fully demonstrated to them), that those who finally 
prefer and choose evil may be cut off— destroyed. 
Thus God will for all eternity remove all who do not 
love righteousness and hate iniquity. 

We read, regarding that testing, that Satan will 
endeavor to lead astray all mankind, whose numbers 
will then be as the sand of the sea for multitude; but 
that many of them will follow Satan's evil example and 
choose evil and disobedience, with past experience 
before them, and unhampered by present weaknesses 
and blinding influences, we need not suppose. However, 
when God does not tell us either the number or 
the proportion of those to be found worthy of life, and 
those to be judged worthy of death (the Second 
death), we may not dogmatize. Of one thing we may 
be confident, God willeth not the death of the wicked, 
but would that all should turn to him and live; and no 
one will be destroyed in that "lake of fire and brimstone" 
(figurative of utter destruction,— Gehenna) who 
is worthy of life, whose living longer would be a blessing 
to himself or to others in harmony with 
righteousness. 

That utter and hopeless destruction is intended 
only for wilful evil doers, who, like Satan, in pride of 
heart and rebellion against God, will love and do evil 
notwithstanding the manifestations of God's disapproval, 
and notwithstanding their experience with its 
penalties. Seemingly the goodness and love of God 



in the provision of a ransom, a restitution, and another 

opportunity of life for man, instead of leading all to an 

abhorrence of sin, will lead some to suppose that God 

is too loving to cut them off in the Second death, or 

that if he did so he would give them other, and 

yet other future opportunities. Building thus upon a 

supposed weakness in the divine character, these may 

be led to try to take advantage of the grace (favor) 

of God, as a license for wilful sin. But they 

shall go no further, for their folly shall be made manifest. 

Their utter destruction will prove to the righteous 

the harmony and perfect balance of Justice, 

Wisdom, Love and Power in the Divine Ruler. 

REVELATION 21:8 

The true character of the goat class is portrayed. 
"The fearful and unbelieving [who will not trust God], 
the abominable, murderers [brother-haters], whoremongers, 
sorcerers, idolaters [such as misappropriate 
and misuse divine favors, who give to self or any other 
creature or thing that service and honor which belong 
to God], and all liars"— "whosoever loveth and maketh 
a lie" [in a word, all who do not love the truth and 
seek it, and at any cost defend and hold it] "shall have 
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone 
[Gehenna, symbol of utter destruction], which is 
the Second death." Such company would be repulsive 
to any honest, upright being. It is hard to tolerate 
them now, when we can sympathize with them, 
knowing that such dispositions are now in great measure 
the result of inherited weakness of the flesh. We 
are moved to a measure of sympathy by the remembrance 
that in our own cases, often, when we would 
do good, evil is present with us. But in the close of 
the Millennial judgment, when the Lord, the righteous 
Judge, shall have given every advantage and opportunity 
of knowledge and ability, this class will be an abhorrence 
and detestation to all who are in harmony 
with the King of Glory. And the righteous will be 
glad when, the trial being ended, the gift of life of 
which these shall have proved themselves unworthy, 
shall be taken from them, and when the corrupters of 
the earth, and all their work and influence, shall be 
destroyed. 

THE DEVIL, THE BEAST AND THE FALSE PROPHET 
TORMENTED. 

Rev. 20:9 tells of the destruction of those individuals 
who join with Satan in the last rebellion; and 
verse 15 tells of that same destruction in other words, 
using the symbol "lake of fire." They are devoured 
or consumed in fire. This being the case, the torment 
of verse 10 cannot refer to these human beings who 
are consumed, destroyed. Hence the question narrows 



down to this, Will Satan and a false prophet and 
a beast be tortured forever? and does this verse so 
teach? 

We answer in God's own words, "All the wicked 
will he destroy." Concerning Satan, the arch enemy 
of God and man, God expressly advises us that he will 
be destroyed, and not preserved in any sense or condition. 
-Heb. 2:14. 

The beast and false prophet systems, which during 
the Gospel age have deceived and led astray, will be 
cast into a great, consuming trouble in the close of this 
Gospel age. The torment of those systems will be 
aionion, i.e., lasting. It will continue as long as they 
last, until they are utterly consumed. So also the system 
of error, which will suddenly manifest itself at the 
end of the Millennial age and lead the "goats" to destruction, 
will be consumed. (Rev. 20:7-10.) That 
deceiving system (not specified as to kind, but merely 
called Satan, after its instigator) will be cast into the 
same sort of trouble and destruction, in the end of the 
Millennial age, as the beast and false prophet systems 
are now being cast into, in the end of the Gospel age. 

Rev. 19:3, speaking of one of these systems, says, 
"Her smoke rose up forever and ever." That is to 
say, the remembrance ("smoke") of the destruction of 
these systems of deception and error will be lasting, 
the lesson will never be forgotten— as smoke, which 
continues to ascend after a destructive fire, is testimony 
that the fire has done its work.— See also Isa. 34:8-10. 

Of Rev. 14:9-1 1 we remark, incidentally, that all 
will at once concede that if a literal worshiping of a 

R2759 : page 43 

beast and image were meant in verse 9, then few, if 
any, in civilized lands are liable to the penalty of verse 1 1 ; 
and if the beast and his image and worship and 
wine and cup are symbols, so also are the torments 
and smoke and fire and brimstone. 

The casting of death and the grave into utter destruction, 
the Second death, during the Millennial age, 
is a part of the utter destruction which will include 
every improper, injurious and useless thing. (Isa. 11:9; 
Psa. 101:5-8.) The Second death, the sentence 
of that individual trial, will be final: it will never be 
destroyed. And let all the lovers of righteousness say, 
Amen; for to destroy the Second Death, to remove the 
sentence of that just and impartial trial, would be to let 
loose again not only Satan, but all who love and practice 
wrong and deception, and who dishonor the Lord 
with their evil institutions— to oppose, offend and endeavor 
to overthrow those who love and desire to serve 
him and enjoy his favor. We rejoice that there is 
no danger of this, but that divine justice unites with 
divine wisdom, love and power, to bring in everlasting 
righteousness on a permanent basis. 



TURNED INTO HELL. 



"The wicked shall be turned into hell, and the nations 
that forget God. "-Psa. 9:17. 

This statement of the Lord recorded by the 
Psalmist we find without any qualification whatever, 
and we must accept it as a positive fact. If the claims 
of "Orthodoxy" respecting hell were true, this would 
be, indeed, a fearful message. 

But let us substitute the true meaning of the word 
sheol, and our text will read: "The wicked shall be 
turned into the condition of death, and all the nations 
that forget God." This we believe; but next, who are 
the wicked? In one sense all men are wicked, in that 
all are violators of God's law; but in the fullest sense 
the wicked are those who, with full knowledge of the 
exceeding sinfulness of sin, and the remedy provided 
for their recovery from its baneful effects, wilfully 
persist in sin. 

As yet few— only consecrated believers— have 
come to a true knowledge of God. The world knows 
him not, and the nations cannot forget God until they 
are first brought to a knowledge of him. The consecrated 
have been enlightened, led of the Spirit through 
faith to understand the deep and hidden things of God, 
which reveal the glory of God's character, but which, 
though expressed in his Word, appear only as foolishness 
to the world. 

As we have hitherto seen, this will not be so in the 
age to come, for then "The earth shall be full of the 
knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea." 
(Isa. 11:9.) Much that we now receive by faith will 
then be demonstrated to the world. When he who has 
ransomed man from the power of the grave (Hos. 13:14) 
begins to gather his purchased possessions back 
from the prison-house of death (Isa. 61:1), when the 
sleepers are awakened under the genial rays of the 
Sun of Righteousness, they will not be slow to realize 
the truth of the hitherto seemingly idle tale, that "Jesus 
Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every 
man." 

We have also seen that the gradual ascent of the 
King's Highway of Holiness in that age will be possible 
to all, and comparatively easy, because all the 
stones— stumbling-blocks, errors, etc.— will have been 
gathered out, and straight paths made for their feet. 
It is in that age that this text applies. Those who 
ignore the favoring circumstances of that age, and will 
not be obedient to the righteous Judge or Ruler- 
Christ— will truly be the wicked. And every loyal 
subject of the Kingdom of God will approve the 
righteous judgment which turns such an one again 



into sheol— the condition of death. Such an one 
would be unworthy of life; and, were he permitted to 
live, his life would be a curse to himself and to the 
rest of mankind, and a blemish on the work of God. 

This will be the Second Death, from which there 
will be no resurrection. Having been ransomed from 
the grave (sheol) by the sacrifice of Christ, if they die 
again on account of their own sin, "there remaineth 
no more sacrifice for sin." (Heb. 10:26.) "Christ 
dieth no more; death hath no more dominion over 
him." (Rom. 6:9.) The Second death should be 
dreaded and shunned by all, since it is to be the end of 
existence to all those deemed unworthy of life. But 
in it there can be no suffering. Like Adamic death, 
it is the extinction of life. 

It is because through sin mankind had become 
subject to death (sheol, hades) that Christ Jesus came 
to deliver us and save us from death. (1 John 3:8; 
Heb. 2:14.) Death is a cessation of existence, the absence 
of life. There is no difference between the conditions 
in the Adamic and Second deaths, but there is 
hope of a release from the first, while from the second 
there will be no release, no return to life. The first 
death sentence passed upon all on account of Adam's 
sin, while the Second death can be incurred only by 
wilful, individual sin. 

That the application of our text belongs to the 
coming age is evident, for both saints and sinners go 
into sheol or hades now. This scripture indicates that, 
in the time when it applies, only the wicked shall go 
there. And the nations that forget God must be nations 
that have known him, else they could not forget 
him; and never yet have the nations been brought to 
that knowledge, nor will they be until the coming 
time, when the knowledge of the Lord shall fill the 
whole earth, and none shall need to say unto his neighbor, 
Know thou the Lord, for all shall know him, from 
the least to the greatest of them.— Isa. 11:9; Jer. 31:34. 

The Hebrew word goi, rendered "nations" in this 
verse, is elsewhere used by the same writer and rendered 
"heathen," "Gentiles" and "people." The thought 
seems to be,— any who do not become God's covenant 
people, even though they be not openly wicked. The 
nations (Gentiles, all who under that full knowledge 
do not become Israelites indeed) who are forgetful 
or negligent of God's favors enjoyed, and of their 
duties and obligations to him, shall share the fate of 
the wilfully "wicked," and be cast into the Second 
death. 

In further proof of this, we find that the Hebrew 
word shub, which in our text is translated "turned," 
signifies turned back, as to a previous place or condition. 
Those referred to in this text have been either 
in sheol or liable to enter it, but being redeemed by 
the precious blood of Christ, will be brought out of 
sheol. If then they are wicked, they, and all who forget 



God, shall be turned back or returned to sheol. 
R2759 : page 44 
DID THE JEWS BELIEVE IN EVERLASTING TORMENT? 



Noting that we teach that the doctrine of everlasting 
torment was engrafted upon the doctrines of the 
Christian Church during the period of the apostasy, 
the great falling away which culminated in Papacy, 
some have inquired whether it does not seem, according 
to the works of Josephus, that this doctrine was 
firmly held by the Jews; and, if so, they ask, does it not 
seem evident that the early Christians, being largely 
converts from Judaism, brought this doctrine with 
them, in the very outstart of Christianity? 

We answer, No; the doctrine of everlasting torment 
sprang naturally from the doctrine of human 
immortality, which as a philosophic question was first 
promulgated in anything like the present form by the 
Platonic school of Grecian philosophy. These first 
affirmed that each man contained a fragment of deity, 
and that this would prevent him from ever dying. This 
foundation laid, it was as easy to describe a place for 
evil-doers as for well-doers. But to the credit of those 
heathen philosophers be it recorded that they failed 
to develop, or at least to manifest, that depth of degradation 
from benevolence and reason and pity, necessary 
to paint, by word and pen and brush, such 
details of horrors and agonies as were soon incorporated 
into their doctrine, and a belief thereof declared 
"necessary to salvation" in the professed church of 
Christ. 

To appreciate the case, it is necessary to remember 
that, when the Christian Church was established, 
Greece stood at the head of intelligence and civilization. 
Alexander the Great had conquered the world, 
and had spread respect for Greece everywhere; and 
though, from a military point of view, Rome had taken 
her place, it was otherwise in literature. For centuries, 
Grecian philosophers and philosophies led the intellectual 
world, and impregnated and affected everything. 
It became customary for philosophers and 
teachers of other theories to claim that their systems 
and theories were nearly the same as those of the Grecians, 
and to endeavor to remove differences between 
their old theories and the popular Grecian views. And 
some sought to make capital by claiming that their 
system embraced all the good points of Platonism 
with others which Plato did not see. 

Of this class were the teachers in the Christian 
Church in the second, third and fourth centuries. Conceding 
the popularly accepted correctness of the philosophers, 
they claimed that the same good features 



of philosophy were found in Christ's teachings, and 
that he was one of the greatest philosophers, etc. Thus 
a blending of Platonism and Christianity took place. 
This became the more pronounced as kings and emperors 
began to scrutinize religious teachings, and to 
favor those most likely to awe the people and make 
them law-abiding. While heathen teachers were 
truckling to such imperial scrutiny, and teaching an 
everlasting punishment for those who violated the 
laws of the emperors (who ruled as divinely appointed), 
we cannot suppose otherwise than that the ambitious 
characters in the church at that time, who were seeking 
to displace heathenism and to become the dominant 
religious power instead, would make prominent 
such doctrines as would in the eyes of the emperors 
seem to have an equal hold upon the fears and prejudices 
of the people. And what could be more to 
the purpose than the doctrine of the endless torment 
of the refractory? 

The same motives evidently operated with Josephus 
when writing concerning the belief of the Jews. 
His works should be read as apologies for Judaism, 
and as efforts to exalt that nation in the eyes of Rome 
and the world. It should be remembered that the 
Jews had the reputation of being a very rebellious 
people, very unwilling to be ruled even by the Caesars. 
They were hoping, in harmony with God's promises, 
to become the chief nation. Many rebellious outbreaks 
had occurred among them, and their peculiar 
religion, different from all others, came in for its share 
of blame for favoring too much the spirit of liberty. 

Josephus had an object in writing his two principal 
works, "Antiquities" and "Wars of the Jews." 
He wrote them in the Greek language while living at 
Rome, where he was the friend and guest successively 
of the Roman emperors Vespasian, Titus and Domitian, 
and where he was in constant contact with the 
Grecian philosophers. These books were written for 
the purpose of showing off the Jewish people, their 
courage, laws, ethics, etc., to the best advantage before 
the Grecian philosophers and Roman dignitaries. This 
object is covertly admitted in his preface to his "Antiquities," 
in which he says: 

"I have undertaken the present work as thinking 
it will appear to all the Greeks worthy of their study. 
...Those that read my book may wonder that my discourse 
of laws and historical facts contains so much of 
philosophy. ...However, those that have a mind 
to know the reasons of everything may find here a 
very curious philosophical theory." 

In a word, as a shrewd man who himself had 
become imbued with the spirit of the Grecian philosophers 
then prevailing, Josephus drew from the Law 
and the Prophets, and from the traditions of the elders 
and the theories of the various sects of the Jews, all he 
could find that in the most remote degree would tend 



to show:— 

First, that the Jewish religion was not far behind 
popular Grecian philosophy; but that somewhat analogous 
theories had been drawn from Moses' Law, and 
held by some Jews, long before the Grecian philosophers 
broached them. 

Secondly, that it was not their religious ideas 
which made the Jews as a people hard to control or 
"rebellious," as all liberty-lovers were esteemed by the 
Caesars. Hence he attempts to prove, at a time when 
virtue was esteemed to consist mainly in submission, 
that Moses' Law "taught first of all that God is the 
Father and Lord of all things, and bestows a happy life 
upon those that follow him, but plunges such as do 
not walk in the paths of virtue into inevitable miseries." 
And it is in support of this idea, and for such 
purposes, evidently, that Josephus, after saying: 
"There are three philosophical sects among the Jews; 
first, the Pharisees; second, the Sadducees, and third, 
the Essenes," proceeds to give an account of their 
three theories; especially detailing any features which 
resembled Grecian philosophy. And because the 
last and least, the Essenes, most resembled the doctrines 
of the Stoics and leading Grecian theories, 
Josephus devotes nearly ten times as much space 
to their views as to the views of both Sadducees 

R2759 : page 45 

and Pharisees combined. And yet the Essenes 
were so insignificant a sect that the New Testament 
does not even mention them, while Josephus 
himself admits they were few. Whatever views they 
held, therefore, on any subject, cannot be claimed as 
having Jewish sanction, when the vast majority of 
Jews held contrary opinions. The very fact that our 
Lord and the apostles did not refer to them is good 
evidence that the Essenes' philosophy by no means 
represented the Jewish ideas. This small sect probably 
grew up later and probably absorbed from 
Grecian philosophy its ideas concerning immortality 
and the everlasting torment of the non-virtuous. 
It should be remembered that Josephus 
was not born until three years after our Lord's 
crucifixion, and that he published his "Wars" A.D. 75 
and "Antiquities" A.D. 93— at a time when he and 
other Jews, like all the rest of the world, were eagerly 
swallowing Grecian philosophy and science falsely so 
called, against which Paul warned the church.— Col. 2:8; 
1 Tim. 6:20. 

Josephus directed special attention to the Essenes 
because it suited his object to do so. He admits that the 
Sadducees, next to the largest body of Jewish people, 
did not believe in human immortality. And of the Pharisees' 
views he makes a blind statement, calculated to 
mislead, as follows: "They also believe that souls have 



an immortal vigor in them [This might be understood 

to mean that the Pharisees did not believe as the Sadducees 

that death ended all existence, but believed in 

a vigor or life beyond the grave— by a resurrection 

of the dead], and that under the earth there will be rewards 

and punishments, according as they have lived 

virtuously or viciously in this life; and that the latter 

are to be detained in an everlasting prison [death— not 

torture], but that the former [the virtuous] shall have 

power to revive and live again." 

Is it not apparent that Josephus has whittled and 
stretched the views of the Pharisees, as much as his 
elastic conscience would allow, to show a harmony 
between them and the philosophies of Greece? Paul, 
who had been a Pharisee, contradicts Josephus. While 
Josephus says they believed "that only the virtuous 
would revive and live again [Does not this imply 
a resurrection, and imply also that the others would 
not live again, but remain dead, in the great prison 
—the tomb?]" Paul, on the contrary, says: "I have 
hope toward God, which they themselves also allow, 
that there shall be a resurrection of the dead, both of 
the just and unjust."— Acts 24:15. 

We have no hesitancy about accepting the testimony 
of the inspired Apostle Paul, not only in regard 
to what the Jews believed, but also as to what he and the 
early Church believed; and we repeat, that the theory 
of the everlasting torment of the wicked, based upon 
the theory that the human soul cannot die, is contrary 
to both the Old and the New Testament teachings, 
and was introduced among Jews and Christians 
by Grecian philosophers. Thank God for the purer 
philosophy of the Scriptures, which teaches that the 
death of the soul (being) is the penalty of sin (Ezek. 18:20); 
that all souls condemned through Adam's sin 
were redeemed by Christ's soul (Isa. 53:10); and that 
only for wilful, individual sin will any die the Second 
death— an everlasting punishment, but not an everlasting 
torment. 

CHOOSE LIFE THAT YE MAY LIVE. 



"I have set before thee this day life and good, 
death and evil." "I have set before thee life and 
death, blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that 
both thou and thy seed may live."— Deut. 30:15,19. 

We come now to the consideration of other Scripture 
statements in harmony with the conclusions set 
forth in the preceding articles. 

The words here quoted are from Moses to Israel. 
To appreciate them we must remember that Israel 
as a people, and all their covenants, sacrifices, etc., had 
a typical significance. 

God knew that they could not obtain life by keeping 



the Law, no matter how much they would choose 
to do so, because they, like all others of the fallen race, 
were weak, depraved through the effect of the "sour 
grape" of sin which Adam had eaten, and which his 
children had continued to eat. (Jer. 31:29.) Thus, 
as Paul declares, the Law given to Israel could not 
give them life because of the weaknesses or depravity 
of their fallen nature. -Rom. 8:3; Heb. 7:19; 10:1-10. 

Nevertheless, God foresaw a benefit to them from 
even an unsuccessful attempt to live perfectly; namely, 
that it would develop them, as well as show them the 
need of the better sacrifice (the ransom which our Lord 
Jesus gave) and a greater deliverer than Moses. And 
with all this their trial furnished a pattern or shadow 
of the individual trial insured to the whole world 
(which Israel typified) and secured by the better sacrifices 
for sin, which were there prefigured, to be accomplished 
by the great prophet of whom Moses was 
but a type. 

Thus seeing that the trial for life or death presented 
to Israel was but typical of the individual trial 
of the whole world, and its issues of life and death (of 
eternal life or the Second death), may help some to see 
that the great thousand-year-day of trial, of which our 
Lord Jesus has been appointed the Judge, contains the 
two issues, life and death. All will then be called upon 
to decide, under that most favorable opportunity, for 
righteousness and life or sin and death, and a choice 
must be made. And, although there will be rewards 
and "stripes" according to the deeds of the present 
life, as well as according to their conduct under that 
trial (John 3:19; Matt. 10:42; Matt. 11:20-24), the 
verdict in the end will be in harmony with the choice 
expressed by the conduct of each during that age of 
trial. 

The second trial, its sentence and its result, are 
also shown in the words of Moses quoted by Peter 
(Acts 3:22,23): "A Prophet shall the Lord your God 
raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me. 
Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall 
say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every 
soul [being] which will not hear [obey] that Prophet 
[and thus choose life] shall be destroyed from among 
the people." In few words this calls attention to the 
world's great trial, yet future. It shows the great 
Prophet or Teacher raised up by God to give a new 
judgment or trial to the condemned race which he has 
redeemed from the condemnation which came upon 
it through its progenitor, Adam. It shows, too, the 
conditions of eternal life to be righteous obedience, 
and that with the close of that trial some will be 

R2759 : page 46 

judged worthy of that life, and some worthy of destruction 
—the Second death. 



Our Lord Jesus, having redeemed all by his perfect 
and precious sacrifice, is the Head of this great 
Prophet; and during the Gospel age God has been selecting 
the members of his body, who, with Christ 
Jesus, shall be God's agents in judging the world. 
Together they will be that Great Prophet or Teacher 
promised. "Do ye not know that the saints shall judge 
the world?"— 1 Cor. 6:2. 

The first trial was of mankind only, and hence 
its penalty or curse, the first death, was only upon 
man. But the second trial is to be much more comprehensive. 
It will not only be the trial of fallen and 
imperfect mankind, but it will include every other 
thing and principle and being out of harmony with 
Jehovah. "God will bring every work into judgment, 
with every secret thing." 

The "judgment to come" will include the judgment 
to condemnation of all false systems— civil, 
social and religious. These will be judged, condemned 
and banished early in the Millennial day, the light 
of truth causing them to come into disrepute and 
therefore to pass away. This judgment comes first, in 
order that the trial of man may proceed unhindered 
by error, prejudice, etc. It will also include the trial of 
"the angels which sinned"— those angels "which kept 
not their first estate" of purity and obedience to God. 
Thus it is written by the Apostle of the members of the 
body of the great Prophet and High Priest, who is 
to be Judge of all— "Know ye not that the saints shall 
judge angels?"— 1 Cor. 6:3. 

This being the case, the condemnation of the 
Millennial trial (destruction, second death) will cover a 
wider range of offenders than the penalty or curse 
for the sin of Adam, which "passed upon all men." 
In a word, the destruction at the close of the trial will 
be the utter destruction of every being and every 
thing which will not glorify God and be of use and 
blessing to his general creation. 



R2759 : page 46 

FORGIVABLE AND UNPARDONABLE SINS. 



IN THE preceding pages we briefly show the extreme penalty 
for wilful sin. Adam's penalty, which involved his 
entire race, was of this sort; and only as the result of 
Christ's death as our ransom from that penalty of that wilful 
sin, is any forgiveness of it or subsequent sins possible. 

Forgivable sins are those which result from weaknesses 
incurred through that one Adamic sin which Christ settled 
once for all. They are such as are not wilful, but are committed 
through ignorance or weaknesses of the flesh. God 



stands pledged to forgive all such sins upon our repentance, 
in the name and merit of Christ's sacrifice. 

Unpardonable sins, sins which cannot be forgiven, are 
such as are wilfully done. As the penalty of the first wilful 
sin was death— extinction of being— so death is the penalty of 
every wilful sin against full knowledge and ability to choose 
and to do the right. This is called Second Death, in distinction 
from the first or Adamic penalty, from which Christ's 
ransom sacrifice will release all mankind. 

The "sin unto [second] death," for the forgiveness of 
which the Apostle declares it is useless to pray (1 John 5:16), 
is not only a wilful sin but a sin against clear knowledge; a 
sin for which no adequate excuse can be found. Because it 
is a sin against clear knowledge, or enlightenment in holiness, 
it is called the "sin against the Holy Spirit" (Matt. 12:31,32), 
for which there is no forgiveness. 

But there are other partly-wilful sins, which are, therefore, 
partially unpardonable. In such the temptations within 
and without (all of which are directly or indirectly results of 
the fall) have a share;— the will consenting under the pressure 
of the temptation or because of the weakness. The Lord 
alone knows how to properly estimate our responsibilities and 
guilt in such cases. But to the true child of God there is but 
one proper course to take;— repentance and an appeal for 
mercy in the name and merit of Christ, the great sacrifice for 
sin. The Lord will forgive such a penitent, in the sense of 
restoring him to his favor; but he will be made to suffer 
"stripes" (Luke 12:47,48) for the sin, in proportion as God 
sees it to have been wilfully committed. 

Not infrequently a conscientious person realizes that he 
has committed sin, and that it had some wilfulness in it. He 
properly feels condemned, guilty before God; realizing his own 
guilt, and forgetting the fountain for sin and uncleanness, opened 
by God for our weak, fallen race, he falls into a state of 
sadness, believing that he has committed the sin unto death. 
Such wander in deserts drear, until they find the cleansing 
fountain. Let such remember, however, that the very facts of 
their sorrow for sin and their desire to return to divine favor 
are proofs that they have not committed the sin unto death; 
for the Apostle declares that those who commit sin of this sort 
cannot be renewed unto repentance. (Heb. 6:6.) Penitents, 
then, may always feel confident that their sins were in part, at 
least, results of the fall, and hence not unto death, but requiring 
forgiveness and stripes. 

Such is the wonderful provision of God, through Christ, 
for the acceptance of every soul which, forsaking sin and the 
love of it, seeks righteousness and life through him who is 
the Way, as well as the Truth and the Life. Thus all, whether 
naturally stronger or weaker, have an equal opportunity to 
gain everlasting life as well as to gain the great prize of joint-heirship 
with Christ. 

FUTURE RETRIBUTION. 



While the Scriptures teach that the present Gospel age is 
the Church's Judgment-day or period of trial, and that the 
world's Judgment-day or time of trial will be the Millennial 
age, it is, nevertheless, a reasonable question to ask,— To what 
extent will those who are not of the consecrated Church be 
held responsible, in the Millennial age, for their misdeeds, of 
cruelty, dishonesty and immorality, of the present time? And 
to what extent will those of the same class then be rewarded 
for present efforts to live moral and benevolent lives? 

These are important questions, especially to the world; 
and well would it be for them if they could realize their importance 
and profit thereby. They are important also to the 
Church, because of our interest in the world, and because of 

R2759 : page 47 

our desire to understand and teach correctly our Father's 
plans. 

We have learned that the sacrifice of Christ secures for 
all mankind, however vile, an awakening from death, and the 
privilege of thereafter coming to perfection, and, if they will, 
of living forever. "There shall be a resurrection of the dead, 
both of the just and the unjust." (Acts 24:15.) The object 
of their being again brought into existence will be to give 
them a favorable opportunity to secure everlasting life, on the 
conditions which God requires— obedience to his righteous 
will. We have no intimation whatever in the Scriptures that, 
when awakened, the moral condition of men will have changed, 
but we have much, in both reason and revelation, to show 
that as they went into death weak and depraved so they will 
come out of it. As there is "no work, nor device, nor knowledge, 
nor wisdom in the grave" (Eccl. 9:10), they will have 
learned nothing; and since they were sinners and unworthy of 
life and divine favor when they died, they will still be unworthy; 
and as they have received neither full rewards nor full 
punishments for the deeds of the present life, it is evident that 
just such a time of awakening as God has promised during 
the Millennium is necessary;— for rewarding, and punishing, 
and giving to all mankind the opportunity for eternal life secured 
by Christ's great ransom-sacrifice. 

While, strictly speaking, the world is not now on trial: 
that is, the present is not the time for its full and complete 
trial, yet men are not now, nor have they ever been, entirely 
without light and ability, for the use of which they are accountable. 
In the darkest days of the world's history, and in 
the deepest degradation of savage life, there has always been at 
least a measure of the light of conscience pointing more or 
less directly to righteousness and virtue. That the deeds of 
the present life have much to do with the future, Paul taught 
very clearly when, before Felix, he reasoned of justice and 
self-government, in view of the judgment to come, so that 
Felix trembled.— Acts 24:25, Diaglott translation. 

At the first advent of our Lord, an increased measure 
of light came to men, and to that extent increased their responsibility, 
as he said: "This is the condemnation, that light 
is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than 



light, because their deeds were evil." (John 3:19.) For those 
evil deeds committed against the light possessed, whether of 
conscience or of revelation, men will have to give an account, 
and will receive, in their day of judgment, a just recompense 
of reward. And, likewise, to the extent of their effort to live 
righteously: they will receive their reward in the day of trial. 
-Matt. 10:42. 

If men would consider what even reason discerns, that a 
time of reckoning, of judgment, is coming, that God will not 
forever permit evil to triumph, and that in some way he will 
punish evil-doers, it would undoubtedly save them many sorrows 
and chastisements in the age to come. Said the Prophet, 
"Woe unto them that seek deep to hide their counsel 
from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they 
say, Who seeth us? and who knoweth us?" (Isaiah 29:15.) 
Behold, "The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good" (Prov. 15:3); and "God shall 
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, 
whether it be good, or whether it be evil." (Eccl. 12:14.) 
He "will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and 
will make manifest the counsels of the hearts."— 1 Cor. 4:5. 

The age of Christ's reign will be a time of just judgment; 
and though it will be an age of golden opportunities 
to all, it will be a time of severe discipline, trial and punishment 
to many. That the judgment will be fair and impartial, 
and with due consideration for the circumstances and 
the opportunities of each individual, is also assured— by the 
character of the Judge (the Christ— John 5:22; 1 Cor. 6:2), 
by his perfect knowledge, by his unwavering justice and 
goodness, by his divine power and by his great love as shown 
in his sacrifice to redeem men from death, that they might 
enjoy the privilege of this favorable, individual trial. 

The varied circumstances and opportunities of men, in 
this and past ages, indicate that a just judgment will recognize 
differences in the degree of individual responsibility, 
which will also necessitate differences in the Lord's future 
dealings with them. And this reasonable deduction we find 
clearly confirmed by the Scriptures. The Judge has been, 
and still is, taking minute cognizance of men's actions and 
words (Prov. 5:21), although they have been entirely unaware 
of it; and he declares that "Every idle ["pernicious," 
injurious or malicious] word that men shall speak, they shall 
give account thereof in the day of judgment" (Matt. 12:36); 
and that even a cup of cold water, given to one of his little 
ones, because he is Christ's, shall in nowise lose its reward. 
(Matt. 10:42.) The context shows that the "pernicious" 
words to which Jesus referred were words of wilful 
and malicious opposition spoken against manifest light. 
(Matt. 12:24,31,32.) He also affirmed that it would be more 
tolerable for Tyre, Sidon and Sodom in the day of judgment 
than for Chorazin, Bethsaida and Capernaum, which 
had misimproved greater advantages of light and opportunity." 
-Matt. 11:20-24. 

In the very nature of things, we can see that the punishments 
of that age will be in proportion to past guilt. Every 
sin indulged, and every evil propensity cultivated, hardens 



the heart and makes the way back to purity and virtue more 

difficult. Consequently, sins wilfully indulged now, will require 

punishment and discipline in the age to come; and 

the more deeply the soul is dyed in willing sin, the more 

severe will be the measures required to correct it. As a 

wise parent would punish a wayward child, so Christ will 

punish the wicked for their good. 

His punishments will always be administered injustice, 
tempered with mercy, and relieved by his approval and reward 
to those who are rightly exercised thereby. And it 
will only be when punishments, instructions and encouragements 
fail; in short, when love and mercy have done all that 
wisdom can approve (which is all that could be asked), that 
any will meet the final punishment which his case demands— 
the Second Death. 

None of the world will meet that penalty until they 
have first had all the blessed opportunities of the age to 
come. And while this is true of the world, the same principle 
applies now to the consecrated children of God in this 
our judgment (trial) day. We now receive God's favors 
(through faith), while the world will receive them in the next 
age, viz., instruction, assistance, encouragement, discipline 
and punishment. "For what son is he whom the Father 
chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement, whereof 
all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons." Therefore, 
when we receive grievous chastisement, we should accept 
it as from a loving Father for our correction, not forgetting 
"the exhortation which speaketh unto us as unto 
children, My son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, 
nor faint when thou art rebuked of him; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 
-Heb. 12:4-13. 

How just and equal are God's ways! Read carefully the 
rules of the coming age— Jer. 31:29-34 and Ezek. 18:20-32. 

R2759 : page 48 

They prove to us, beyond the possibility of a doubt, the sincerity 

and reality of all his professions of love to men: "As 

I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death 

of the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and 

live: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye 

die?"-Ezek. 33:11. 

All who in this life repent of sin, and, as the term repentance 
implies, begin and continue the work of reformation 
to the best of their ability, will form character which will 
be a benefit to them in the age to come; when awakened in 
the resurrection age, they will be to that extent advanced 
towards perfection, and their progress will be more rapid and 
easy; while with others it will be more slow, tedious and difficult. 
This is implied in the words of our Lord (John 5:29,30 
— Diaglott): "The hour is coming in the which all that 
are in their graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; 
they that have done good unto the resurrection of life [those 
whose trial is past, and who were judged worthy of life, will 
be raised perfect— the faithful of past ages to perfect human 



life, the overcomers of the gospel age to perfect life as divine 
beings], and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection 
of judgment."— These are awakened to judgment— to receive 
a course of discipline and correction— as the necessary means 
for their perfecting, or, otherwise, their condemnation to the 
second death. 

The man who, in this life, by fraud and injustice, accumulated 
and hoarded great wealth, which was scattered 
to the winds when he was laid in the dust, will doubtless 
awake to lament his loss, and bewail his poverty and his 
utter inability under the new order of things to repeat unlawful 
measures to accumulate a fortune. With many it will 
be a severe chastisement and a bitter experience to overcome 
the propensities to avarice, selfishness, pride, ambition and 
idleness, fostered and pampered for years in the present life. 
Occasionally we see an illustration of this form of punishment 
now, when a man of great wealth suddenly loses all, 
and the haughty spirit of himself and family must fall. 

We are told (Dan. 12:2) that some shall awake to shame 
and age-lasting contempt. And who can doubt that, when 
every secret thing is brought into judgment (Eccl. 12: 14), 
and the dark side of many a character that now stands measurably 
approved among men is then made known, many a 
face will blush and hide itself in confusion? When the man 
who steals is required to refund the stolen property to its 
rightful owner, with the addition of twenty per cent, interest, 
and the man who deceives, falsely accuses or otherwise wrongs 
his neighbor, is required to acknowledge his crimes and so 
far as possible to repair damages, on peril of an eternal loss 
of life, will not this be retributive justice? Note the clear 
statement of this in God's typical dealings with Israel, whom 
he made to represent the world.— 1 Cor. 10:11; Lev. 6:1-7. 
See also "Tabernacle Shadows," page 99. 

As we are thus permitted to look into the perfect plan of 
God, how forcibly we are reminded of his word through the 
prophet Isaiah, "Judgment also will I lay to the line, and 
righteousness to the plummet." (Isa. 28:17.) We also see the 
wholesome influence of such discipline. Parents, in disciplining 
their children, realize the imperative necessity of making 
their punishments proportionate to the character of the 
offences; and so in God's government: great punishments 
following great offences are not greater than is necessary 
to establish justice and to effect great moral reforms. 

Seeing that the Lord will thus equitably adjust human 
affairs in his own due time, we can afford to endure hardness 
for the present, and resist evil with good, even at the cost of 
present disadvantage. Therefore, "Recompense to no man 
evil for evil." "Let this mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus our Lord."-Rom. 12:17-19; Phil. 2:5. 

The present order of things will not always continue: 
a time of reckoning is coming. The just Judge of all the 
earth says, "Vengeance is mine, I will repay;" and the Apostle 
Peter adds, "The Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly 
out of temptation and to reserve the unjust unto the day 
of judgment to be punished." (2 Pet. 2:9.) And, as we have 
seen, those punishments will be adapted to the nature of the 



offences, and the benevolent object in view— man's permanent 
establishment in righteousness. 

Other Scriptures corroborative of this view of future 
rewards and punishments are as follows: 2 Sam. 3:39; Matt. 16:27; 
1 Pet. 3:12; Psa. 19:1 1; 91:8; Prov. 11:18; Isa. 40:10; 
49:4; Matt. 5:12; 10:41,42; Luke 6:35; Rev. 22:12; 
Rom. 14:11,12. 

LET HONESTY AND TRUTH PREVAIL. 



Having demonstrated that neither the Bible nor reason 
offers the slightest support to the doctrine that eternal torment 
is the penalty for sin, we note the fact that the various 
church creeds, and confessions, and hymn-books, and theological 
treatises, are its only supports; and that under the 
increasing light of our day, and the consequent emancipation 
of reason, belief in this horrible, fiendish doctrine of the 
dark ages is fast dying out. But alas! this is not because 
Christian people generally are zealous for the truth of God's 
Word and for his character, and willing to destroy their grim 
creed-idols. Ah no! they still bow before their admitted 
falsities; they still pledge themselves to their defense, and 
spend time and money for their support, though at heart 
ashamed of them, and privately denying them. 

The general influence of all this is, to cause the honest-hearted 
of the world to despise Christianity and the Bible; 
and to make hypocrites and semi-infidels of nominal Christians. 
Because the nominal church clings to this old blasphemy, 
and falsely presents its own error as the teaching of 
the Bible, the Word of God, though still nominally reverenced, 
is being practically repudiated. Thus the Bible, the 
great anchor of truth and liberty, is being cut loose from, 
by the very ones who, if not deceived regarding its teachings, 
would be held and blessed by it. 

The general effect, not far distant, will be, first open infidelity, 
then anarchy. For much, very much of this, lukewarm 
Christians, both in pulpits and pews, who know or 
ought to know better, are responsible. Many such are willing 
to compromise the truth, to slander God's character, and 
to stultify and deceive themselves, for the sake of peace, or 
ease, or present earthly advantage. And any minister, who, 
by uttering a word for an unpopular truth, will risk the loss 
of his stipend and his reputation for being "established" in 
the bog of error, is considered a bold man, even though he 
ignominiously withhold his name from his published 
protests. 

If professed Christians would be honest with themselves 
and true to God, they would soon learn that "their fear 
toward God is taught by the precepts of men." (Isa. 29:13.) 
If all would decide to let God be true, though it should prove 
every man a liar (Rom. 3:4), and show all human creeds to 
be imperfect and misleading, there would be a great creed-smashing 
work done very shortly. Then the Bible would be 
studied and appreciated as never before; and its testimony 



that the wages of sin is death (extinction), would be recognized 
as a "just recompense of reward." 



We have given foregoing but a mere suggestion of the light now shining 
in "due season" for the "household of faith." We invite correspondence 
from all who "hunger and thirst after right." We have free tracts, and 
books to loan to the poor in spirit who are poor also in purse. See page 2. 



page 49 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. FEBRUARY 1, 1901. No. 3. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 51 

The Christian Advocate's View of 

the New Century 51 

How the Century Looks to a 

Millionaire 52 

God's Blessing Brings Riches 52 

Heavenly vs. Earthly Riches 55 

Laodicea's Counterfeit Riches 56 

Parable of the Ten Virgins 57 

"To Every Man According to His 

Several Ability" 58 

Interesting Questions Answered 62 

Sin and Sickness 63 

Interesting Letters 63 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



WATCH TOWER BINDERS. 



These patent binders permit the insertion of each copy of 



the WATCH TOWER as received. Each binder holds two years' 
issues. Very durable and cheap— 40 cents including postage: 
British money Is. 8d. Binders, etc., for Great Britain, can be 
had through our London branch. 

NEW FOREIGN TRANSLATIONS. 



We now have the "Parousia" booklet in French and in 
Swedish, and "What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism?" 
in German. 

R2750 : page 50 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 



Preaching and divine worship every Sunday afternoon in 
Bible House chapel, No. 610 Arch street, at 3 P.M. 

Cottage meetings for prayer and testimony on Wednesday 
evenings; and Dawn Circles for Bible Study on Monday, Friday 
and Saturday evenings— various localities, Pittsburg and 
vicinity-inquire at WATCH TOWER office. 

page 50 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This volume contains a very choice selection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too common, erroneous, 
hymn-book theology: 494 pages, good print, cloth binding only. It is 
the Gospel of the Kingdom in verse, by the pens of many of God's dear 
saints of all centuries. It is a companion to MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
sells at the same price as the cloth-bound volumes. It is designed to 
lead the mind aright in meditation and worship. 



R2760 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE DAWN of the twentieth century has naturally 
led to the launching of new programs along 
ethical and religious lines. The United Free Churches 
of Great Britain, it is announced, "have been quietly 
working to bring about one of the greatest and most 
striking revivals on record." Their primary effort, 
for which they have prepared for more than a year, is 
the conversion of London, tho it expected to extend 
more or less to the whole world. In the same metropolis 
Rev. Dr. Joseph Parker has for a week tried to 



demonstrate the advantages of a religious daily newspaper. 
In our own land various Union-movements 
have been started which welcome Jews, Romanists, 
and Unitarians who deny the ransom, to unite with the 
so-called "Orthodox" who ignore the ransom. The 
general plaint of all is that an effort to uplift mankind 
must be made, and yet they ignorantly oppose or ignore 
the divinely appointed uplift so near at hand— 
the Millennial Kingdom of God's dear Son, the result 
of the great sin-offering finished at Calvary over 
eighteen centuries ago, but delayed until now for the 
calling and perfecting of the elect Church to be joint-heirs 
with her Savior and Bridegroom in that heavenly 
Kingdom. 

What these various "movements" and "crusades" 
will accomplish is hard to guess: our surmise is that 
they will amount to little socially so long as times are 
prosperous; and that they will amount to nothing spiritually 
—along the lines of true spirituality— "sanctification 
through the truth;" because they are not 
built upon the truth of God's Word, but upon various 
human philosophies and theories. 

Some, however, seem impressed with the fact 
that the new century opens under conditions very unfavorable 
to peace on earth and good will amongst 
men. For instance,— 

CARDINAL VAUGHN DECLARES THE WORLD 
OUT-OF-JOINT. 

In a recent address in London he is reported to 
have said: "The twentieth century will dawn on a 
world badly out-of-joint and sick unto death. The 
sense of uncertainty and unrest is universal. Races 
are exasperated against races. Rival nations have 
provoked each other to strife by gibes and insults, 
and men are asking whose influence is to dominate 
mankind when Asia is armed like ourselves? Will the 
heathen races prevail against Christian? 

"Envy, jealousy, hatred, desires for revenge, 
avarice, greed of power and influence, have broken out 
among the nations like a plague of vices that threaten 
to destroy them. Remedies have been applied, but 
remedies are worthless. 

"The nations called a conference for peace, but 
excluded the pope. They have forged weapons of destruction; 
harbored compulsory education without religion; 
preached the gospel of commerce; of the 'open 
door' and 'spheres of influence,' and then dispatched 
armies to fight the people. 

"They have dug passionately into the bowels of 
the earth for more and more of the precious metals; 
yet taxation is increased and wants multiplied, and 
there is a chaos of conflicting cries, but no common 
agreement." 



THE CHRISTIAN ADVOCATE'S VIEW OF THE NEW 
CENTURY. 

"The nineteenth century goes out in war all 
around the world. The Hague Conference led some 
to sing 'Hosanna!' and to cry, The age of peace 
dawns!' We sat among the doubters; for human nature 
unregenerated is the same all over the world. 

"The Christians are still cutting one another's 
throats in South Africa. The Christians are not done 
cutting one another's throats in the Phillipine Islands. 
The Christians and the pagans are but pausing for 
breath in China. 

"Clouds are rising over various parts of Northern 
Africa, and the shadow of revolution is upon a score 

R2760 : page 52 

of nations in South and Central America and on the 
continent of Europe. 

"An epidemic of lynching pervades this country. 
Prize-fighting is a great popular amusement. New 
York loves it, and also can breed a race riot... 

"Those premillennarians who think that the world 
must get worse before Christ can come are solemnly 
pointing to these things as portents." 

HOW THE NEW CENTURY LOOKS TO A MILLIONAIRE. 



At the annual meeting of the Educational Alliance 
recently held, former Mayor of New York City, Abram 
S. Hewitt made caustic criticism of the rich men of 
New York City and of the country, and prophesied 
that unless they changed their attitude toward the 
masses of society the twentieth century would bring 
forth a social cataclysm such as the world has never 
seen. Mr. Hewitt said in the course of his remarks: 

"The rich are blind. There is not one among 
them who is giving what he would give if his conscience 
were properly aroused. They do not seem to 
realize that this is a government by the majority. 
Ours is the only country in which there is universal 
suffrage. To be exercised rightfully and righteously, 
that suffrage must needs be educated. The rich in 
contributing to its education are but building for their 
own protection. If they neglect so to build, barbarism, 
anarchy and plunder will be the inevitable result. 

"I believe that in the twentieth century the spirit 
of commercialism will steadily grow less strong and 
the spirit of altruism stronger. I believe that the rule, 
'Do unto others as you would have others do unto you,' 
will more generally prevail than in all the centuries 
which have gone before. 

"If I am mistaken in this— if the spirit of commercialism 



and greed continues to grow stronger- 
then the twentieth century will witness a social cataclysm 
unparalleled in history. It is only by the discountenancing 
of commercialism and the spreading of 
altruism that we can safeguard justice, property and 
liberty." 

How much the above words resemble the Scriptural 
declarations respecting our day, and their assurances 
that the growing selfish rapacity will eventuate 
in that great time of trouble "such as was not since 
there was a nation," in which "every man's hand 
shall be against his neighbor," and lead to mutual 
distrust and anarchy!— James 5:1-5; Zech. 8:9,10. 

The closing words of Mr. Hewitt's address remind 
us forcibly of Malachi's words (4:6), "He shall 
turn the heart [sentiment]... or else I will come 
and smite the earth with a curse." Here the Lord 
puts an alternative, as Mr. Hewitt suggests; but other 
Scriptures clearly indicate that no such reform will 
occur, and that the "curse" or trouble will surely come. 
How refreshing it is to have the Lord's assurance 
that the coming trouble (in which the groaning creation 
will suffer and groan still more than ever) is but 
a preparation for their introduction to the long promised 
Millennial Kingdom blessings. How the Lord 
links the fire upon the tare-field with the speedy shining 
forth thereafter of the Sun of Righteousness to 
heal and bless all the families of the earth! (Matt. 13:43.) 
How this trouble, in which every man's hand 
shall be against his neighbor, is prophetically connected 
with the building of the great spiritual temple! 
-Zech. 8:9,10. 

All faithful "Watchers" may well lift up their 
heads and rejoice in the evidences which abound on 
every hand corroborative of what the Scriptures so 
clearly show is to be expected now. These evidences 
portend the speedy finishing of the Gospel age "harvest," 
the binding of Satan, and the inauguration of 
the reign of righteousness. Let us be glad and rejoice 
and give glory to God while patiently waiting for the 
consummation of his plans, and seeking to become 
more and more copies of his dear Son and meet for 
the inheritance of the saints in light. 



R2760 : page 52 

GOD'S BLESSING BRINGS RICHES. 



"The blessing of Jehovah itmaketh rich, and 
he addeth no sorrow with it."— Prov. 10:22. 

HOW REASONABLE it seems that those who 



become God's friends, and especially those 

who are adopted into his family as children, should 

be blessed of him in multitudinous ways, in which 

others of mankind, who are aliens, strangers, and foreigners 

to him through wicked works (Col. 1:21), 

should not be blessed. We look back into the past 

and see father Adam, while in divine favor, very rich, 

—the possessor of the whole world, filled with bounties. 

We read of father Abraham, "the friend of 

God," very rich in cattle and goods; and Jacob, altho 

losing all inheritance in his father's estate, was blessed 

of the Lord, so that he became very rich in flocks and 

in herds. So Israel was promised that if as a nation 

they would be obedient to the Lord they should be 

blessed in all of their temporal affairs; their land would 

bring forth bountifully; they would not be afflicted 

with drought or pests; their flocks and herds should 

prosper and multiply exceedingly, and even their 

physical health was provided for, so that God guaranteed 

them that abiding in his favor as a people they 

should not be subject to pestilences, diseases, etc., for 

the Lord himself would be their physician to preserve 

to them health and every prosperity. 

However, with the introduction of the new age, 
the Gospel age, came a great change— not in the divine 

R2761 : page 53 

plan, but in the divine dealings; and henceforth the 

favored of the Lord were not promised earthly blessings 

and good things, nor immunity from sickness 

and pain and persecution; but to the contrary of this, 

they were assured that whoever would be received into 

God's family on the high plane of sonship, begotten 

of the spirit, and, prospectively, heirs of God and joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ their Lord, would be required 

to pass through experiences of suffering more than 

others; of trials of faith and of patience and of character 

to which others would not be subjected; and 

they were instructed that these adversities should be 

accepted by them as marks of divine favor, as evidences 

that God was dealing with them as with sons, 

and by these experiences fitting and preparing them 

for positions of honor, and untellable blessings in the 

future. (Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; Heb. 12:6-8.) 

"Eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard, neither 

hath it entered into the heart of man, the things 

which God hath prepared for them that love him; but 

God hath revealed them unto us by his spirit."— 

1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

In harmony with this change of dispensation, we 
find the New Testament declaration to be to the effect 
that those accepted to this high honor of sonship (John 1:12) 
should not expect earthly riches or temporal 
blessings or marks of divine favor, but that, quite to 
the contrary, the Apostle says, "Harken my beloved 



brethren: hath not God [as a rule] chosen the poor of 
this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom 
which he hath promised to them that love him?" 
(James 2:5.) And again he assures us that not many 
great, not many rich,* not many mighty, not many 
wise, according to the course of this world, are to be 
found amongst the called and sanctified sons of God. 
-1 Cor. 1:26-29. 

From the foregoing Scriptures and many others 
we see, not only that those who become the Lord's 
sons are very rarely blessed with temporal riches, but 
we see also that the principle extends still further, 
and that very few who possess earthly riches in advance 
of hearing of the truth are very likely to attain 
the high calling of this Gospel age. This is not because 
God is opposed to riches, for he himself is rich 
above all others. It is rather, we might say, the outworking 
of a natural law or principle which has its 
force in the fact that all mankind, by reason of the 
fall, are selfish. The possession of wealth in combination 
with selfishness leads to a measure of satisfaction 
with present circumstances and conditions unfavorable 
to faith in God's heavenly promises. The wealthy, 
selfish, satisfied soul says to itself, Eat, drink and be 
merry; enjoy your advantages; take your pleasure out 
of these, rather than speculate respecting future advantages 
and future riches, which are intangible, and 
which must be accepted by faith. It is in harmony 
with this that our Lord declared, "How hardly [with 
what difficulty] shall they that have riches enter into 
the Kingdom of God! "--Mark 10:23. 

By this term, the Kingdom of God, our Lord 
evidently did not refer to the earthly nominal church, 
for we are all aware that the rich men find very little 
difficulty in getting into it. Evidently he referred to 
the real Kingdom, the glorified Kingdom which shall 
be established in the end of this age, the Millennial 
Kingdom. It will be difficult for a rich man to obtain 
membership in this glorified body of Christ, to 
which the Kingdom work will be entrusted. But why 
is this so? 

The reason is that God, desiring to select in this 
Gospel age a peculiar people to be the kings and priests 
and judges of the world in the next age, desires to 
select for the rulers and teachers only such as will 
come up to certain tests or requirements of character 
and obedience. One of these requirements is sacrifice 
—self-sacrifice— and hence all of this class now being 
selected are Scripturally designated a priesthood— "a 
royal priesthood," because royalty eventually is to be 
added to their office, partly as a reward for their faithfulness 
as priests in sacrificing the present life, and 
partly to enable them as priests in the future the better 
to serve and bless all the families of the earth. 

The beginning of these terms or conditions of 
this age was with the great Head of the Church, our 



Lord Jesus— he must sacrifice ere he could be made 
the King, and have the power and authority to bless. 
His sacrifice, as is well known, was a comprehensive 
one; it began with the sacrifice of his riches, and ended 
with the sacrifice of his life. "He was rich, yet for our 
sakes became poor, that we through his poverty might 
[eventually, in the Millennial Kingdom] be made 
rich." (2 Cor. 8:9.) His wealth, consisting of 
heavenly glory and, subsequently, of human talents, 
and every kind of good possessions, was all sacrificed, 
including even his reputation, so that the Apostle declares, 
"He made himself of no reputation." His will 
also was sacrificed,— the strongest individual thing 
that any being can possess; as he himself declared, he 
sought not his own will, but the will of the Father 
who sent him. His life, the most precious thing to 
any intelligent creature, was freely laid down, a sacrifice, 
a sin-offering, in harmony with the divine plan, 
on our behalf. -Phil. 2:5-8-Diaglott. 



*Riches, while generally applied to money and physical 
comforts and opulence, may properly enough be applied to any 
valuable possession; as, for instance, one might be rich in talents 
of music or oratory or art; or he might be rich in mental endowment 
which would carry with it weight of influence 
amongst men. 

R2761 : page 54 

But all these sacrifices led, under divine providence 
and promise, to still greater riches, greater honors and 
greater powers, as the Apostle, after reciting how our 
Lord humbled himself and became obedient to death, 
even the death of the cross, declares,— "Wherefore, 
[as a reward for this sacrifice] God hath highly exalted 
him, and hath given him a name that is above 
every name;" he has been exalted "far above angels, 
principalities and powers, and every name that is 
named." He has been given a name more excellent 
than all others, that all men should honor the Son, 
even as they honor the Father. (Phil. 2:9-11.) It 
is by virtue of his sacrifice of riches and honors and 
will and life itself that our dear Redeemer is now the 
great and glorious Royal High Priest, with all power 
in heaven and in earth, which he soon will take to 
himself. (Rev. 1 1:17.) Soon he will exercise it in 
accomplishing the wonderful work which he already 
has begun, and which it is the Father's good pleasure 
that he shall complete; viz., of subduing all things, and 
bringing all sin and rebellion against divine authority 
into subjection, rescuing so many as desire to return 
to harmony with their Creator and his laws, and destroying 
with an everlasting destruction all who love 
and practise sin knowingly and wilfully. 



These, our dear Redeemer's experiences, are set 
before believers as an example; and so many as desire 
during this Gospel age, and under its high calling, are 
permitted to become his followers, and to walk in his 
footsteps— to have fellowship in his sufferings, sharing 
in his sacrifice, that ultimately they may be sharers 
with him in the glorious rewards. As a matter of fact, 
none of these followers have anything of value to sacrifice. 
It cannot be said of them, as of their Redeemer, 
that they were rich and became poor; on the contrary, 
they are all poor as respects everything that could be 
considered true riches. Even their own righteousness 
was as filthy rags, which needed to be replaced with 
the imputed robe of the Savior's righteousness (justification), 
ere they could be invited to be his followers. 

But while none called to the under-priesthood possess 
any real riches, each one possesses something of 
some value in his own estimation; some possess a 
little honor amongst men; some possess a little of 
this world's goods, bringing measurable comforts; 
some possess talents capable of exercise and development; 
each one possesses a will, more or less weak and 
imperfect; and each one possesses a little fragment of 
life which has not yet flickered out. The invitation 
to each would-be royal priest is, that being justified 
by faith through the redemption which is in Christ 
Jesus, he should sacrifice his all, and thus be 
reckoned a joint-sacrificer with the great Redeemer, 
as having fellowship with him in his sufferings, that 
he might also share in his glory. (Rom. 8:17.) 
This is the particular feature of this Gospel age: it is 
the age of sacrifice and self-denial as respects all earthly 
blessings and privileges and advantages. And the object 
or hope inspiring to such sacrifices of present things is, 
that all such shall be made partakers of far greater 
riches of glory, honor, immortality and eternal life, 
in the Kingdom. Thus we have the key to the difference 
between God's dealings with his faithful ones in 
this present age, and his dealings with some of his 
faithful ones in a preceding age. 

From this point of view earthly riches of every 
kind, opulence of money, of influence, of talent, should 
not be despised by the Lord's people, but, on the contrary, 
should be appreciated— not after the worldly 
manner of appreciation, for selfish interests and purposes, 
but because those who possess riches of any 
kind, have that much more than they otherwise would 
have to offer upon the Lord's altar as a sacrifice in his 
service, to glorify his name, to advance his truth, to 
bless his people. But the consecrated should keep 
ever in mind that this is the only value of any kind of 
riches to them: they are not to seek to keep these 
riches, but to seek opportunities for using them wisely, 

R2762 : page 54 



—spending them all to the very last farthing. 

There are some who are rich in talents, and who 
could, if they would, turn those talents into the service 
of the Lord and the Truth; and they make a great 
mistake and lose a precious opportunity if they hold 
them for themselves in any selfish manner or degree. 
There are those who have more or less of the money 
talent, earthly riches, and they make a great mistake 
if they hoard these; for their only value as respects 
the Kingdom, its glories, its riches and its honors, is 
in using them, now. If they hold and hoard their 
earthly riches they are burying their talent, their opportunity, 
instead of using it; and such will demonstrate 
to themselves eventually the meaning of our 
Lord's words, "It is easier for a camel to go through 
a needle's eye* than for a rich man to enter into the 
Kingdom." (Luke 18:25.) He cannot get into the 
Kingdom at all except as he strips himself of his riches, 
—sacrifices them, devotes them to the Lord. 

However, the stripping of oneself of riches, sacrificing 
riches, does not signify the reckless and wasteful 
disposition of them; rather, all riches of every kind 
should be considered consecrated to the Lord at the 
time their possessor consecrates himself and his all to 
God's service; and thenceforth those riches should be 
used, not as his own, but as the Lord's riches, the 



*A small gate in the walls of ancient cities, for the convenience 
of belated travelers after sundown, after the main 
city gates were closed. These needle-eyes were so low that 
camels could enter them only upon their knees and after being 
stripped of their burdens. 

R2762 : page 55 

Lord's talents, to be used according to the steward's 

understanding of the divine will. But certainly no 

steward is faithful who hoards and accumulates to 

hand down selfishly to his own posterity. We are not 

here opposing a reasonable provision being made for 

the steward's household, as the Apostle enjoins (1 Tim. 5:8; 

Rom. 12:17), but we are opposing the 

thought that God has ever authorized his stewards to 

avoid using their stewardship, and to attempt to pass 

that stewardship onward at their death, to others. 

This is one of the fallacies with which many deceive 
themselves, for, as the Scriptures declare, the 
natural mind (heart) is exceedingly deceitful and at 
times misleads the new creature, the new will, the 
new heart. (Jer. 17:9.) It is for this reason that 
God in his Word gives us in so many ways line upon 
line, precept upon precept, that we may know the 
terms of our calling, that they are terms of sacrifice 
and not of acquisitiveness as respects earthly things,— 



that knowing this we may make our calling and our 
election sure by conformity thereto,— by becoming 
copies of God's dear Son, "who was rich [in every 
sense of the word, far beyond our comprehension], 
but who for our sakes became poor [sacrificing it 
all]." 

The Apostle speaks of the deceitfulness of riches; 
and on every hand we may witness this deceitfulness: 
we see how often earthly wealth deceives and misleads 
and corrupts the reasoning powers, and turns aside 
the force of God's Word to those who possess it. We 
see the same in respect to the wealth of influence, how 
those who possess this wealth frequently deceive themselves, 
and hoard it, and refuse to sacrifice it for the 
truth, for the Lord, for his cause. We see the same 
deception operating powerfully in those who possess a 
wealth of talent in any direction; they feel like keeping 
all of it for self, and if not all, the larger and choicer 
parts; they are deceived into thinking this is the right 
course, notwithstanding the Scriptures so plainly declare 
that our privileges in connection with these is 
that of sacrifice. As a whole, then, we daily witness, 
as the Scriptures declare, that those who possess any 
kind of riches, wealth, talent or influence, are rarely 
amongst the sacrificers. We might almost say, Blessed 
are those who are poor in this world's goods, and in 
talents and in influence, for they having practically 
nothing to sacrifice to the Lord but their wills, find it 
easier to comply with the conditions, and we presume 
that the larger proportion of those who will through 
faith inherit the Kingdom will consequently be of this 
poor class, rich in faith only.— Jas. 2:5. 

When we would see a noble example, like that of 
our Lord, who was rich in everything, and who gave 
all, we rejoice in it, and realize that as his sacrifice 
was so great his reward also is proportionately great. 
When we see the noble example of the Apostle Paul, 
who possessing some considerable wealth of ability, 
talent and influence, and possibly of financial means 
also, laid these all, a willing, a glad sacrifice, at the 
feet of the Lord, laying them all down with joy in 
God's service, in the service of the truth, in the service 
of the brethren, it causes our hearts to rejoice, 
and we feel sure that one so rich, and who spent his 
riches so faithfully, will be one to shine very brightly 
in the Kingdom, when it is set up and manifested. 
And so, undoubtedly, it will be with all the royal 
priesthood,— in proportion as they have sacrificed their 
possessions. Those who joyfully endure for the Lord's 
sake, the truth's sake, the greatest shame, the greatest 
ignominy, the greatest trials, the greatest persecutions 
in this present life, and thus have experiences most 
like those of the Master and Pattern, we may be sure 
will in proportion to their faithfulness manifested in 
such sacrifices, have a future great reward;— as the 
Apostle has declared, "star differeth from star in 



glory."- 1 Cor. 15:40-44. 

HEAVENLY VERSUS EARTHLY RICHES. 



We have said that the heavenly riches are to be 
attained in the resurrection, when the Millennial Kingdom 
shall be inaugurated, and the faithful overcomers, 
by their resurrection change, shall be richly endowed 
with all the good things which God hath in reservation 
for them that love him, and who prove their love 
by present-time devotions, sacrifices, etc. But, we 
should notice that there is a foretaste of these heavenly 
blessings granted to the faithful in this present life; 
these heavenly riches granted us now the Apostle 
speaks of as "riches of grace" (Eph. 1:7,18), and 
these grace-riches include faith, hope, and joy in the 
holy spirit and an ability to see and appreciate with 
the eye of faith things actually not seen as yet. The 
Apostle declares that these treasures of wisdom and 
grace— knowledge of divine good things in reservation, 
and the fellowship with God which permits us 
to anticipate and enjoy those blessings in a measure 
now, are all hidden in Christ, "in whom are hid all the 
treasures of wisdom and knowledge." (Col. 2:3.) 
We must come into Christ, as members of his body, 
the true Church, by sacrifice,— before we can have the 
opportunity of even searching for these hidden treasures, 
or of finding any of them. And then, as we 
progress faithfully in our sacrificial service, as priests, 
walking in the footsteps of the great High Priest, we 
find more and more of these true "riches of grace" 
day by day, and year by year, as we progress. 

Moreover, another kind of riches comes to the 
royal priesthood, faithful in performing their self-sacrifices. 

R2762 : page 56 

These are riches of the holy spirit. They 
find as they sacrifice the selfish interests, earthly aims, 
earthly projects, etc., in the service of the Lord and 
the Truth, that they grow more and more in likeness 
to their heavenly Father and to their Lord, and that 
the fruits of the holy spirit abound in them more and 
more— meekness, patience, gentleness, brotherly kindness, 
love. 

Furthermore, they find a peace and a joy to which 
formerly they were strangers, and which the world 
can neither give nor take away. This peace and joy 
come through a realization that having given their all 
to the Lord, all of his exceeding great and precious 
promises belong to them. Now their faith can firmly 
grasp these promises as their own; they can realize 
that as their justification and call were not of themselves, 
but of the Lord, so all their course of sacrifice, 



in harmony with that call, is under divine supervision 
and care, and sure to work out blessings; and that to 
whatever extent they shall work out earthly hardships, 
trials and sufferings, God will proportionately 
make them to work out a far more exceeding and an 
eternal weight of glory in the Kingdom.— 2 Cor. 4:17. 

With this peace of God and confidence in his 
leading and care, they can apply to themselves the 
prophetic statement, "All the steps of a righteous 
man are ordered of the Lord, and he [the righteous 
man] delighteth in his way." (Psa. 37:23.) They 
can delight in this way, be it ever so thorny and narrow 
and rugged, because of their confidence in God's 
love and wisdom, and that he who began a good work 
in them is thus completing it and blessing them with 
experiences which divine wisdom sees will be to their 
profit eventually. Thus the Lord's blessing is upon 
this class; and they realize indeed that, "The blessing 
of the Lord it maketh rich." How rich it makes their 
hearts in the present time— rich in noble sentiments, 
rich in faith, rich in love, rich in good works to all 
men as they have opportunity, especially toward the 
household of faith; and very rich in God's blessing 
and under his providential care, which, if rightly accepted, 
will ultimately make these members of the 
Royal Priesthood heirs of God, joint-heirs with Jesus 
Christ their Lord, in an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, 
and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven 
for them.- 1 Pet. 1:4. 

LAODICEA'S COUNTERFEIT RICHES. 



We have been considering the true riches, present 
and future, provided for the true Israel, the Church 
of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, 

R2763 : page 56 

and whose Head is Christ. But the Scriptures draw 
to our attention the fact that the nominal church of 
this present time, symbolical Laodicea (Rev. 3:17,18), 
claims also to be very rich. "Thou sayest, I am rich 
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing." 
Alas! This seems to be the prevalent condition of nominal 
churchianity on every hand. Only the few in her 
who are Israelites indeed, and who have not yet heard 
and obeyed the voice speaking in this harvest-time, 
and saying, "Come out of her my people, that ye be 
not partakers of her sins and that ye receive not of 
her plagues"— only these very few know of the true 
riches; the remainder are deceiving themselves with a 
counterfeit wealth. They look with pride upon their 
numbers, and count them by millions: they rejoice in 
this wealth of numbers, not realizing that nearly all 



are "tares," not begotten by the good Word of the 
Kingdom;— indeed very few of them know anything 
about the Kingdom at all, not being begotten of the 
Truth, but begotten of error. 

Laodiceans look upon their material prosperity, 
and the numbers of wealthy people associated with 
their confederating denominations, and count their 
money and their donations by millions, and say, We 
are rich as never before. Alas! that they do not realize 
that these are earthly riches of the kind which 
our Lord declares are no evidence of his favor during 
this Gospel age, but rather to the contrary. And 
they see not the true riches which the Lord admires, 
and which are the foretaste of his favor and the coming 
Kingdom wealth. 

And so the Lord declares to Laodicea, "Thou 
knowest not that thou art wretched and miserable and 
poor and blind and naked." She is poor, in that she 
has so little of the Master's spirit, so little of the Truth 
and the spirit of the Truth. The only riches which 
God can recognize are those which he promised to, and 
bestows upon his people in this present time. Laodicea 
is blind, in that the god of this world hath blinded 
her perceptions of God's character and plan and is 
leading her further and further away from confidence 
in his Word, under the guidance of her chosen and 
well-paid lords and masters, the clergy, who under the 
name of Higher Criticism and Evolution are rapidly 
taking away from her every good possession and thing 
which would be estimable in the sight of the Lord, and 
who are thus denuding her, making her naked, taking 
from her the robe of Christ's righteousness, and leading 
her to trust, not in the precious blood of the redemption, 
the death of the Redeemer, but to trust in 
an evolutionary process which needs no Savior, which 
denies an atonement for sin, yea, denies that there is, 
or has been any sin to make atonement for; and claims, 
on the contrary that humanity has ground for pride in 
its own progress, which will be quite sufficient eventually 
to bring to them every desired blessing, without 
any Savior and without his Kingdom, which God has 

R2763 : page 57 

promised as the hope of the groaning creation.— 
Rom. 8:19-23. 

Laodicea is indeed counseled to buy the true gold, 
the true riches of the Lord, and to use eye-salve that 
she may see, and to put on the garment of Christ's 
righteousness, that she may not be put to shame; but 
we have no intimation in the Scripture that she will 
give any heed to this counsel; on the contrary, the 
intimation is that more and more she will become a 
Babel of confusion, and that she will go down with 
the political and financial systems of this present age, 
in the great time of trouble with which this age will 



terminate, and which will fit and prepare mankind for 

the Kingdom of God's dear Son, and its reign of righteousness. 

"When the judgments of the Lord are 

abroad in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will 

learn righteousness."— Isa. 26:9. 

Then, with the new Millennial age, will come a 
new order of things, and no longer will the blessing of 
the Lord entail sacrifice and self-denials, as at the 
present time; because the sacrificing priesthood will 
all have been found and proven and glorified. Then 
the blessing of the Lord will come, as to the Jews, in 
earthly favors and earthly blessings, in proportion as 
they shall be obedient to the laws of the Kingdom and 
to the spirit of those laws. "In that day the righteous 
shall flourish"— flourish in all temporal prosperity, 
and in mental, physical and moral growth, upward 
and still upward in the highway of holiness; in that 
day the evil-doer will receive the stripes, and be at 
the disadvantage; and, if he continue in evil-doing, 
ultimately he will be cut off from amongst the people, 
-in the Second Death. -Isa. 35:8; Psa. 37:9; 
Acts 3:23. 

"Charge them that are rich in this world, that 
they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain 
riches,— but in the living God who giveth us [all his 
people] all things [needful] to their rich enjoyment; 
that they do good; that they be rich in good works, 
liberal, ready to bestow; treasuring up for themselves 
a good preparation for the real life."— 1 Tim. 6:17-19. 



R2763 : page 57 

PARABLE OF THE TEN VIRGINS. 

-MATT. 25:1-13. -FEB. 3.- 

"Watch ye therefore, for ye know neither the day 
nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh." 

OF DEEP and special interest to every consecrated 
believer this parable should surely be, 
referring, as it does, to the Lord's true people only— 
the "virgin" or pure class— ignoring the worldly and 
hypocritical, and yet showing that amongst the true 
saints there are two classes, only one of which will enter 
the Kingdom and be the Bride, the Lamb's wife. 
Those who pin their faith to the creeds of "Christendom" 
find little light and comfort in this parable. Those 
creeds teach (contrary to the Scriptures) that death inducts 
the Church to heavenly joys, and all others into 
endless torment. No wonder those who believe those 
creeds seek to deny or at least to forget the Scriptural 
statement that there is "no other name given under 
heaven or among men whereby we must be saved." No 



wonder they seek in generosity of heart to extend God's 

favor, and heaven's protection from eternal misery, to 

hundreds of millions who have never heard of the only 

name, and consequently have never believed in Jesus 

unto justification, as well as to all except the most vicious 

of civilized lands. To such creed-deceived people 

this parable should give such a shock as would thoroughly 

awaken them to search for the truth in God's 

own Word. For to interpret this parable in harmony 

with their creeds would not only cut off for eternal woe 

all but the truly consecrated Christians, but would divide 

these "virgins" (pure ones) into two classes, only 

one of which attains the heavenly Kingdom, and join t-heirship 

with Christ as his Bride. All must see error 

in such a conception of the divine Word and plan, whether 

they have seen the truth on the subject or not. 

For our interpretation of this parable, which we 
believe to be both Scriptural and reasonable, we refer 
our readers to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., page 91 
and on. 

The Golden Text should not be overlooked;— particularly 
because its real lesson is the very reverse of 
the interpretation usually given it. It is usually quoted 
and considered separate and apart from its context, 
and understood to mean, Watch; because no one will ever 
know anything respecting the second coming of Christ. 
How absurd it would be to tell us to watch for a thing, 
and in the same breath assure us that our watching 
would be useless because none would ever know! 

But this verse taken in connection with the parable 
of the Virgins, as our Lord gave it, and meant it 
to be considered, means much of great interest and importance 
to God's people. It means that all of God's 
people should watch, because if watching faithfully 
they will know of his second coming— it will be distinctly 
announced— not to the world, ignorant of the Bridegroom 
and non-expectant of his second coming— but to 
all the "virgins" (the pure in heart, the truly consecrated, 
the Church). These alone (not the world) are 
called upon to watch and wait for the Lord from heaven, 
the Bridegroom. And the parable shows the necessity 
for this expectancy, watching, and readiness on the 
part of the consecrated;— that only such would be ready 

R2763 : page 58 

for, and share in the great blessing expected. The unready 
were too drowsy spiritually;— overcharged with 
the cares of this life and the deceitfulness of riches. 
This proved that they did not love the Lord enough, 
more than earthly interest, and hence did not sacrifice 
the latter for the spiritual interests; and surely in this 
they are foolish, and will so assert some day. 

The parable belongs to our day. It is now in process 
of fulfilment; and it is but a kindness on the part 
of the "virgins" who are awake that they shake and 



otherwise attempt to arouse the sleeping "virgins" in 
time for them to get the oil in their vessels and make all 
needed preparations, and be among the wise before all 
the wise have gone in to the wedding and the "door" 
of opportunity is shut. This is the meaning of the 
exertions being put forth through the circulation of 
WATCH TOWER literature in every conceivable way. 

R2764 : page 58 

We seek to awaken the sleeping "Virgins." Some of 
them get awake and thank the Lord and his faithful, 
while others are merely angered by our kind endeavors 
and say all manner of evil against us falsely;— thus 
showing that they are not of the kind whom the Lord 
desires shall be members of "the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife."-Rev. 19:7,8. 

The portion or future of the foolish virgins is not 
shown in the parable— except that they, not getting the 
proper supply of the "oil" in season to go in before the 
"door" to this joint-heir class closes, will not be admitted 
to it;— its number being limited, and by that 
time completed. Other Scriptures seem to show us 
that these foolish virgins will pass through the great 
time of trouble with which this age is just about to 
close; and that in it they will be chastened and tested 
and made fit for a good place in the Father's house; 
and that tho they will never be sharers of the Bride's 
portion they will be of "the virgins her companions that 
follow her."-Psa. 45:14; Rev. 7:14-17; 19:9. 



R2764 : page 58 

"TO EVERY MAN ACCORDING TO HIS SEVERAL ABILITY.' 

-MATT. 25:14-30.-FEB. 10.- 

"So, then, everyone of us shall give an account 
of himself before God."— Rom. 14:12. 

IT WAS ON the way from Jericho toward Jerusalem 

that our Lord gave the Parable of the Ten 

Pounds, delivered one each to ten servants. (Luke 19:11,12. 

See our issue of Dec. 1.) The Parable of 

the Talents which we are now considering is a different 

one in several particulars, tho bearing close resemblance 

to the other. It was part of our Lord's teaching to his 

disciples during the few days preceding his crucifixion, 

probably the Tuesday preceding it, on the evening 

journey from Jerusalem to Bethany. This parable 

illustrates to us the differing abilities of God's people 

in respect to his service, and how each is accountable 

according to his ability, and that the same results are 

neither required nor expected from all, but simply faithfulness 



by each in the use of that ability and opportunity 
which he possesses. 

The Revised Version notes the fact that the words, 
"the Kingdom of Heaven," in the opening verse, are 
not found in the ancient MSS., but this does not interfere 
with the thought that it is the Kingdom of Heaven 
in embryo (the Church) that is discussed, and that is 
likened to these servants who receive the talents; for 
this parable, it is to be remembered, followed immediately 
the Parable of the Ten Virgins, which is declared 
to be an illustration of the Kingdom. The Parable of 
the Talents, therefore, merely continues the thought 
respecting the Kingdom class, making these fresh observations 
respecting it. 

Altho a number of servants are implied, yet only 
a sample illustration of three is given, leaving it to be 
inferred that the others were more or less distinctly 
represented in these three, without attempting to show 
or to teach which of the classes would predominate. 
In this respect also this parable corresponds to the Parable 
of the Pounds. This parable was evidently, like 
the other, to prepare the minds of the apostles for our 
Lord's departure from the present life— to the "far 
country," heaven itself, there to appear in the presence 
of God to present on behalf of mankind the sacrifice for 
sins which he was about to accomplish at Calvary; and 
incidentally to be crowned, highly exalted and honored 
far above angels, principalities and powers, at the right 
hand of divine favor, and there to remain till the appointed 
time for him to take possession of his Kingdom 
under the whole heavens, to subdue it and to bring it 
into full accord with the divine government, that God's 
will should be done on earth as it is done in heaven. 

The expression "far country," would give the 
thought of a considerable time to elapse between the 
Master's leaving and his return to establish his Millennial 
Kingdom. Meantime the apostles were to understand 
that they themselves were his servants to whom he 
entrusted his property, and that he would expect them 
to be faithful in guarding all of his interests and affairs, 
and promoting the same according to their several abilities. 
But since the parable covers the long period of 
eighteen hundred years, and looks down to certain servants 
living at the time of the Master's return, it is 
evident that it was intended to include, not the apostles 
only, but, as our Lord's prayer expressed the matter, 
"All those who shall believe on me through their 
word." We are to notice distinctly that the parable 

R2764 : page 59 

does not concern the world; nor do the decisions mentioned 
as taking place at the second coming of our Lord 
in any sense of the word represent decisions respecting 
the world, but merely decisions respecting the Church. 
Nor are we even to understand that the parable includes 



the general "household of faith;" but simply and only 
the specially consecrated servants of the Lord, to whom 
he has committed certain responsibilities; viz., those 
only who have been begotten of the holy spirit. 

In the early Church, following the Pentecostal outpouring 
of the holy spirit, every consecrated believer 
received a gift or talent, and some received many of 
these, as the Apostle says: "The manifestation of the 
spirit [a portion, at least one talent] is given to every 
man [in this consecrated Church] to profit withal." 
Each had a responsibility in proportion as he had talents 
or gifts of the spirit, and hence the Apostle Paul, 
having more than the others, had a greater responsibility 
because he had greater opportunities; and we 
judge that he measured up to these responsibilities in 
a manner most acceptable to the Master. (1 Cor. 14:18.) 
But those gifts must have ceased within a short time 
after the death of the Apostles, because we most clearly 
find that the gifts of the spirit were imparted to believers 
only through the laying on of hands of the apostles 
—that they did not come supernaturally from God 
to every individual,— and that those who possessed the 
gifts themselves, except the apostles, could not communicate 
them to others. -Acts 8:12-20. 

The object of those gifts, as we have already seen, 
was the establishment of the early Church, but with 
its establishment their necessity ceased, and hence the 
gifts ceased in that form, and have since continued with 
the Lord's people in a very different form; that is to 
say, since then the natural gifts or talents which each 
person possesses through birth, education and training 
are reckoned, when he is consecrated to the Lord and 
accepted by him, as being owned or possessed by the 
man's new or holy spirit, and hence are reckoned as 
talents or abilities committed to his care, and for the 
use of which he will be held responsible in the outcome. 
If he remained one of the world he would have other 
responsibilities, but no such as are implied in this 
lesson, which represents only the responsibilities of the 
consecrated servants in the use of their Master's spiritual 
goods. 

We may safely say that there are comparatively 
few five-talent servants amongst the Lord's people: the 
majority of the saints may safely be considered as being 
of the one- and two-talent classes. There are not many 
five-talent people in the world anyway, and it would 
appear that the world, the flesh and the devil bid so 
high for the services of these few that the number of 
them to become the Lord's servants, and to make consecration 
of their five talents fully and exclusively to 
his service, is comparatively small— "not many wise 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble." 

The parable shows that five-talent people amongst 
the Lord's servants are not to measure themselves with 
others and to say, I have done enough; certainly more 
than A., who has one talent, but as much as B., who 



has two talents. Rather, each disciple is to seek to 

know truthfully just what talents of natural ability and 

opportunity the Master has committed to his care, and 

to seek to use everyone of these as fully, as thoroughly 

and as constantly as possible, so that the results may 

be much fruit, much praise, much service, much honor 

to the Lord. And as this parable should be a check 

upon those servants who have five talents, to hinder 

them from taking a slothful view of the matter so it 

should also be an encouragement to those having fewer 

talents of ability and opportunity, showing them that 

the Lord will not expect as great things from them as 

he would expect from those having greater opportunities 

and greater natural talents. It teaches such that they 

should do with their might what their hands find to 

do, and realize that this reasonable service is what the 

Lord expects and what he proposed to reward in each. 

The servant who had only one talent of ability and opportunity 

should have felt equally his responsibility, 

and might equally have had the Master's approval had 

he been faithful, in which event, no doubt, his one talent 

would have increased to two. 

Our Lord's arrangement of the parable, that the 
person who received the one talent was the one who 
digged in the earth and buried it, should not be understood 
to mean that the one-talented people are more 
likely than others of the Lord's servants with more talents 
to thus neglect and misuse them. So far as observation 
teaches, we might conclude that proportionately 

R2765 : page 59 

as many of the two-talented and five-talented dig in the 

earth and hide their talents, as of those who possess 

only one; and of course their so doing would be proportionately 

more blameworthy than that of the one-talented 

man. Why, then, is the one-talented man 

chosen as an illustration of these talent-burials? We 

answer, that it is to show the responsibility of those 

who have least— that the Lord expects even the least 

of his consecrated people to know of, and to use the talents 

he has in his possession, and that he will not hold 

guiltless even those who have the smallest ability to 

serve him and his brethren and his truth and who neglect 

to use it. As the responsibilities accompanying a 

larger number of talents would be greater, so the losses 

in their case would be greater, and thus the punishment 

more severe. 

"After a long time the lord of those servants cometh 
and reckoneth with them." By these words our 

R2765 : page 60 

Lord gave to the disciples as clear an intimation as was 
proper of the fact that they were not to expect him to 
return and reckon with them in a very few days, a few 



months or a few years; but when they subsequently 
asked him respecting the particular time, he refused 
them, saying that it was not for them to know the times 
and the seasons, which the Father had put in his own 
power. And so for eighteen hundred years the Lord's 
people have been left without clear information on this 
subject. This, however, does not militate against the 
thought that it is the privilege of God's people now 
to know something of the times and seasons, because 
the due time has come in which the Father wishes to 
communicate these;— the time mentioned through the 
Prophet Daniel, when the [truly] wise shall understand, 
as we saw in the preceding lesson.— Dan. 12:10; 1 Thess. 5:4; 
John 16:13. 

There is no intimation in the parable that the disciples 
would die and go to their Lord, and be reckoned 
with and rewarded then, as many believe to have been 
the case. The Scriptures are harmonious and consistent 
with themselves in their teachings, and not only 
declare that "David is not ascended into the heavens," 
and that "no man hath ascended up to heaven" save 
Jesus, but they declare also that our Lord will come a 
second time, to receive his people unto himself and to 
then reward them. The Apostle Paul, who was one of 
these five-talented servants, declares respecting himself, 
"I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course; 
I have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for 
me [in reservation, in waiting] a crown of righteousness 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give me 
in that day, and not to me only, but also unto all them 
that love his appearing."— 2 Tim. 4:7,8; John 3:13; 
14:3; Acts 2:34. 

To our understanding we are now living in "the 
days of the Son of Man," and he is now reckoning with 
his servants in this the day of his revelation. We understand, 
according to the Scriptures, by faith and not 
by sight, that the reckoning was to begin with those 
servants who had fallen asleep, and that "we who are 
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord" should 
not prevent or hinder them, nor take precedence to 
them in this matter of being reckoned with and rewarded. 
(1 Thess. 4:15-17.) To our understanding, 
as already shown in the MILLENNIAL DAWN series, 1878 
marked the date for our Lord's assumption of Kingly 
authority and his judgment upon Babylon the Great, 
characterizing her as "fallen," and calling for all the 
people of God to come out of her: and that it marked 
also the date for the faithful overcomers of the past to 
have a share in the first resurrection— to enter into the 
joys of their Lord, and hear his words, "Well done, 
good and faithful servants." In harmony with this, 
it is our understanding that all of this class are now 
enjoying the glory, honor and immortality promised 
to the faithful. This work of judging the servants is 
totally distinct from the judging of the world— the 
world's judgment is very different everyway, and is to 



take place during the Millennial age, and is represented 
in the Parable of the Sheep and the Goats, the scene of 
which is located "when the Son of Man shall sit upon 
the throne of his glory," at which time the faithful 
servants of the present age, whose trial is now in progress, 
and whose reckoning and rewards are shown in 
the parable of the lesson, will sit with the Lord in his 
throne as he has promised.— Rev. 3:21. 

As other Scriptures show, "we who are alive and 
remain unto the presence of the Lord" will not be 
omitted from the company of the glorified, altho our 
being alive will not give us precedence to them. The 
inspection and rewarding of the Lord's servants having 
begun in 1878 as respects those that had fallen asleep, 
is since progressing in respect to those who remain: 
these are granted a reasonable time in which to finish 
up their contract of full consecration,— to become ripe 
"wheat"— and to render up their accounts. Each of 
the elect now, as he finishes his course, reports immediately, 
and does not need to "sleep" in death, to wait 
for the coming of the King, but is immediately, in the 
moment of death, changed, "in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye," experiencing fully and instantly the 
first resurrection blessing of glory, honor and immortality 
—in the moment of death. 

Realizing from this view of the parable that the 
Lord's people of today are represented in it, it is for 
each one of the consecrated (while yet it is called day 
—before the night cometh) to make a full and thorough 
inspection of himself: and to determine to what extent 
he has talents, abilities, privileges, opportunities, to 
serve the Lord, and to what extent he is using these; 
and to remember that his share in the reward depends 
upon his faithfulness in the use of his talents. There 
may be instances in which persons of five talents will 
use three of them faithfully in the Lord's service, and 
bury the other two in business and cares of this life — 
"in the earth," in earthly affairs. There may be instances 
in which those who have two talents use one 
for the Lord's service and bury the other one; but the 
fact that our Lord does not give such illustrations would 
lead us to question the probability of such a course. 
Some might plan certain things respecting two talents 
for heavenly things and three for earthly things; or of 
one for earthly things and the other for heavenly things; 
but the result probably would be either that he would 
become thoroughly immersed in the earthly things, and 
bury all his talents there, or else that his heart would 
become so thoroughly infused with the Lord's spirit 

R2765 : page 61 

and the desire to serve his cause that all of his talents 
would be thus employed. This tendency and result is 
implied by our Lord's statement on another occasion: 
"Ye cannot serve God and Mammon." "No man can 



serve two masters." Experience and observation corroborate 

this; and hence as a rule we find that people 

are either cold or hot in spiritual things; either it is the 

Kingdom of heaven first and far above all other considerations, 

demanding and receiving the very best we 

have of time, energy and influence; or else the Kingdom 

of heaven is neglected and forgotten, and time and 

influence are spent in money-getting or other selfish 

and earthly occupations of mind and body. 

The lesson of this to every one of the Lord's consecrated 
people is plain: we are to "seek first [chiefly] 
the Kingdom of God." It is to be our chief concern 
and to receive from us all the time, attention, thought, 
energy, influence and means we have— the things needful 
for the present life being understood to be excepted; 
and our love and zeal will be manifested by the proportion 
of these even, which we are willing to sacrifice 
in the interest of heavenly things. 

The reward given to the faithful servants was the 
same in each case— the entering into the joys of the 
Lord; and we may reasonably understand that this will 
mean that the cup of joy to each will be full. In this, 
too, we have a great encouragement for all, and one 
which perhaps is specially needed by the majority of 
the Lord's servants, who possess only one or two talents 
of opportunity, etc. They have an equally good 
opportunity of entering into the joys of the Lord as 
tho they had five or ten talents; and the reward, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant," will be truly meant 
for, and as fully appreciated by the one as the other. 

The reward to these servants is in full harmony 
with the foregoing application of the parable, and shows 
that during the Millennial age the faithful servants, the 
"elect" of this Gospel age, will be the rulers of the 
world, "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord" in 
his Kingdom, and upon his throne of rulership; for the 
reward specifies, "Thou has been faithful over a few 
things; I will make thee ruler over many things." If 
the parable were intended to represent the world's 
judgment, such a conclusion would be inappropriate, 
because by the time the world's judgment will have 
ended there will no longer be necessity for rulership in 
this sense; for, as the Apostle declares, Christ shall 
reign [during the Millennium] until he shall have put 
down all authority, etc., and then he shall deliver up 
the Kingdom to God, even the Father. The rule, or 
reign of righteousness, the Mediatorial Kingdom, is to 
be established during the Millennial age,— thus to overthrow 
the rule of unrighteousness now prevailing amongst 
men, and to lift mankind in general out of the present 
condition of sin and death— to deliver as many of them 
as will accept the deliverance from the power of Satan 
into the liberty of sons of God. And with the accomplishment 
of this work the time for all such ruling will 
be at an end; hence this parable is a strong lesson in 
support of the pre-millennial coming of our Lord and 



exaltation of his faithful, the elect Church. 
R2766 : page 61 

The servant who hid his talent in the earth, and 
who failed to use it, endeavored to justify his course 
by blaming the Master with being too hard and exacting. 
And so it is with many, who, having taken upon 
themselves the vows of consecration to the Lord, subsequently 
fail to perform them. They are disposed to 
blame the Lord rather than to blame themselves; and 
this course indicates what their real lack is,— Love. 
They do not love the Lord fully, truly, sufficiently, and 
their course reveals this fact. Had they loved him 
they would have delighted to do to their ability his 
will; and only such are blessed with rewards. 

The punishment of those who failed to perform 
their covenant as servants, who failed to use the talents 
provided for them under this covenant, is shown to be 
great loss;— but not the loss which many suppose, whose 
minds are blinded by the theory that eternal torment 
is the wages for sin, and that it is visited upon all except 
the "overcomers" of this Gospel age. Such claim 
that the unfaithful servant would be delivered over to 
Satan and be tortured in flaming fire, and so blind are 
many of the advocates of this theory that they read all 
this into our Lord's statement in this very parable; but 
instead of mentioning flames of fire, which would surely 
make the place light, our Lord mentions darkness as his 
portion— "outer darkness." Neither does our Lord 
mention the demon-tormentors, generally believed in. 

We offer another and much more reasonable, much 
more consistent, interpretation of our Lord's words. 
The servant who fails to use present privileges of consecration 
and service and sacrifice will find the opportunity 
taken from him. He will have it no more; 
neither will he have any share in the reward given to 
the overcomers;— he will suffer this great loss. He is 
represented as going into "outer darkness," implying 
that he had already been in the light of divine favor, 
blessing, privilege, knowledge of divine things;— that 
he would lose this enlightenment, and that his understanding 
would become darkened as respects spiritual 
things. It is "outer darkness," because it is the darkness 
common to and resting upon the whole world of 
mankind;— only the consecrated, accepted of the Lord, 
being permitted to come fully into the clear light of the 
knowledge of the Lord and of his plan now shining. 
Any others than these, upon whom this light may temporarily 
fall, have it only in a secondary sense, at very 
most, and see not the glorious things themselves, but 
merely, so to speak, their reflections. The unfaithful 

R2766 : page 62 

servant is to be cast completely out of all favor; even 



the reflected light will be obscured from his vision, and 
he will find himself, now or shortly, in the darkness 
of the world as respects the divine plan, work, etc. And 
there he will share with the world in its great time of 
trouble with which this age is about to close, a time of 
trouble which is fittingly pictured in the parable by 
the weeping and gnashing of teeth. 



R2766 : page 62 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



Question.— Is it so that children are not amenable 
to the high calling, and that consequently they should 
be let go, without special religious instruction— into 
the nominal church Sunday Schools, etc.? 

Answer.— Only believers have ever been amenable 
to the high calling of joint-heirship with Christ, and 
to suffering with him. The innocency of childhood 
is in the Scriptures set forth as a beautiful picture, 
and one that is to be emulated by all of the Lord's 
people in spiritual matters— they are to be children 
as respects malice; they are to be simple in their faith 
and love, not given to duplicity, misrepresentation, 
deep scheming, etc. In this sense of the word the 
Lord assures us that we must all become as little children, 
else we cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven. 
But to be as a little child in these respects, and to be 
a little child, are two different matters. The Lord did 
not accept any of the infants of Palestine to be his disciples, 
nor has he called infants to be his disciples since. 

However, the age at which an intelligent faith in 
the Lord might be exercised and the time, therefore, at 
which, after the exercise of that faith, a covenant of 
full consecration to the Lord's service could be intelligently 
entered into, must vary with the individuality 
of the children. We have known some that we considered 
quite competent both to believe and to consecrate 
at as early an age as fourteen, and all we should 
ask of any would be an evidence of their faith and an 
evidence of appreciation of consecration. 

We have a duty to our children, even tho they be 
too young to appreciate matters for themselves. They 
are our children, and under our care, and for us to deliberately 
lead their young feet into the snares of the 
Adversary, and to assist in entangling them in sectarianism, 
when we know how much evil it has done 
us, would be a crime on our part against them and 
against the truth. Every parent should recognize himself 
as having incurred grave responsibilities toward 
his children, not only for their temporal necessities, 
but equally for their mental and moral training; and 



the parents who are most faithful in the discharge of 

this God-appointed responsibility are sure to be the 

ones who are running the race themselves most successfully: 

for they will find that every effort to make 

clear the divine plan to the child will bring clearness 

and force to the parent's mind, and every attempt to 

inculcate the spirit of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, 

the spirit of truth, will be sure to bring with it a blessing, 

not only upon the heart of the child, but upon the 

heart of the parent. And years will show that the 

faithful parents will have reward through their children, 

of joy and peace and comfort, while those parents 

who neglect their children, or who trust them to 

those who are likely to mislead them in spiritual things, 

are pretty sure eventually to reap according as they 

have sown— poor or meager results. 

Question.— Would it be proper for us after withdrawing 
from a church to return to it and commune 
with it? 

Answer.— There is no law to hinder the Christian 
from going anywhere he believes the Lord would have 
him go, and where he believes he can get and do good 
and serve the truth, and feed the Lord's flock, and 
use his influence to the Lord's praise. If therefore 
you feel that your visiting the church from which you 
have withdrawn would have the above beneficial results, 
and if you would be made welcome by the said 
church, we see no reason why you might not, as occasion 
would offer, attend such church. 

However, on the other hand there is something 
to be said. Are you sure that your going would either 
do good or bring good? Are you sure that your influence 
would be favorable to the truth, if invested in 
that manner? Or would it be unfavorable to the truth 
and favorable to error? Are you sure that your attendance 
would furnish you any opportunities for speaking 
the truth and serving it to fellow-members of the 
household of faith? These are questions which each 
of the Lord's people must decide for himself. We 
think that as a general rule denominational lines are 
so closely drawn that there is no opportunity inside 
of them for bringing the truth clearly and fearlessly 
before the attention of the attendants. 

Respecting the taking of communion: It would 
seem to us that to do this regularly would certainly 
be unwise and prejudicial to the truth, because it would 
be favoring what we think is not Scriptural. And 
yet if by accident we happened to be with Christian 
people when they partook of the communion we would 
not feel condemned by our conscience in celebrating the 
Lord's death with them, explaining subsequently to 
our acquaintances what we considered to be the Scriptural 
truth on this subject. But in visiting a nominal 
church we should, if possible, avoid visiting on the 
Sunday when they erroneously celebrate the Lord's 
death out of its memorial season. 



R2766 : page 63 

SIN AND SICKNESS. 



It is frequently asserted by some of the faith-healers 
of the present day that personal sin is the 
cause of all personal sickness, and that if persons who 
are sick will repent and be saved from their sins they 
may expect to be also saved from their sickness and 
diseases; the one only condition being that they shall 
believe that the Lord does heal them in answer to 
prayer. 

The proposition may be true that sin is the general 
cause of sickness, or, rather, that sickness is a 
consequence of sin, in the sense that had not Adam 
sinned death would not have entered into the world, 
neither sickness as an antecedent of death; yet to hold 
that the sickness of the individual is the consequence 
or result of the sin of the individual in every instance, 
and that salvation from sin necessarily carries with it, 
on the exercise of the requisite faith, the healing of 
the body, is a doctrine fraught with error and evil; 
bringing those who come under its influence into great 
mental trouble because they cannot exercise the necessary 
faith for healing, and they therefore count themselves 

R2767 : page 63 

base unbelievers, when they may be exercising 

all the faith that is required of them, and should rejoice 

with joy unspeakable and full of glory,' because 

they are receiving the end of their faith, even the salvation 

of their souls. --1 Pet. 1:8,9. 

It will, therefore, be a desirable thing to disprove 
this unwholesome doctrine, and, in order to do 
so, it will be only necessary to show that the Lord Jesus 
Christ was sick, for he "did no sin" (1 Pet. 2:22), 
"and in him is no sin" (1 John 3:5), and he could boldly 
ask, while he walked the earth, "Which of you convinceth 
me of sin?" (John 8:46), and, therefore, personal 
sin could not have been the cause of sickness in 
him, as it was not in the case of the man born blind, 
and may not be in a thousand other instances. 

Jesus was a very sick man in the garden of Gethsemane. 
Luke, who was a physician, tells us that, 
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly, and 
his sweat was, as it were, great drops (thromboiclots) 
of blood falling down to the ground. This sickness 
with which Jesus suffered was diapedesis, a sickness 
not very common, and yet frequent enough to 
receive note and attention in the medical works and 



the cyclopedias. In McClintock and Strong's great 
work we have several instances given, under the phrase, 
"bloody sweat," especially that of Charles IX. of 
France, and allusion is made to Dr. Stroud's book on 
"The Physical Cause of the Death of Christ," where 
the matter is scientifically treated.... 

No one can read the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, 
in the original, without being fully convinced that 
(the chapter containing a prophecy of Christ) it is 
intended to present him as one suffering from sickness. 
In the third verse we have the words, "a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief." Here the Hebrew 
word for sorrows is "makaboth," and means pains, 
while the word for grief is "choli," and is from the 
verb "chalah," which means to be sick, weak, diseased. 
This word "choli" is the word used when the 
sickness of Hezekiah is spoken of; also when it is 
said, "Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof 
he died (2 Kings 13:14), and in numerous other instances 
of bodily sickness. The same word is used in 
the fourth verse, when it is said, "Surely he hath 
carried our griefs." In Matthew 8:17 this word is 
translated in the Greek asthencias, "infirmities" in 
our version, but it is the word that is used in the singular 
when the sickness of Lazarus is spoken of (John 1 1:4), 
and as a verb in various other instances of unquestionable 
bodily illness. Again, in the tenth verse, 
"he hath put him to grief," where the reading in the 
Hebrew is, "he hath made him sick," as in the margin 
of the Revised Version. 

Thus the proof from the Scriptures is ample that 
Jesus Christ was sick, and so able to sympathize with 
us in our sicknesses and "infirmities" (Heb. 4:15); 
being without sin, personal sin could not have been the 
cause of his illness, and, therefore, may not be of ours. 

W. S. URMY, 
Pastor of Potrero M.E. Church, California. 



page 63 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your recent favor was 
received yesterday. Please accept my most heartfelt 
thanks for your clear and detailed explanation of the 
1881 matter. Altho I felt this to be your understanding 
of the matter, yet several in the meeting have been 
greatly exercised with respect to the question. These 
I now rejoice to be able to comfort and encourage more 
positively than I could before receiving your letter. I 
trust I am not taking up your valuable time unnecessarily 
with my little questions. I felt a little guilty 



after reading your comment on the numerous conventions 
held during the past year, fearing that my correspondence 
may have helped to retard the sixth volume 
of DAWN. I most sincerely trust such has not been 
the case. 

I visited Brother and Sister Davis at , Cal., 

last week, and they asked me to call your attention 
to a statement on page 16, VOL. V., where you 
classify the Quakers with Unitarians, which they fear 
will cause prejudice among the Friends denomination. 
They fully understand your reason for this statement, 
knowing that the Friends you meet in Pennsylvania 
are of that belief; but they are only about one-tenth of 
the denomination. I send by same mail a "Discipline" 
of Iowa Yearly Meeting of Friends, from which you can 
judge of their position with respect to our Lord Jesus 
(page 30), and I am free to confess that I have for 
years held the same view with yourself, having come 
in contact with what I supposed were representative 
Friends, but who I now see were "Hicksite" and "Wilburite" 
Quakers, and representing the "Philadelphia 
Yearly Meeting," one not recognized by the other Yearly 
Meetings as sound in the doctrines of the "Friends." 
I felt sure you would like to know this, for in view of 
the statement appearing so early in the volume, readers 
might feel that you had either misrepresented the matter 
or were misinformed, and therefore they would lack 
confidence in the author and not desire to pursue the 

page 64 

study further. Bro. Davis may write you on the subject 
too. I feel so jealous for the Truth, that I cannot 
bear to have any error, however slight or unimportant 
apparently, go without correction. If I may suggest, 
I think a foot-note in future copies, or a little slip pasted 
in the present edition to the effect that you referred to 
a certain branch of the Friends denomination in your 
classification, would serve to counteract any erroneous 
impression. Dear brother, please do not think I am 
desirous of giving orders to you in any matter. I feel 
that situated as you are, and with your mind so free 
from the suspicions and evil surmisings of people in 
general, even professing Christians, you might possibly 
not see these matters in the light we do who come in 
contact with them. 

I enclose a copy of a publication which truly seems 
a device of the Adversary, written as it is by a person 
of your name, and on the subjects especially treated by 
you, but from so opposite a standpoint. Nevertheless 
"no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper," 
and the true sheep will not follow the "voice of a 
stranger." Only it makes my heart sad to see such 
things scattered broadcast to further deceive and delude 
any who may be "feeling after God." 

I wish especially to thank you for the article in 



the TOWER on "The Song of Moses and the Lamb." 
Ever since I came into the knowledge of present truth 
I have felt that I would really be satisfied even to go 
into the grave never to be resurrected if only I might 
live long enough to see the character of Jehovah vindicated, 
his infinite wisdom, justice, love and power made 
known to all the world of mankind. How true it is 
that we alone of all the people of the earth are able to 
sing this glorious song of Moses and the Lamb! And 
my heart longs for that blessed time when "the knowledge 
of the Lord shall fill the earth as the waters cover 
the sea." If God has been willing to wait six thousand 
years for his true character to be made manifest, should 
not we be able to wait a few brief years to have our 
motives and lives, now so sadly misunderstood, cleared 
of every misconception? I have recently been reading 
the Bible through, the first time since I began to study 
present truth, and great was my delight at the marvelous 
harmony of every passage with the Divine Plan. Scriptures 
once as unintelligible as if written in Sanscrit now 
flame with light and truth and meaning ! Oh, how 
can I ever praise my Heavenly Father for all his mercies 
to me! I am overwhelmed with the feeling of my 
utter unworthiness to have been called "out of darkness 
into his marvelous light!" Pray for me, dear 
brother, that I may be faithful to my calling and a more 
worthy ambassador for Christ Jesus, "approved unto 
God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly 
dividing the word of truth;" and more than that, one 
who not only hears and knows the Master's will, but 
also obeys it. I desire especially to be more humble, 
more like our Beloved, who had no will but that of his 
Father, for I realize more fully day by day that "this is 
the will of God (concerning me) even my sanctification," 
my complete submission to him in all things, 
if I would be with him and "see him as he is." 

With much Christian love to yourself, and all the 
other faithful ones in the TOWER office, I remain, 

Yours in the love and service of our King, 
G. W. SEIBERT, -California. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have long desired to 
write to you to tell you as best I can how happy I am 
since I have learned of the true Gospel of Christ. I 
hesitated about writing for I felt that perhaps I ought 
not to intrude on your time, even for the few minutes 
that you will take to read these few lines, but I was 
assured by the dear brothers and sisters here in Boston 
that it would be all right, so I write these few lines to 
you at this time. I thank God, through his beloved 
Son every day for the true Gospel which has been revealed 
through the MILLENNIAL DAWN books, and I 
want to thank you, as the instrument in God's hands, 
for writing those books. I cannot tell you what they 



are to me, but when we "see face to face" you will 
know. I often wonder why his truth was made known 
to me, who am the least of all his children, as it seems 
to me, and while I realize that it increases my responsibility, 
yet that is not to be compared with the blessed 
privilege of knowing the true plan of God. 

I am a constant TOWER reader, though you will 
not find my name on the list of subscribers, for the reason 
that I am blind and cannot therefore read for myself, 
and I feel that I ought not to have the TOWERS 
sent to me and be able to make no use of them. They 
are far too precious for that. I have had three volumes 
of DAWN read to me, and am now having the fourth 
and fifth read. I have sent to Scotland to have the first 
volume copies in embossed type for my use. I have 
often wondered if there are any more blind people who 
know the true gospel. Do you know of any? 

Enclosed you will find a small Money Order which 
perhaps will help to send TOWERS or books to some of 
the Lord's poor. Yours faithfully, 

F. B. GOULD,-Massachusetts. 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR SIR:— Some one kindly sent me a copy of 
your paper of March 15 and April 1, 1900, the contents 
of which I have just read with more than ordinary interest, 
the matter of which is entirely new to me,— a 
revelation. Will you kindly supply me with some tracts 
that I may more fully know whereof you speak. I am 
truly interested. A great deal of the contents of the 
paper now before me I read to another professional gentleman, 
Dr. J. H. Jenkins, whose office is on the same 
floor with mine. He too is interested. 

Yours truly, W. H. WOODSON-Missouri. 



R2767 : page 64 

DEAR BROTHER IN JESUS CHRIST:-Your divine theology 
is certainly a helping hand to me. I hope, dear 
sir, that you will let me have many tracts and ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER for my religious education. I do certainly 
believe that the "little flock" will be an instrument 
by whom all the families of earth will be blessed; 
because all the churches are in a very poor situation 
and the world in great desolation [distress]. May God 
give me opportunity to know more about your divine 
mission. Come to my help and let me take the water 
abundantly in your publications. I am, dear sir, with 
much gratitude 

Very truly yours, 
J. R. VILATTE, Archbishop of the 

Orthodox Catholic Church, 



Canada. 



page 65 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. FEBRUARY 15, 1901. No. 4. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 67 

Men's Hearts Failing them for Fear 68 

Religious Federation in Unbelief 

and Works 69 

Resist, Stedfast in the Faith 70 

The Lord's Supper 72 

First Celebration of the Lord's Supper 74 

Primary Signification of the Bread 

and the Cup 75 

The Secondary and Deeper Signification 

of the Loaf and the Cup 75 

The Celebration in the Kingdom 76 

Gethsemane— Watching and Praying 77 

Items: One Day Conventions, etc 66 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



R2769 : page 66 



ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS AND ALLEGHENY MEETINGS. 

The Editor has accepted quite a number of invitations for 
one-day (Sunday) Conventions of late— at points which can be 
reached by railroad in one night's travel, permitting him to 
leave Allegheny Saturday night and to get back to his Editorial 
duties on Monday morning. One of these (D.V.) will be 
held at Canton, O., Feb. 10, one at Toledo, O., Feb. 17; another 
at Baltimore, Md., on Mar. 10. These are only local conventions 
usually attended by friends living within a radius of 50 miles. 

But some dear friends from neighboring towns who have 
come to Allegheny at such times have felt a little disappointment 
at not seeing "Brother Russell" as they expected. We 
therefore announce, that hereafter such one-day conventions 
will be arranged for on only the second and fourth Sundays of 
each month. Brother Russell may be expected to be at Allegheny 
on the first and third Sundays of each month, no preventing 
providence. 

VOLUNTEER WORK FOR 1901. 

Remarks respecting the new tract "Food for Thinking 
Christians," No. 52, are favorable: all of our readers seem to consider 
it well calculated to awaken interest wherever it may be 
read. We are getting ready large editions for the "Volunteer" 
service on Sundays near Protestant churches and hope to be 
ready to fill orders about April 1 . 

It is time now to prepare by choosing a "captain" and enlisting 
as many volunteers as may be able and willing to serve. 
Let your "captain" report to us the names of volunteers, the 
numbers of churches, the average attendance at these, and his 
estimate of the quantity of the booklets needed, and the addresses 
to which they are preferred to be sent. 



R2767 : page 67 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



NATURALLY enough at the opening of a new 

century thinking men inquire each other's 

views respecting the outlook. Naturally enough, too, 

hopes and fears chase each other through these imaginings, 

according to the temperaments of the thinkers 

and their experiences and their light. 

The child of God, with his Father's Word of revelation 
in his hand, surely has much advantage every 
way over others as he seeks to scan the horizon of the 
twentieth century. But alas! how few among the 
millions of Christendom are in this position scanning 
the future through the glass of divine revelation. The 
masses nominally assent to the wisdom of such a 



course, yet will not follow it, confessing themselves 
"babes" as respects the Bible,— "unskilful in the word 
of righteousness." (Heb. 5:11-14.) Such "babes," 
realizing their own inabilities, look to their teachers 
as to nurses, care-takers; and the latter, sad to relate, 
are fulfilling prophecy in turning away their ears from 
the truth unto fables,— evolution theories and higher 
criticism unbelief.— 2 Tim. 4:3,4. 

But the few, the very few, the Lord's "little 
flock," those who do trust the Lord and search his 
Word— the very class to whom our Lord declares, "To 
you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom" 
—the very class specified by the Apostle as 
"taught of God" and guided by his holy spirit to an 
understanding of his Word— these certainly have much 
advantage every way; notably as respects the Kingdom, 
but also in respect to the affairs of the present 
evil world.- 1 Cor. 2:6-16; Matt. 13:11. 

As this class faces toward the sunrise to note the 
world's prospects for the twentieth century, what a 
sun-burst meets their eye of faith peering with the aid 
of the divine glass— God's Word— through the clouds 
and mists! They see, just beyond the vail, the Lord 
of Glory ready to take possession of earth's empire, 
just as soon as the allotted "Times of the Gentiles" 
shall have run out! They see, with the same eye of 
faith, the Lord's jewels, his bride, his joint-heir in the 
Kingdom, mostly with him and waiting now while 
the remainder of the 144,000 finish their course and 
make their calling and election sure— passing one by 
one beyond the vail— changed in a moment, in the 
twinkling of an eye, to the glorious perfection of the 
First Resurrection, with its glory, honor and immortality, 
which eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man, but which, as 
the Apostle declares, God hath revealed unto us by 
his spirit. 

Then looking for the world's portion through the 
same inspired glass and with the same eye of faith 
they see still other wonders and glories. They see 
God's (spiritual) Kingdom about to be established in 
the earth: they see its wonderful provisions of heavenly 
love,— for justice, equity, righteousness and the 
resultant blessings of peace on earth, good-will toward 
men: they see the binding of Satan and every evil 
principle and thing: they see the release of earth's 
dead and dying millions from the curse to an opportunity 
then to be theirs to return to full heart-harmony 
with the Creator through their Redeemer: they 
see the channel of this favor to be Christ and that the 
knowledge of this grace of God is yet to fill the whole 
earth as the waters cover the great deep. 

Seeing these things their hearts rejoice and their 
faces are glad;— truly the holy anointing oil, the holy 
spirit and the blessed enlightenment which it brings 
them, is the oil of joy which replaces the spirit of 



heaviness. True, they see also the intervening trials 
of faith to themselves, and the sharp experiences which 
lie before them in the narrow way ere the goal is 

R2767 : page 68 

reached, and they see with even clearer distinctness 
than do the worldly-wise the great time of trouble 
coming upon nominal Christendom; but realizing all 
these things to be but incidentals preparing the way 
for the great blessing so soon to follow, they can and 
do lift up their heads and rejoice in the God of our 
salvation, saying— "Great and marvelous are thy 
works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy 
ways, thou King of saints." 

"What if the clouds do for a moment 

Hide the blue sky where morn appears? 
Soon the glad sun of promise given 
Rises to shine a thousand years!" 

But now let us contrast with the above bright 
prospect the fears and doubts which trouble the wisest 
of the "children of this world," because they see only 
with their own mental eyes and lack the hearing enlightenment 
of the Bible spy-glass. These views have 
been collated by the New York World, which sent out 
some time since to prominent people a query respecting 
their view of the greatest menace to twentieth 
century progress. Some of the replies are summarized 
as follows:— 

"I believe that ere the twentieth century closes, 
the earth will be purged of its foulest shame, the killing 
of men by men in battle under the name of war," 
says Andrew Carnegie. 

W. T. Stead declares that the chief menace to 
man's progress is "war, which threatens Christendom 
as the result of ignoring Christian principles in its 
dealings with one-fourth of the human race which is 
born inside a yellow skin." Sir Walter Besant fears 

R2768 : page 68 

especially the increasing naval armaments, designed 
"apparently for self-protection," but in reality for 
aggression; while Lord Charles Beresford regards "the 
Chinese question" with most apprehension. 

In many quarters the greatest menace is believed 
to be of a social rather than international nature. The 
Earl of Wemyss states it as his opinion that Socialism 
is blocking the march of human progress, and Arthur 
W. Pinero, the dramatist, attacks trades-unionism. 
Joseph Arch, the English labor leader, retaliates by 
declaring that "a large accumulation of wealth on the 
one hand, and a large increase of pauperism on the 
other" is the growing evil in society; and Samuel 
Gompers expresses fears for the lowering of the American 
standard of living, by Oriental competition. 



"The greatest political danger of the twentieth 
century is that the increasing influence of wealth will 
lead to increasing disregard of the inalienable rights 
of man," says William Jennings Bryan. President 
Schurman, of Cornell University, fears most the "exaltation, 
worship, and pursuit of money as the foremost 
good of life. The salt that may save us from 
this blight," he adds, "is to be found in our schools 
and churches; in every union for a righteous cause; 
and most of all, in the ideals and aspirations of the 
noble souls who will not suffer human society to degenerate 
into a mere brutish struggle for life and 
the survival of the fittest." President Hadley, of 
Yale University, finds the threat to the public welfare 
in "legislation based on the self-interest of individuals, 
or classes, instead of on public sentiment and 
public spirit." 

Among the ecclesiastics, emphasis is laid on the 
moral virtues. When questioned regarding coming 
dangers, the Bishop of Hereford replied, in the words 
of Col. 3:5: "Evil desires and covetousness." The 
Bishop of Llandaff answered: "Infidelity, anarchy." 
Cardinal Gibbons says that "the greatest dangers that 
now seem to confront us are political corruption and 
lust for gain and the unholy purposes to which it is 
perverted." 

"MEN'S HEARTS FAILING THEM FOR FEAR." 



"The view ten years ago showed a placid, smiling 
river; now we see the boiling rapids of a torrent plunging 
toward what abyss no one knows. War has followed 
war with swift succession.... What the next 
stroke will be, who can say?"— Springfield Republican. 
Lord Salisbury said of threatened wars:— 
"These wars come upon us absolutely unannounced 
and with terrible rapidity. The war cloud 
rises in the horizon with a rapidity that obviates all 
calculation, and, it may be, a month or two months 
after the first warning you receive, you find you are engaged 
in, or in prospect of a war on which your very 
existence is staked." 
Gen. N. A. Miles, after his European tour said:— 
"I have seen all the great armies of Europe except 
the Spanish army. What I have seen does not 
indicate that the millennium is at hand, when swords 
shall be beaten into plowshares." 
The late Bishop Newman gave his view thus:— 
"This is the most unsettled condition of the world 
since the crucifixion of Christ. The stability of government 
is no longer a fact. Change is in the atmosphere. 
It is just as true now as a thousand years ago, 
'Thou knowest not what a day will bring forth.'... 
Statesmen are at their wits' end. Philosophers speculate 



in vain. 

Archbishop Ireland, Roman Catholic, declares:— 

"The bonds of society are relaxed; traditional 
principles are losing their sacredness, and perils hitherto 
unknown are menacing the life of the social organism." 

Prof. Andrews, ex -president of Brown University, 
says:— 

"No well-informed person in Europe seems to believe 
that peace is destined to endure there very long. 
On all hands people are preparing for war. Armies 
and navies are strengthened; fortifications multiplied; 
immense war treasures of gold piled up; all possible 
hypothetical plans of campaign, offensive and defensive, 

R2768 : page 69 

studied and discussed; firearms, great and small, 
ceaselessly experimented upon and improved; civil 
measures subordinate to military, and statesmen to 
great army men and navy men." 
Signor Crispi, ex -prime minister of Italy, says:— 
"Europe resembles Spain from a certain point of 
view. Anarchy is dominant everywhere. To speak 
frankly, there is no Europe. The European concert 
is only a sinister joke. Nothing can be expected from 
the concert of the powers. We are marching toward 
the unknown. Who knows what tomorrow has in 
store for us?" 

All of these are right to some extent, for indeed 
and in truth the new King, Immanuel, will bring in 
an everlasting peace, but his reign will be ushered in 
by the political and social and ecclesiastical troubles, 
which Bishop Heresford properly ascribes to "evil desires 
and covetousness"— otherwise selfishness, which, 
as Bishop Llandaff declares, lead to anarchy. 

RELIGIOUS FEDERATION IN UNBELIEF AND WORKS. 



In Great Britain and in various quarters in the 
United States religious federation is making progress. 
These unions are for greater and more effective works 
of righteousness according to their own statements, and 
religious conviction, faith, is generally lost sight of— 
denominations of opposite faiths seeking rapprochement, 
—in growing unbelief as respects Bible doctrines. 
Note the following public affirmation of unbelief in 
the reliability of the Scriptures by Rev. Rainsford, 
D.D., of New York City, reported in the New York 
Journal. 

"In his sermon at St. George's Protestant Episcopal 
Church, Rev. Dr. W. S. Rainsford said that the 
teachings of Jesus Christ in regard to his second coming 
had been grossly misunderstood by the Apostles; 
that they had incorporated their mistakes into the New 



Testament; that the Church had been grossly misled; 
and that the Prayer Book's teachings had been largely 
influenced by a handling of the Bible which did not 
discriminate between the spiritual teachings of Jesus 
and the concepts of men. 

"The preacher's thesis was that the Kingdom of 
God was not a world power at all, but a spiritual 
kingdom in all men's hearts, which could never be established 
by force, but could be wrought only by the 
persuasion of truth. Dr. Rainsford said that the 
prophecies of the destruction of Jerusalem, in the Gospel 
of St. Mark, had been understood to include the 
promise that the Lord would come again within the 
generation of the Apostles. When he did not come, 
St. Jude attempted to explain the apparent failure of 
the prophecy by saying that one day was with the 
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as 
one day. 

'"A delightful theological subterfuge,' remarked 
the preacher; 'a complete twisting of the meaning of 
Jesus. There is no terrible judgment ahead, no physically 
burning hell. Judgment is a process here and 
now; salvation is a process here and now. There is 
no standing before an awful throne and the separation 
of impossible sheep and goats; but the separation is 
here and now, as men go on up or slip down into the 
bog and mire.'" 

Here we have one of the nominal church's great 
men, one of its "princes," doing his best to undermine 
the faith of the people who pay him a princely salary 
to help them to see and follow the Lord's paths. Nor 
must we condemn the man as a hypocrite, for doubtless 
it is but another case of the blind leading the blind 
into the ditch. This learned man has possibly not 
yet learned that it was not Jude who wrote the words 
to which he objects, but Peter. (2 Peter 3:8.) He 
perhaps has not noted, either, that the same holy spirit 
indited the same lesson through the Prophet David 
centuries before Peter's day, saying, "A thousand 
years in thy sight are but as yesterday." (Psa. 90:4.) 
The expression was so used by the Lord himself also. 
-Gen. 2:17. 

However, Dr. Rainsford is only following the 
logical course of all "higher critics," who, starting 
out with too much egotism, find fault not only with 
all of the Old Testament but also with the New— confounding 
both prophets and apostles by their superior 
wisdom, and classing our Lord with these because he 
quoted those very prophecies which the superior wisdom 
of the higher critics show to be spurious, while 
our Lord, lacking their wisdom, thought these to be 
genuine prophecies and quoted them as such. Truly, 
as the Prophet Isaiah foretold, the wisdom of their 
wise men is perished.— Isa. 29:13,14,9-12. 

A PLAIN STATEMENT OF THE CASE. 



The Rev. M. O. Simons, a Cleveland minister, is 
reported by the Plain Dealer to have summed up present 
conditions in Christendom as follows:— 

"Rev. Simons referred to some of the old battle 
fields in this warfare of ideas, and indicated how recent 
have been the great changes in religious thinking, 
by referring to the fact that only in 1876 Dr. Minot 
J. Savage preached a series of sermons on "The Religion 
of Evolution." So far as known, he was the 
first minister in Europe and America in the regular 
course of pulpit work to frankly accept evolution and 
to frankly attempt a reconstruction of religious thinking. 
'And it is hard for us to realize now,' said Mr. 
Simons, 'the hue and cry that was raised over these 
sermons. Where are we now in this conflict between 
the old and the new? I believe we are on the verge 
of a frank confession that there must be a complete 
religious reconstruction. The old system of Christian 
doctrine rested upon the fall of man as a foundation. 
But now modern thought has utterly discredited this 
story of the fall and the subsequent depravity of all 
human nature. What then becomes of the system 
that is built upon it?' 

"Mr. Simons then referred briefly to some of the 

R2769 : page 70 

great Christian bodies to show how every one of them 
is yielding to the broader and more liberal interpretation 
of Christian doctrine. He said: 'Officially, the Catholic 
Church stands squarely opposed to all modern 
tendencies, and yet its people cannot be prevented from 
thinking. We find much unrest among Catholic leaders, 
much suspicion in European Catholicism of American 
Catholicism. The Catholic Church has its radical 
wing as truly as any Christian denomination. In 
the Church of England we find reactionary tendencies, 
but these simply indicate that the conservative element 
has turned to the only things left to it, the traditional 
value of church machinery and apostolic succession. 
That reaction does not represent the whole church. 
Some of the most enlightened scholars in the world 
are in that church; the great liberal interpretation of 
all doctrinal points is winning its way and the future 
of the English church is in the hands of those who 
are rebuilding their religious thought on new 
foundations. 

"I may say much the same of the Episcopal 
Church in America. It has its conservative reactions, 
but the growing sentiment in the church is broad and 
liberal. I have friends in its ministry who are as liberal 
as I am. In the Congregational Church there is 
going on a rapid reconstruction of religious thought. 



A book like Dr. Gordon's 'The Christ of Today' is 
proof of this, not only because of its ideas, but because 
it did not convulse the whole Congregational body as 
it once would have done. 

"In the great Presbyterian Church there is a 
great rising tide of liberal thinking. The movement 
for revision of the Westminster Confession, or for some 
relief from the outgrown ideas of that document, is 
plain evidence. 

"In all the great Christian denominations the 
conservatives who would keep fighting the church 
upon its old foundations, are fighting a losing battle. 
The advance of liberal thought is irresistible." 

We quote the above to prove the reverse of what 
the speaker intended— to prove the great falling away 
from the truth to vanity and fables and from vital godliness 
to moralizing infidelity. However, the wider 
the chasm grows between the "wheat" and the 
"tares," between the children of light and the children 
of darkness, the easier it will be for each to know 
his place, and by taking it he will make the division 
the more quick and complete. Who is on the Lord's 
side? Who?— Speak and live accordingly! 



R2769 : page 70 

"RESIST, STEDFAST IN THE FAITH. 



"Be sober, be vigilant; because your Adversary, the devil, as a roaring 
lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist, stedfast 
in the faith. "-1 Pet. 5:8,9. 

THE SCRIPTURES set before us the thought that 
as Christians we are subject to assaults from 
three different quarters, by three different enemies, 
who, nevertheless, frequently cooperate the one with 
the other;— the world, the flesh and the devil. We 
are not to suppose that every difficulty and trial which 
besets us is of the devil; but rather to remember the 
Apostle's words, "A man is tempted when he is led 
astray of his own desires and enticed." (James 1:13,14.) 
Such temptations, then, are of the flesh— the 
result of our being members of the fallen race, whose 
weaknesses and imperfections have been aggravated 
and intensified for now six thousand years. So, then, 
we are to recognize as one of our chief foes our own 
inherent weaknesses and predisposition to things depraved, 
selfish, sinful. 

The whole world, thus depraved and under the 
control of the spirit of selfishness, is largely, tho unconsciously, 
the tool of Satan, who now worketh in 
the hearts of the children of disobedience. (Eph. 2:2.) 



The world has become an enemy and tempter by reason 

of the fact that we (the Church) have been "begotten 

again" to new hopes, new ambitions, new aspirations, 

new desires, which are along radically different 

lines from any the world knows or has sympathy 

with. Our begetting is of the holy spirit, and its tendencies 

are heavenly and spiritual, and in harmony 

with principles of righteousness, truth and love. Yet 

it is only our hearts that are thus changed— our flesh 

is still much more in harmony with the world than 

with the new order of things established in our hearts 

and wills by grace and truth, through Christ. Consequently, 

when the world, through any of its children, 

by their words or writings or general spirit, 

comes in contact with the Lord's people, immediately 

they find that altho their hearts are loyal to the Lord 

and loyal to all the gracious things which he has promised 

them, and to the spirit of righteousness, love and 

truth, nevertheless their flesh has an affinity for and 

an attraction toward the world, its things, its views, 

its arguments, its pleasures, etc. 

It is for this reason that the Christian is called 
upon to reckon himself dead, not only to sin, but to 
his own natural desires, appetites, inclinations, and to 
the world, which is in harmony with sin and perverted 
tastes and appetites. As the Apostle intimates, there 
is a constant battle between the new creature, the new 
will, and the old creature, the fleshly or depraved 
disposition. He says, "The flesh desires contrary to 
the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the flesh." (Gal. 5:17.) 
And even tho the advanced Christian has 
reached the place where he is enabled to reckon his 
flesh and its will completely dead and buried, he nevertheless 
has need continually, with the Apostle, to reexamine 
the matter, lest the flesh should become 
alive again. This was the Apostle's method; he says: 

R2769 : page 71 

"I keep my body under [dead, buried, in complete 
subjection to the new mind], lest having preached to 
others I myself should be a castaway." (1 Cor. 9:27.) 
This keeping of the body under, this watching of it 
lest its will become alive again, is a constant necessity 
to those who would be "overcomers;" for it is the 
victory of the new mind, the new will, over the old 
will, the will of the flesh, that constitutes us victors, 
by developing in us strong, holy characters. 

And now we come to the third feature of the 
Christian's temptations— Satan, our Adversary; strong 
and lion-like, vigilant and fully awake, he seeks to 
use every opportunity against us, as the Apostle declares. 
He seeks to devour us, to swallow us up in 
calamity, patiently waiting and insidiously laying 
snares for the "new creatures," using his many blinded 
servants to brow-beat or cajole or otherwise inveigle 



us into yielding to the old will;— thus separating us 
from the Good Shepherd and making us more and 
more deaf to his Word. Since our Lord sees best to 
permit Satan to have this liberty, and will not take 
it from him until the beginning of the Millennial age, 
when he shall be bound, to deceive the nations no 
more, it implies that in some sense it is profitable to 
the Lord's people that this Adversary be granted liberty 
against them. If it were not so, faith assures us that 
he would be bound forthwith,— at once restrained of 
liberty to assault us. 

R2770 : page 71 

Writing on this same subject, the Apostle Paul 
declares, "We are not ignorant of his devices." Again 
he refers to the "wiles of the devil;" implying that 
he is an ensnarer who seeks to entrap us. Again he 
declares, "For we wrestle not with flesh and blood 
[merely], but [our chief conflict is] with principalities 
and powers [unseen], with wicked spirits in exalted 
positions." (2 Cor. 2:11; Eph. 6:11,12.) The Apostle 
here seems to call attention to the fact that not 
Satan alone, but all the fallen angels, the demons, his 
coadjutors, are the foes of the Church, against whose 
wiles and schemes and plottings, more subtle than 
that of human beings, the Lord's people must be continually 
on the lookout. 

As to Satan's methods of attack, we are given 
some suggestions also. Altho he is alert, like the 
roaring lion, he never attacks us with a roar, but, on 
the contrary, subtly; he creeps upon us in an unlooked 
for place and at unlooked for times, to devour 
us, to overcome us, to crush out of us the spiritual life, 
and particularly to deprive us of faith in the Lord. 

The Apostle Paul shows us that these subtle approaches 
of the Adversary are to be expected through 
human agencies, assuring us that the Adversary worketh 
in the hearts of the children of disobedience, and 
the better and more honorable and more closely identified 
with the Lord and his flock these children of 
disobedience may be, the more pleased the Adversary 
will be to use them, and the more service they may 
render him. Thus the Apostle declares that Satan 
presents himself in his temptations as an angel, a messenger 
of God— not a messenger of darkness, of error 
and of gross sin, for he knows that these qualities 
would alarm and repel all the children of the light: 
rather he appears as an angel of light, a messenger of 
divine grace and truth. And we are not ignorant of 
his wiles and devices; we see that for centuries he has 
used not only heathen religious systems to delude and 
ensnare the heathen, but Christian religious systems, 
to deceive and ensnare God's people. At the making 
of the creeds of Christendom, during the dark ages, 
we may be sure that he was present, and that through 



various agencies he took an active part in framing 
their many blasphemous misstatements of the divine 
character and plan, and of deluding the people into 
thinking that these were the teachings of the divine 
Word; and so through these channels he has wrought 
great havoc with the truth and greatly hindered God's 
people from receiving both the milk of the Word, and 
its strong meat, and from growing by these means to 
the stature of the fulness of manhood in Christ. 

We see again that after he could no longer control 
the world under Papacy and its darkness of error, 
when he perceived that the light of a clearer knowledge 
of divine things was breaking out here and there, he 
zealously presented himself as a messenger of light, 
to help on in the formation of the various sects and 
parties which then sprang up. How well he succeeded 
in getting into them all the leaven of false doctrine, 
and in getting each denomination, after having organized, 
to declare that it had the whole truth, and 
that there must be no further progress in the knowledge 
of the Lord and in the understanding of his 
Word, all may judge. 

Coming down to our own day, we see that as the 
light of truth became due, and when the minds of all 
thinking Christians were surely awakening from many 
of the superstitions and fallacies of the past, Satan 
again becomes the leader and reformer, and starting 
in with the principal colleges and theological seminaries, 
he leads them, professedly in a search for truth, 
into the gross darkness of skepticism, under the names 
of Higher Criticism and Evolution; and through these 
fountains of learning and instruction his influence is 
permeating Christendom through the ministry, in all 
denominations and in every quarter of the civilized 
world. 

But, foreseeing that all minds would not be influenced 
along the same lines, our wily adversary has 
been leading other parties into other doctrines along 

R2770 : page 72 

other lines, all of which, however, have the Satan 
mark upon them; viz., either a tacit or an active denial 
of the Ransom— a denial of the redemption accomplished 
once for all by the man Christ Jesus at Calvary, 
and a denial, consequently, of all the gracious things 
which the Scriptures declare respecting the establishment 
of Christ's Kingdom and the blessing of all the 
world of mankind with a knowledge of the truth, and 
with opportunities of restitution to Edenic conditions 
and harmony with God and everlasting love. 

These various devices of the Adversary in recent 
times are well known. Mormonism is one of these 
that attracts and ensnares a certain class; Spiritualism 
is another which attracts and ensnares another class 
of minds; Christian Science is another, very distinctive 



and totally different from the others; Theosophy is 
still another that has its attractions for other minds. 
In testing all the "new light" theories let us not forget 
that the Cross of Christ and the redemption thereby 
accomplished are the central point of antagonism 
between all these spurious theories, and the doctrine 
of the Scriptures. "The faith once delivered to the 
saints" has as its foundation, "how that Christ died 
for our sins and rose for our justification." However 
much Satan's various systems of delusion may differ 
from one another, they all agree in opposing this central 
point of the truth; and however they may seek 
to use the name of Christ, call themselves Christians, 
and seek to cover themselves with that "holy name" 
as a garment of light, it is only to deceive; it is in 
full accord with the policy which our great Adversary 
has employed for centuries. 

One of the most recent of Satan's devices to ensnare 
those of God's people who could not be misled 
by something presenting itself as another religion and 
another gospel, is what claims to be a Christianity of 
good works and good morals without respect to faith 
in things past or future. The good works are usually 
presented in the form of healing of disease. The 
methods employed, and the claims set forth vary considerably, 
yet back of and underneath all is an occult 
power, a hypnotic power, which, however much it 
claims to be "merely human power," nevertheless 
gives evidence in various ways that it is a part of the 
great deception of our day, wrought by the Adversary 
himself as an angel of light, and respecting which the 
Scriptures forewarn us that there would be such strong 
delusions, which, if possible, would deceive the very 
elect. --Matt. 24:24. 

If the very elect will be in danger, what must we 
expect respecting the world of mankind in general, 
and nominal Christianity? We must expect, as the 
Scriptures forcefully picture it, that many will "fall 
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and 
doctrines of devils." We must expect the number 
thus to fall from the faith to be large, as again it is 
prophetically stated, "A thousand shall fall at thy 
side; ten thousand at thy right hand— but it shall not 
come nigh thee, ...because thou hast made the 
Lord, which is my refuge, even the Most High, thy 
habitation. "-1 Tim. 4:1; Psa. 91:7-9. 

This gives us a clue to the security of the saints. 
Their strength will lie in great part in that they are 
taking heed to the warnings of the Apostle respecting 
the present time, and hence know how to beware of 
the wiles of the Adversary. The "very elect" will 
be so in harmony with the Lord and so filled with the 
spirit of his Word, and so blessed by the exercise of 
their privileges as under-reapers in this harvest, and 
so disposed to lay down their lives for the truth and 
in its service, that none of these snares and delusions 



of the Adversary, promising life and health, will be 
special attractions for them. On the contrary, knowing 
what to expect, and looking forward with joy to 
the finishing of their course in death and thus passing 
"beyond the vail," they will be wholly out of sympathy 
with the snares which the Adversary will present. 
Nevertheless, as the Apostle intimates, there 
will be in this time also some of the Lord's people 
who will require the sympathy and assistance of others, 
respecting whom he says that we should seek to pull 
them out of the fire,— away from the influence and 
snares of the Adversary.— Jude 22,23. 

The Apostle Peter's counsel respecting the way 
in which the Lord's people should meet the Adversary 
implies that they will all somehow or other be 
enabled to recognize him. He says, "Whom resist, 
stedfast in the faith." These words imply that in 
order to resist we must have the faith— the faith that 
has confidence in God; the faith that has led to a consecration 
on the Lord's altar, even unto death; the 
faith that would not take back the sacrifice under any 
consideration, but which delights to see it consuming, 
and which rejoices, hoping thereby to share in the 
glory that shall follow.— Jude 3; Rom. 8:17,18. 



R2771 : page 72 

THE LORD'S SUPPER. 

-MATT. 26:17-30.-FEB. 17.- 

"This do in remembrance of me."— Luke 22:19. 

VARIOUS ARE the theories throughout Christendom 
respecting the Lord's Supper— its meaning 
and the proper time for its observance. Most Christian 
scholars recognize the fact that it was instituted as the 
antitype of the Jewish Passover. Amongst the older 
churches, Roman and Greek Catholic, Episcopal, etc., 
there is an attempt made to celebrate our Lord's death 
as a memorial on its annual recurrence. Originally the 
celebration was according to Jewish calculations, on the 
fourteenth day of the first Jewish month, Nisan— the 
day on which the Jews kill the typical Passover lamb. 
Subsequently, however, a change in the method of calculation 
was made so as to commemorate our Lord's 
death on the nearest Friday and his resurrection on the 
Sunday— Good Friday and Easter Sunday. With the 
younger denominations of Christendom this custom has 
generally fallen into disuse, probably with a desire to 
put as much difference as possible between Protestant 

R2771 : page 73 



customs and ceremonies, and those of Catholics. As a 
consequence of this we find that the majority of Protestants 
fail to associate the Lord's Supper with the 
Jewish Passover, and fail to appreciate the fact that the 
death of the Jewish lamb celebrated annually on the 
fourteenth of Nisan typified the death of our Lord Jesus 
on the same date, the latter being the antitype, the fulfilment 
of the type. 

Nor are they wholly without excuse in this oversight, 
for we are to remember that while the older 
churches celebrate our Lord's death upon its anniversary, 
they introduced other ceremonies resembling the 
Memorial, but not authorized in the Scriptures, nor in 
anything pertaining to the type. For instance, to the 
average Catholic mind, as well as to the Protestant, the 
Catholic Mass is merely a commemoration of our Lord's 
death; but this is not its true significance. The Mass, 
rightly understood, from a theological standpoint, is a 
fresh sacrifice, and not merely a commemoration of the 
one sacrifice at Calvary. Protestants, misinterpreting 
it to be a repetition of the Lord's Supper, have come 
to believe that from the earliest times the Memorial 
Supper was celebrated at any convenient season. Hence 
we find among Protestants a variety of views on the 
subject, some partaking of it weekly, others monthly, 
and others quarterly, as each esteems to be the most 
desirable, most profitable. 

We hold that no such irregularity was ever intended 
by the Lord or by the apostles— that our Lord 
instituted it at the particular time, on the particular 
day of the year, that was proper; and that the words, 
"As oft as ye do this" had reference, not only to the 
bread and the cup, but also the time,— the general incident 
commemorated. We will not here attempt to go 
into detailed expose respecting the Roman Catholic 
doctrine of the Mass, but merely refer our readers to 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., pages 98-104, remarking 
incidentally that to the informed Catholic, Greek or 
Roman, the Mass is in no sense of the word a commemoration 
of the original sacrifice of Christ. The claim is 
that the first sacrifice of Christ was sufficient for sins 
that are past, but not for subsequent sins, and that God 
has given authority to the properly ordained bishops 
and priests to representatively create Christ afresh on 
any occasion, and then to sacrifice him afresh for any 
special sin or sins— High Mass for particular sins of an 
individual, Low Mass for general sins of a congregation. 

The claim of Catholicism is that the blessing of the 
priest transforms the ordinary wafer and wine into the 
actual body and blood of Christ, who is thus re-created 
thousands on thousands of times every year, by thousands 
of priests, and re-sacrificed for thousands and 
thousands of sins. We, of course, object to all this as 
being thoroughly anti-christian, and the majority of orthodox 
Protestants will give their cordial assent. Nevertheless, 
those who organized new Protestant denominations 



seem to have entirely overlooked this matter when 

they use this frequency of the Mass in the older churches 

as an excuse for a frequency of commemoration of the 

Lord's Supper. However, the majority of Protestants 

seem to have been well aware that great frequency of 

observance (as in the Mass) would be unwise, unprofitable; 

and hence the majority commemorate only three 

or four times a year, believing the service to be thereby 

rendered more impressive and solemn to all who participate. 

We hold that the original method, of celebrating 

our Lord's death on its anniversary, is still more 

solemn, still more impressive; besides which it has the 

sanction of the Scriptures, which we claim no other 

method has. 

OTHER MISCONCEPTIONS, BASED UPON SCRIPTURE. 



Our so-called "Disciple" and "Plymouth Brethren" 
friends and others who have adopted the custom 
of celebrating our Lord's death every Lord's Day— on 
the first day of the week— seem to us to have fallen 
into a serious blunder. The inappropriateness of such 
celebrations is manifest in several ways: first they celebrate 
it on Sunday, which is itself the memorial of our 
Lord's resurrection, a totally different thing— a joyous 
Easter occasion. And losing sight of the importance of 
the date, it is not remarkable that they have likewise 
lost sight of the proprieties respecting the time of the 
day— that as originally instituted it was partaken of at 
night, whereas the usual custom is to commemorate in 
the morning or in the afternoon. 

We are not to suppose that these Christian friends 
adopted their weekly custom without any reason whatever; 
but noticing the reasons they give we find them 
quite insufficient. It is their claim, for instance, that 
the statements of Acts 2:42,46; 20:7, which speak of 
the disciples coming together on the first day of the 
week "to break bread," refer to the Memorial Supper. 
To the contrary, we hold that these first-day-of-the 
week gatherings were Love-feasts, and never intended 
to take the place of nor in any sense to represent our 
Lord's Memorial Supper. It will be noticed that in 
these various accounts nothing whatever is said of "the 
cup," representing our Lord's blood, and which must 
be considered as important a part of the symbol as the 
unleavened bread, which represented his body. The 
Love-feasts appropriately took place on the day which 
celebrates the Church's joy in her Lord's resurrection, 
and no doubt were all suggested by the circumstances 
of the first Sunday,— the day of our Lord's resurrection, 
on which occasion he was known to the two at Emmaus 
in the breaking of bread, and later in the evening to 
the eleven as they sat at meat, saying, "Peace be unto 



R2771 : page 74 

you," and causing their hearts to burn within them. 

(Luke 24:30,31; John 20:19.) Our Lord's Supper, 

on the contrary, was evidently intended to be a reminder 

of his death and of our covenant as members 

of his body to have fellowship in his sufferings. 

THE FIRST CELEBRATION OF THE LORD'S SUPPER. 



Our lesson points us to the first institution of this 
memorial, indicating that it was celebrated on the day 
before the Passover proper began,— on the fourteenth 
day of Nisan. The Law respecting the Passover was 
very exact. The lamb was to be taken into the house 
on the tenth day of Nisan, was to be killed on the fourteenth, 
and was to be eaten during the night before the 
dawn of the fifteenth. In the antitype Jesus offered 
himself to the nation on the tenth, but they, except his 
faithful few, neglected to receive him, and on the fourteenth 
he was crucified. It was in the same Jewish 
day in which he was crucified that he ate the Passover 
mentioned in our lesson, and later on he was betrayed. 
(The day with the Jew began at sundown and lasted 
until the next evening.) There can be no doubt from 
the account that our Lord and his disciples ate the 
Passover Supper on the day preceding the one on which 
the Jews in general ate it; for in John's Gospel we 
read (18:28; 19:14) that when our Lord was before 
Pilate in the Judgment Hall, which was after he had 
eaten the Passover, the Pharisees, his accusers, had not 
yet eaten it— nor would they eat it until the evening 
after his crucifixion. 

One Evangelist records that our Lord said to his 
disciples, "With desire have I desired to eat this Passover 
with you before I suffer." It was his last commemoration 
of the Jewish rite, which as a Jew he was 
bound to observe legally, fully. We may not know 
positively the particular hour of the fourteenth day at 
which our Lord and the disciples partook of the Passover, 
but probably it was near midnight, when after 
the Passover had been eaten our Lord instituted the 
new memorial of his own death, the Lord's Supper, 
substituting it for the Passover supper of the Law, and 
intimating this in his words, "Henceforth, as oft as ye 
do this do it in remembrance of me." "This" represented 
the antitypical Lamb, "the Lamb of God, which 
taketh away the sin of the world," and doing this— 
breaking the bread and drinking of the fruit of the 
vine— showed forth our Lord's death and not any longer 
the death of the type, because the antitype had now 
come, and in this same day, a few hours later, he would 
be killed, crucified. Our Lord was thus laying a deep 
and broad basis for the new institution, his Church, 



and separating it from the Jewish type by pointing out 
to the believers himself as the antitype, and the higher 
meaning connected therewith— the deliverance of all 
true Israelites, not from Pharaoh, but from Pharaoh's 
antitype, Satan, the deliverance of all the first-born of 
God's people from death into life more abundant- 
eternal life. 

All who see clearly the type should realize that it 
could never pass away until its antitype had come, and 
the antitype of the killing of the Passover lamb must 
occur on its anniversary, the fourteenth day of Nisan. 
Hence the significance of the Scriptural statement that 
"they could not take him because his hour was not yet 
come." (John 7:30; 8:20.) God had foreseen the entire 
matter, and had forearranged everything pertaining 

R2772 : page 74 

to it, and the type had marked it most definitely. We 

no longer celebrate the type, but believing that the 

antitypical sacrifice of the Lamb of God has taken the 

place of the type, we as Christians "do this" in remembrance 

of the antitype; for, as the Apostle says, 

"Even Christ our Passover [Lamb] is slain; therefore 

let us keep the feast."— 1 Cor. 5:7,8. 

It was while the Lord and his apostles were eating 
the Passover Supper, the typical roast lamb, that our 
Lord said to them, "One of you shall betray me." 
John tells us that our Lord was "troubled in spirit," 
manifested emotion, at the time he said this. His 
emotion was not caused, we may be sure, by the matter 
of his betrayal, for he evidently foreknew the particulars 
as well as the fact of his death. The cause of 
his sorrow, we may reasonably suppose, was the thought 
that one of those whom he had so tenderly kept and 
cared for should now prove so ungrateful, unthankful, 
unholy;— evidently his sorrow was for Judas. His 
statement drew forth from the disciples inquiries, "Lord, 
is it I?" Or rather, as the Greek word would seem to 
indicate, the question signified, Lord, do you mean to 
accuse me? I am not the one, am I? And the disciples 
in general were sorrowful too. It was well, perhaps, 
that they should pass through this experience at this 
time, as they evidently needed it all, in order to prepare 
them for the trying times just before them. 

Judas, of course, asked the same question with 
the rest, for not to have asked it would have implied 
that he admitted his guilt. Our Lord's answer was 
that it was one who supped with them, and dipping 
the sop he gave it to Judas, who forthwith went out. 
(John 13:25-30.) So far from these incidents melting 
the heart of Judas and leading him to change his course 
before it was too late, they seem to have aroused in 
him a malevolent spirit, just as divine mercy toward 
Pharaoh, in the stopping of the plagues, hardened his 
heart. Instead of resisting the Adversary's suggestions 



Judas entertained them more and more, until he was 

filled with the Satanic spirit, "Satan entered into him" 

fully, completely— took possession of his heart as an instrument 

of evil, and it was doubtless because he felt 

out of place in such society that he went out. 

R2772 : page 75 

It thus seems probable that Judas was not with 
the others when our Lord washed their feet, and subsequently 
instituted with the bread and the fruit of the 
vine the memorial of his death. It was better that he 
should be absent; and so it would be preferable, where 
possible, that only the true, loyal, devoted disciples of 
Christ should meet together to celebrate his death on 
its anniversary. Nevertheless, let us remember that 
we are not competent to judge the heart, and hence in 
coming to the memorial table all should be invited to 
come who trust in the precious blood of Christ for redemption 
and who profess a full consecration to the 
Lord. Let us leave it to divine providence to scrutinize 
those who profess to be fellow-disciples. 

PRIMARY SIGNIFICATION OF THE BREAD AND THE CUP. 



In presenting to the disciples the unleavened bread, 
as a memorial, our Lord gave a general explanation, 
saying, "Take, eat; this is my body." The evident 
meaning of the words is, This symbolizes or represents 
my body. It was not actually his body, because in no 
sense of the word had his body yet been broken; in no 
sense would it have been possible for any to have partaken 
of him actually or antitypically then, the sacrifice 
not being as yet finished. But the picture is complete 
when we recognize that the unleavened bread represented 
our Lord's sinless flesh,— leaven being a symbol 
of sin under the Law, and specially commanded to be 
put away at this time. On another occasion our Lord 
gave a lesson which interprets to us this symbol. He 
said, "The bread of God is he that came down from 
heaven and giveth his life unto the world. I am the 
bread of life."— John 6:33,35. 

In order to appreciate how we are to eat or appropriate 
this living bread it is necessary for us to understand 
just what it was. According to our Lord's explanation 
of the matter it was his flesh which he sacrificed 
for us. It was not his prehuman existence as a spirit 
being that was sacrificed, altho that was laid down and 
its glory laid aside, that he might take our human 
nature. It was the fact that our Lord Jesus was holy, 
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and without 
any contamination from father Adam, and hence 
free from sin— it was this fact that permitted him to be 
the Redeemer of Adam and his race,— which permitted 



him to give his life a ransom for all, to be testified in 

due time. And when we see that it was the pure, 

spotless human nature of our Lord Jesus that was laid 

down on behalf of sinners, sacrificed for us, we see what 

it is that we are privileged to appropriate. The very 

thing which he laid down for us we are to "eat," appropriate 

to ourselves: that is to say, his perfect human 

nature was given for us and redeemed Adam and all 

his race from condemnation to death,— to a right to 

return to human perfection and everlasting life if they 

could. The Scriptures show us, however, that if God 

would consider all of past sins cancelled and should 

recognize us as having a right to return to human perfection, 

this still would not make us perfect nor give 

us therefore the right to everlasting life. In order for 

the race of Adam to profit by the redemption accomplished 

by our Lord's sacrifice it is necessary that he 

should make a second advent, and then be to the whole 

world a Mediator, Prophet, Priest and King, to assist 

back to perfection and to harmony with God all who 

will avail themselves of the privileges then to be offered. 

It is this same blessing which the Gospel Church 
in this age receives by faith from the Redeemer; viz., 
justification by faith— not justification to a spiritual 
nature, which we never had and never lost, and which 
Christ did not redeem; but justification to human nature, 
which father Adam did possess and lose, and 
which Christ did redeem by giving his own sinless flesh 
as our ransom-sacrifice. The partaking of the bread, 
then, means to us primarily acceptance and appropriation 
to ourselves, by faith, of justification to human 
rights and privileges secured by our Lord's sacrifice 
of these. 

Likewise the fruit of the vine symbolized our Lord's 
life given for us,— his human life, his being, his soul, 
poured out unto death on our behalf; and the appropriating 
of this by us signifies primarily our acceptance 
of restitution rights and privileges which the Lord has 
thus, at his own cost, secured for us. 

THE SECONDARY AND DEEPER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE 
LOAF AND THE CUP. 



As we have already seen, God's object in justifying 
by faith the Church during this Gospel age in advance 
of the justification of the world through works of obedience, 
in the Millennial age, is for the very purpose 
of permitting those who now see and hear and appreciate 
the great sacrifice which Love has made on our 
behalf, to present their bodies living sacrifices, and thus 
to have part with our Lord in his sacrifice— as members 
of his body. This additional and deep meaning of the 
memorial our Lord did not refer to directly. It was 
doubtless one of the things to which he referred, saying, 



"I have many things to tell you, but ye cannot 
bear them now; howbeit, when he, the spirit of truth, 
is come, he will guide you into all truth, and show you 
things to come." 

The spirit of truth, speaking through the Apostle 
Paul, clearly explains the matter of this secondary and 
very high import of the memorial, for he says, writing 
to the consecrated Church: "The cup of blessing which 
we bless, is it not the participation of the blood of Christ? 
The bread which we break, is it not the participation 

R2772 : page 76 

of the body of Christ?"— to share with Christ as joint-sacrificers 

even unto death, that thereby they may be 

counted in with him also as sharers of the glory which 

he has received as a reward for his faithfulness. "For 

we being many are one loaf and one body." (1 Cor. 10:16,17.) 

Both views of this impressive ordinance 

are important: it is necessary that we should see, first 

of all, our justification through the Lord's sacrifice. 

It is proper then, that we should realize that the entire 

Christ is, from the divine standpoint, a composite body 

of many members, of which Jesus is the Head, and 

that this Church as a whole must be broken, and that 

in this respect each member of it must be a copy of the 

Lord Jesus and must walk in the footsteps of his sacrifice. 

We do this by giving our lives, "laying down 

our lives on behalf of the brethren," as Christ laid down 

his life for all. It is not our spiritual life that we lay 

down, even as it was not our Lord's spiritual life that 

he laid down in sacrifice; but as he sacrificed his actually 

perfect being, so we must sacrifice our justified selves, 

reckoned perfect but not actually so. Likewise the cup 

represents suffering. It is one cup, tho it be the juice 

of many grapes, even as it is one loaf, tho it be from 

many grains. The grains cannot maintain their individuality 

and their own life if they would become bread 

for others; the grapes cannot maintain themselves as 

grapes if they would constitute the life-giving spirit; 

and thus we see the beauty of the Apostle's statement, 

that the Lord's people are participants in the one loaf 

and one cup. 

Our Lord distinctly declares that the cup, the fruit 
of the vine (nowhere is this cup described as wine, tho 
it may have been) represents blood, hence life; not life 
retained, but life shed or given, yielded up, sacrificed 
life. He tells us that it was for the remission of sins, 
and that all who would be his must drink of it,— must 
accept his sacrifice and appropriate it by faith. All 
who would be justified through faith must accept life 
from this one source. It will not do to claim an immortality 
outside of Christ; it will not do to declare 
that life is the result of obedience to the Law; it will 
not do to claim that faith in and obedience to any great 
teacher will amount to the same thing, and bring eternal 



life. There is no other way to attain eternal life 
except through accepting the blood once shed as the 

R2773 : page 76 

ransom price for the sins of the whole world. There 
is no other name given under heaven or amongst men 
whereby we must be saved. Likewise there is no other 
way that we can attain to the new nature than by accepting 
the Lord's invitation to drink of his cup, and 
be broken with him as members of the one loaf, and to 
be buried with him in baptism into his death, and thus 
to be with him in his resurrection to glory, honor and 
immortality.— Rom. 6:3-5; 8:17. 

THE CELEBRATION IN THE KINGDOM. 



As usual our Lord had something to say about the 
Kingdom. It seems to have been associated in his 
every discourse; and so on this occasion he reminds 
those to whom he had already given the promise to 
share in the Kingdom if faithful, of his declaration that 
he would go away to receive a Kingdom and to come 
again to receive them to share it. He now adds that 
this memorial which he instituted would find its fulfilment 
in the Kingdom. Just what our Lord meant 
by this might be difficult to positively determine, but 
it seems not inconsistent to understand him to mean 
that as a result of the trials and sufferings symbolized 
there will be a jubilation in the Kingdom. "He will 
see of the travail of his soul and be satisfied." He will 
look back over trials and difficulties endured in faithful 
obedience to the Father's will, and will rejoice in these 
as he shall see the grand outcome in the Kingdom 
blessings which will come to all mankind. And the 
same jubilation will be shared by all his disciples who 
drink of this wine, first in justification and secondly in 
consecration, and who suffer with him. They are promised 
that they shall reign with him, and when the reign 
is begun and when the Kingdom work has been established, 
looking back they as well as he will praise the 
way that God has led them, even tho it be a "narrow 
way," a way of sacrifice, a way of self-denial. 

Our Lord's faith stood the test of all these trying 
hours which he knew to be so near to the time of his 
apprehension and death. The fact that he rendered 
thanks to God for the bread and for the cup are indicative 
of a joyful acquiescence in all the sufferings which 
the breaking of the bread and the crushing of the grapes 
implied. He was satisfied already with the Father's 
arrangement, and could give thanks, as by and by he 
will greatly rejoice. In line with this was the singing 
of a hymn as they parted, a hymn of praise, no doubt, 
thanksgiving to the Father that his course was so nearly 



finished, and that he had found thus far grace sufficient 
for every time of need. 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER THIS YEAR. 



The anniversary of our Lord's death will this year 
fall, according to Jewish reckoning, on Wednesday, 
April 3. Consequently, the appropriate time for celebrating 
his memorial would be on the "same night in 
which he was betrayed," the night of Tuesday, April 
2— not immediately at six o'clock, but later on, allowing 
time for certain necessary preparations then, and 
for certain examination of the meaning of the symbols 
and considering the whole subject afresh, now. 

According to custom, the Church at Allegheny will 
meet on this anniversary date to celebrate the great 

R2773 : page 77 

transaction by which we were bought back from condemnation, 

and to celebrate also our consecration to be 

dead with Christ, if so be that being dead with him we 

shall be sharers also in his resurrection, the first resurrection, 

to glory, honor and immortality. 

We recommend that the dear friends in various 
parts of the world neglect not this precious memorial, 
which is so full of meaning to all who intelligently appreciate 
it. We do not advise gathering together in 
large companies, but rather that each little company or 
band meet together as is their usual custom; for this 
seems to have been the method in the early Church. 
Let us keep the feast in joy of heart, and yet with due 
appreciation of its solemnity, not only as relates to 
our Lord's sacrifice for us, but also as relates to our 
own covenant of sacrifice to be dead with him. We 
recommend that all the leaders of the little companies 
of the Lord's people make arrangements to obtain, if 
possible, unleavened bread (from some Hebrew family, 
possibly) and either unfermented grape juice or raisin 
juice, or other fruit of the vine, as may be decided. 
Our recommendation is against a general use of wine, 
as being possibly a temptation to some weak in the 
flesh. However, we recommend that provision be made 
for those who conscientiously believe that wine was 
meant to be used. As satisfying to the consciences of 
some it might not be amiss to put a small amount of fermented 
wine into the unfermented grape or raisin juice. 

We recommend that these little gatherings be without 
ostentation,— yet decently, orderly, quietly, let us 
come together, full of precious thoughts respecting the 
great transaction we celebrate, rather than with our attention 
much taken up with forms and ceremonies. 
Let us in this, as in all things, seek to do that which 
would be pleasing to our Lord, and then we will be sure 



that it will be profitable to all who participate. 

We have already intimated that none are to be forbidden 
who profess faith in the precious blood and consecration 
to our Savior's service. As a rule there will 
be no danger of any accepting the privilege of this fellowship 
who are not earnest at heart. Rather, some 
may need to be encouraged, since wrong views, we believe, 
are sometimes taken of the Apostle's words respecting 
those who "eat and drink damnation to themselves, 
not discerning the Lord's body." (1 Cor. 11:29.) 
For the sake of these timid ones, who, we trust, will 
not forego the privilege of commemorating this great 
transaction, we would explain that to our understanding 
the class mentioned by the Apostle is composed of 
those who fail to realize the real import of the sacrifice, 
and who merely recognize it as a ceremonious form. 
They eat and drink condemnation because, if they would 
investigate the matter, they would clearly see the terms 
upon which the Lord is accepting the "little flock" 
being chosen in this Gospel age. Their failure to do 
this brings a measure of condemnation, reproof; they 
are more responsible than others of the world who know 
nothing of the Lord, his sacrifice, etc. 

Let us, when we celebrate this grand memorial, 
not forget to give thanks to the Lord for our justification, 
and also for the grand privilege we enjoy of being 
fellow-sacrificers with our Redeemer, and filling up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of Christ. And while 
sorrowful and thoughtful, meditative and full of heart-searchings 
on this occasion, let us, as did the Lord, 
triumph through faith and go forth singing praise to 
him who called us out of darkness into his marvelous 
light, and who has privileged us thus to have fellowship 
in the great transaction now in progress. 



R2773 : page 77 

GETHSEMANE--WATCHING AND PRAYING. 

--MATT. 26:36-46.-FEB. 24.- 

"Not my will, but thine, be done."— Luke 22:42. 

NO ONE CAN thoughtfully read this lesson of 

our Lord's dark hour in Gethsemane, and 

his "strong cryings and tears unto him [the Father], 

who was able to save him out of death" (Heb. 5:7), 

without feeling that there is something thoroughly incorrect 

in the idea so prevalent amongst Christian people 

that our Lord Jesus was his own Heavenly Father, 

Jehovah; and that it would have been a pretence, a 

mockery of prayer, for him to have supplicated as here 

represented, unless it were true also that instead of 

being in any sense the Father, he was simply what he 



claimed to be, the Son, the sent of God, the only begotten 
of the Father, the first-born of all creation, the 
beginning of the creation of God. (John 10:29; 1:14; 
Col. 1:15; Rev. 3:14.) There is absolutely no other 
standpoint from which the language of our Lord and 
the apostles and his course of conduct are reasonably 
interpretable. On this point the earnest truth-seeker 
is referred to MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V. 

Our previous lesson closed with our Lord and his 
disciples leaving the upper room, where they had commemorated 
his death. They went to the Mount of 
Olives, to an orchard there, known as Gethsemane,— 
the name signifying "oil-press place," probably because 
olives were there pressed and the oil extracted used 
both for light and for food. One of the Evangelists 
speaks of it as the "garden of Gethsemane," but the 
word garden, as used in olden times, corresponds more 
nearly with our word orchard; it was not a flower-garden. 
There is a small enclosure now on the side of 
Mount Olivet, about 150 feet square, which is reputed 
to be the place of our Lord's agonizing prayer. It contains 
eight very old and very gnarled olive trees, and 
whether the exact spot or not, it represents it sufficiently 
well. 

Our Lord probably had two reasons for going forth 
as he did that night. First, realizing that he would be 
arrested by the traitor Judas and the band he would 
bring, our Lord probably did not wish to bring commotion 
or trouble upon the friend who had so kindly 

R2774 : page 78 

permitted him the use of the upper room. Secondly, 
he desired the still quiet of midnight, out upon the 
hillside where he could be alone with God, to pour 
out his soul in prayer and obtain the strength necessary 
for the ordeal at hand. In harmony with this last 
thought, we find that when our Lord reached the entrance 
to the orchard he left eight of the disciples there, 
as an outer guard, so to speak, or as pickets, to give 
notice; and took with him the same three disciples 
whom he had specially honored on other occasions, 
Peter, James and John: Peter, the bold and impulsive, 
James and John, the so-called "sons of thunder"— 
the three most courageous, most zealous, most earnest, 
of his disciples. These he wished to have nearest to 
himself in this time of anxiety. And yet, on this occasion, 
he desired to be still more alone in his prayer, 
for even these truest friends could not appreciate the 
situation: "of the people there were none with him." 
Hence he left these and went a stone's throw further, 
where he prostrated himself upon his knees, and with 
his face to the earth, as the various accounts show, and 
thus, alone, he communed with the Father. 

The different accounts of our Lord's experience on 
this occasion, grouped together, show us that mental 



anguish seemed to come upon him here with a force 
of poignancy he had never before experienced; and that 
the load became increasingly heavy— "sorrowful even 
unto death," a sorrow which almost crushed out his 
very life, says Matthew. Mark says (14:33) that he 
was "sore amazed," as tho the sorrow had come upon 
him unexpectedly, as tho he were bewildered. Luke, 
who was a physician, says that he was "in an agony," 
a contest, a struggle, the language used in the Greek 
implying a struggle of increasing force and severity, so 
that "his sweat became as it were great drops of blood;" 
and this bloody sweat is not unknown to physicians 
today, altho very rare. It marks an extreme tension 
of feeling— sorrow nigh unto death.* 

Infidelity has suggested that this account of our 
Redeemer's sorrow, tears and prayers, attests his weakness. 
They argue that there have been many martyrs 
of various religions who have faced death with boldness, 
stoical firmness, sometimes with smiles, and that 
this account shows Jesus to have been cowardly, and 
inferior instead of superior to others. But there is a 
philosophy connected with the matter which they seem 
not to grasp. There is a dullness and numbness connected 
with fallen, degraded, coarse manhood that can 
regard pain and death with indifference,— which permits 
them either to undergo it themselves without great 
emotion, or to inflict it mercilessly upon others without 
compassion. We are glad that Jesus was not one of 
those cold, stoical icebergs, but that he was full of warm, 
loving, tender feelings and sensibilities; and that we 
can realize consequently that he is able to sympathize 
with the most tender, the most delicate, the most refined, 
the most sensitive, more than any other human 
being. He must have felt keenly the conditions under 
which he had placed himself, in laying down his life 
on our behalf; because the more perfect the organism 
the more sensitive and high-strung the feelings, the 
greater the capacity for joy and the greater the capacity 
for sorrow: and our Lord being absolutely perfect must 
have been immeasurably more susceptible to the influences 
of pain than others. 

Besides this he had a perfect life, unforfeited, and 
knew it, and realized that he was about to part with it; 
while others of the human family possess only a forfeited 
or condemned existence and realize that they 
must part with this sometime anyway. It would therefore 
be a very different matter for our Lord to lay down 
his life than for any of his followers to lay down their 
lives. Supposing 100 to represent perfect life, our Lord 
had the full one hundred units to lay down, while we, 
being more than ninety-nine-hundredths parts dead, 
through trespasses and sins and condemnation, could 
at most have only the one-hundredth part to lay down. 
A cold, stoical indifference to the loss of life, based 
upon knowledge that it could last but a short time longer 
anyway, would therefore be a very different thing 



from the clear knowledge which our Lord had, based 
upon his experiences with the Father "before the world 
was," and the realization that the life he was now about 
to lay down was not forfeited through sin, but was his 
own voluntary sacrifice. 

There can be no doubt that this thought of the extinguishment 
of life was an important factor in our 
Lord's sorrow. The Apostle clearly intimates it in the 
words (Heb. 5:7), "Who in the days of his flesh... 
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong cryings 
and tears, unto him who was able to save him 
from [out of] death, and was heard in [respect to] that 
he feared"— extinction. Intent continually upon doing 
the Father's will, day by day had passed in self-sacrifice, 
until now, in a few hours, the whole would be 
complete; and the thought of this brought with it another 
thought, viz.: Had he done the Father's will perfectly? 
Could he claim, and would he receive the reward 
promised him, a resurrection from the dead? 

Had he failed in any particular to come up to the 
exact standard of perfection his death would have meant 
extinction; and altho all men fear extinction none could 
know the full depth and force of its meaning as could 
he who not only had the perfection of life, but had recollection 
of his previous glory with the Father before 



*Prof. Tischendorf shows that this account of our Lord's 
bloody sweat is not found in the Vatican MS., and that altho it 
appeared in the original Sinaitic MS. it was crossed out by a later 
critic. The passage is therefore doubtful, or at least questionable. 

R2774 : page 79 

the world was. For him the very thought of an extinction 
would bring anguish, terror of soul. This thought 
seems not to have come to our Lord with the same force 
previously. It was this, therefore, that bore down 
upon him now so heavily as an astonishing sorrow unto 
death. He saw himself about to suffer according to 
the Law as an evil-doer, and the question naturally 
arose, was he entirely blameless, and would the heavenly 
judge thoroughly acquit him whom so many were 
disposed to condemn? 

After praying awhile he went to the three disciples, 
in whom he had greatest confidence, and who, more 
than any others, were his tried and trusted companions, 
but he found them asleep. Luke explains that their 
sleep was the result of sorrow. The night and its lessons 
had been impressive; the memorial supper, which 
they did not fully understand, nevertheless left a weight 
of sorrow upon them, as the Master had intimated that 
it represented his death, and had further intimated 
that one of their number would betray him. The reaction 
from the sorrow brought a measure of stupor. 



Very gently our Lord upbraided them: "Could ye not 
watch with me one hour? Watch and pray lest ye enter 
into temptation." It is not merely that you need 
to watch on my account; you need to be in a watching 
attitude on your own account. An hour of severe trial 
is upon us all; watch and pray lest ye fall in this evil time. 

Then our Lord went to pray again. We are told 
that his prayers were in the same words; that is to say, 
that the same sentiments were expressed; and again a 
third time similarly: the one matter was weighing upon 
his heart. Could he rely upon it now, that having 
sought to do the Father's will, that having finished his 
course, he had done it acceptably? Could he have 
full assurance of faith that God would save him out of 
death by a resurrection? In answer to his petition a 
heavenly messenger was sent to comfort him, to assure 
him, to strengthen him. We are not informed what 
message the angel brought, but we can see that it was a 
message of peace, and that he brought assurances that 
our Lord's course had the Father's approval, and that he 
would be brought again from the dead by a resurrection. 
These were quite sufficient to give our Lord all 
the strength and courage necessary for the ordeal before 
him; and from that moment onward we find him the 
coolest and calmest of the notable figures brought to 
our attention. When approached by Judas and his 
band he was the most calm and self-possessed of all; 
when before the chief priest, Caiaphas, it was the same 
way; when before Pilate the same; when crucified, the 
same; he had found peace in the message that he was 
approved of the Father, and that all the gracious promises 
of glory, honor and immortality were his, and now 
he could pass through any ordeal. 

The Scriptures assure us that our Lord was tempted 
in all points like as we (his brethren) are, and we see 
in this his experience in Gethsemane an illustration of 
one of the most severe trials which come to the Lord's 
people. It would seem as tho the Adversary at times 
attempted to discourage us by making us think that 
the trials and difficulties of the "narrow way" of sacrifice 
will be all unavailing anyhow, and that we might 
as well give up. When such thoughts come to those 
who are earnestly and faithfully seeking to fulfil the 
conditions of their consecration vows they constitute one 
of the severest trials that could overtake them; if they 
have given up this world and its affections, hopes, aims, 
desires, exchanging all these for the heavenly, then 
anything which seems to becloud the heavenly hopes, 
leaves them in a darkness more utter, more dense, than 
they could have known had they never seen and appreciated 
the glorious promises. And what course should 
we pursue at such a time? We should follow the example 
of our Lord, and seek the Father's face, anxious 
to know whether or not everything is all right with 
him; anxious for some assurances that while the world 
may hate us, and say all manner of evil against us 



falsely, we still have his approval; anxious for some 
fresh assurance that it will be well with us, that the 
Lord will grant us a part in the better resurrection to 
life eternal. 

But while we draw this correspondency between 
our experiences and those of our Lord we should not 
forget that there is an immeasurable difference; that we 
are of the dying and ninety-nine-hundredths parts dead 
already, and that therefore we cannot so fully appreciate 
the meaning of death nor the meaning of life eternal; 
and besides all this we have the example of our Lord, 
and the further assurance that our share in the First 

R2775 : page 79 

resurrection is not to be attained through perfection of 
our own, but through his perfection, provided we shall 
have attested to the Lord our full loyalty of heart, of 
intention, of will, however imperfect the results of our 
efforts to glorify him in our bodies and spirits. 
The Evangelist records that our Lord prayed, 
"Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me." 
It may be that our Lord meant by this, If your infinite 
love and mercy see it possible in any manner to accomplish 
your purposes of salvation for mankind without 
it being necessary for me to die, then grant it to be so. 
But if this were the Lord's thought it would imply that 
he had not fully grasped the Father's plan of a restitution 
for mankind, made possible through a ransom price 
for Adam and his sin; for, seeing this, our Lord could 
not have supposed that anything short of the full ransom 
could secure the results. Quite possibly, however, 
the thought which bore heavily upon him was the realization 
now coming vividly to his mind that if apprehended 

R2775 : page 80 

as a blasphemer it would be the policy of his 
enemies not to destroy him secretly, but to deliver him 
over to the Romans; and he could realize the influence 
and power they would exert to secure the performance 
of their wishes, and he knew that the Roman method of 
execution was that of crucifixion, and he knew also 
that the Scriptures explicitly said, "Cursed is every one 
that hangeth on a tree." 

Here, then, seems to have been the centre of his 
thought: I shall be esteemed of all my countrymen as 
forsaken of God, and as accursed of him; I shall die as 
a blasphemer, as a malefactor; whereas my every sentiment 
is, and has always been, fealty, loyalty to the 
Father. This, we believe, was the special feature of 
our Lord's anxiety, called the "cup" of sorrow, which 
he wished, if possible, might be removed. We believe 
that he knew his death to be necessary, unavoidable, as 
he had many times informed his disciples; but that it 
was this ignominious form of death, "even the death of 



the cross," that staggered him; for it not only bespoke 

shame and misrepresentation before the people, and 

those whom he loved and to whom he sought to do 

good, but it carried with it also the thought that he was 

accursed of God; and if accursed of God he could have 

no hope for a realization of the glorious promise of a resurrection. 

But when assured through the angel that 

he would not be actually accused of God, even tho he 

would for a time take the place of the accursed Adam 

and be "made a curse for us," his race, then even the 

cross and its shame could be endured with fortitude. 

WATCH AND PRAY LEST YE ENTER INTO TEMPTATION. 



In the case of our Lord and the apostles we see illustrated 
the value of watchfulness and prayer in the 
dark hour of trouble. Our Lord followed the direction 
he gave to the disciples: he watched, he prayed, he got 
a blessing, he was strengthened, and came off victor. 
They did not watch and did not pray, failing to realize 
the necessities of the occasion, and as a result we find 
them scattered, bewildered;— and one of them, the very 
strongest of them all, who boastingly had said a little 
while before, "Tho all men forsake thee yet will not I," 
was so overpowered by his surroundings, and so weak 
through lack of the very strength he should have obtained 
through watching and prayer, that he denied the 
Lord with profanity. 

Whenever we find the Lord's people attempting to 
live a life of holiness and consecration, yet ignoring the 
injunction of our Lord to watch and pray, we know 
that they are unwise; and that however much they may 
be virgins, pure ones, they are foolish: they cannot 
hope to gain the victory over self and sin and the Adversary, 
single-handed, alone. If the Master himself 
needed strengthening, surely we also need it; and if he 
received it in response to supplications with strong cryings 
and tears, it is an intimation to us of the way in 
which God is pleased to bestow the full assurance of 
faith which is able to strengthen us as good soldiers to 
endure any and everything in his name and service. 
Those who seek the Lord earnestly and in prayer are 
as sure to receive a blessing as was the Lord Jesus himself; 
and altho there will not come to them the same 
kind of heavenly messenger to comfort and encourage 
them, nevertheless a heavenly messenger of another 
kind will surely be sent. It may be in the person of a 
fellow-disciple, able to enter into and sympathize with 
us in our trials as difficulties, as none of the apostles 
could sympathize with our Lord or assist him. Or it 
may be that the messenger sent will be one of the apostles 
themselves, through the many gracious words of 
inspiration which God has communicated to us through 
them in his Word. But however the strength may 



come, it must be the assurance, not of men nor of angels, 
but of God, that we are pleasing and acceptable to 
him,— and that we may claim and expect the exceeding 
great and precious things which he has in reservation 
for them that love him. 

So to speak, we are now in the hour of trial which 
cometh upon the whole world to try them. The present 
is represented in the Scriptures to be "the hour of 
temptation" or testing at the close of this age. It is 
the Gethsemane hour, in this sense of the word, to all 
who are the Lord's true people, fully consecrated to 
him. It is the hour, therefore, in which we, like our 
Lord, should be seeking the Father's face to receive the 
full assurance that we are his, and that he is ours; and 
that we may rely confidently on his strength to carry 
us through this time. It is the time in which we are 
to make sure, as we sometimes sing: 
"O let no earthborn cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 
It is a time in which those who neglect the Master's 
words, "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation," 
will be sure to enter into temptation, and be tolerably 
sure to fall therein. And the fall will be severe, 
—and even tho, like Peter, they should afterward be 
recovered out of it, it will be with weeping. 

Some make the mistake of praying without watching; 
others make the mistake of watching without praying; 
but the safe and only proper method is that which 
our Lord directed, to combine the two. We are to 
watch, and to be on our guard against the encroachments 
of the world, the flesh and the devil. We are to 
watch for all the encouragements of the Lord's Word, 
the evidence of their fulfilment, the signs that betoken 
his presence and the great changes of dispensation just 
at hand. We are to watch for everything that will 
strengthen us in faith and hope and loyalty and love; 
and while watching we are to pray without ceasing. 
We are to pray together as the Lord's people; we are to 
pray in our homes, as families; we are to pray in secret, 
in private. We are to have the spirit of prayer in all 
that we say and do: that is to say, our hearts should 
be going out continually to the Lord for guidance in all 
of life's affairs, that we may do with our might what 
our hands find to do, in a manner that will be acceptable 
to him, and that we may be shielded by him from 
temptation that would otherwise be beyond our endurance, 
and that we may be ultimately delivered from the 
Evil One and have a place in our Lord's Kingdom. 
Brethren and sisters, let us more and more remember 
and put into practice, in every home in which the 
WATCH TOWER is a visitor, these words of our Lord, 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 



page 8 1 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. MARCH 1, 1901. No. 4. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 83 

Corroborations of Scripture 

Testimony 83 

Poem: Longing for Home 85 

Accepted and Rejected Sacrificers 85 

Jesus Betrayed and Forsaken 88 

Our Warfare Not with Carnal 
Weapons 90 

The Cup Which the Father Pours 91 

"Ye have Condemned the Just One" 91 

Interesting Questions Answered 94 

Items: Pilgrim Visits Free, etc 82 

page 82 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would be expected 
to contribute for his railway fare and also for his support. 

This is a mistake: the services of the preaching "Pilgrims" 
laboring under the auspices of the Watch Tower Bible and 



Tract Society are absolutely without charge;— nor do they take 
up any collections. The Society pays their railway and all other 
expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary donations, 
from such as are able and anxious to serve in this manner. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

ONE-DAY CONVENTIONS AND ALLEGHENY MEETINGS. 

The Editor has accepted quite a number of invitations for 
one-day (Sunday) Conventions of late— at points which can be 
reached by railroad in one night's travel, permitting him to 
leave Allegheny Saturday night and to get back to his Editorial 
duties on Monday morning. One of these (D.V.) will be 
held at Baltimore, Md., on Mar. 10. Another at Wheeling, 
W.Va., Mar. 24. These are only local conventions usually attended 
by friends living within a radius of 50 miles. 

But some dear friends from neighboring towns who have 
come to Allegheny at such times have felt a little disappointment 
at not seeing "Brother Russell" as they expected. We 
therefore announce, that hereafter such one-day conventions 
will be arranged for on only the second and fourth Sundays of 
each month. Brother Russell may be expected to be at Allegheny 
on the first and third Sundays of each month. 



R2775 : page 83 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



CORROBORATIONS OF SCRIPTURE TESTIMONY. 



GRADUALLY, but surely and relatively swiftly, 
we see unfolding the various features of the 
divine plan which the Scriptures have taught us to 
expect— pointing them out in a general way in advance 
—namely, preparations for the Millennium of blessing 
and preparations also for the great time of trouble 
with which it will be introduced. The testimonies 
following are all the more forceful because they come 
from men who, so far as we are aware, have no such 
expectations as we hold— no such light as we enjoy, 
relative to the teachings of the Scriptures on these 
matters. 

For instance, many have opposed our presentation 
of the Bible's teachings on restitution (Acts 3:19-21), 
claiming— 

(1) That there would not be standing-room for 
so many as probably have been born, reasonably estimated 



at about fifty thousand millions. We answered 
this by a mathematical demonstration that twice this 
number could find standing room in either Texas or 
France, and that the whole earth under good climatic 
conditions will be ample for all. They then objected— 

(2) That the earth can scarcely feed its present 
population, as attested by the famines in India and 
southern Russia. We replied to this, that God is able 
to provide for the fulfilment of all his promises; and 
pointed out the declarations of the holy prophets respecting 
these "times of restitution," that then "the 
earth shall yield her increase" and the "wilderness 
shall blossom as the rose."— Isa. 35:1; Psa. 67:9. 

Note now how science comes forward to corroborate 
the Bible's testimony; and let us remember that 
now is just the time for these things to begin to appear. 

R2776 : page 83 

We quote the following from The Saturday 
Evening Post:— 

"THE CHEMISTRY OF SOIL." 



"Undoubtedly, one of the most wonderful discoveries 
of modern chemistry has to do with the soil. 
It has been ascertained that the most barren land can 
be made rich simply by adding to it certain mineral 
elements which cost but little. On this basis it is 
estimated that the United States will be able eventually 
to maintain 500,000,000 people— more than one-third 
of the present population of the world. It is merely 
a question of supplying the requisite quantities of 
nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash. The last two 
are readily obtainable at small expense, whereas the 
first may be supplied either by furnishing to the soil 
condensed nitrogen in the shape of slaughter-waste or 
nitrate of soda, or by planting clover, beans, or peas, 
which have an affinity for nitrogen and absorb it from 
the atmosphere. 

It is now known that nitrogen is the most important 
plant food, and inasmuch as this element composes 
four-fifths of the atmosphere the question is merely 
to absorb it into the soil. It has also come to be 
understood that only two per cent, of the material of 
plants is derived from the soil, the remaining ninety-eight 
per cent, being drawn from the air and from 
water. It has been learned that certain species of 
bacteria absorb nitrogen, and these may be propagated 
in moist earth, and the earth thus treated sprinkled 
over the land." 

"IN THE WILDERNESS WATERS SHALL BREAK OUT AND 
STREAMS IN THE DESERT."-ISA. 35:6. 



This prophecy bids fair to have a literal as well 
as a spiritual fulfilment. Already the drilling of artesian 
wells has reclaimed thousands of acres of arid 
land in the "American Desert" of the West; but the 
cost was too great when many of the holes were dry. 
Now, on seemingly reliable authority, relief has come 
to Texas along that line. A boy of fourteen years is 
found to possess what is styled "X-ray sight," so that 
in the dark he can see beneath the surface of the 

R2776 : page 84 

ground; just as the "X-ray" proved to science that 
certain rays of light can penetrate what we call solid 
substances; and just as Marconi, in connection with 
wireless telegraphy, has demonstrated that certain 
waves of ether pass through solid substances unhindered. 
This boy can see the subterranean creeks and 
rivers, and can designate just where the wells should 
be drilled to get the water so much needed on the 
surface. Whether this should be considered a lost 
sense of sight, lost through the fall, and which would 
return during the "times of restitution," or a special 
gift intended to help forward in the restitution, we are 
not yet prepared to give an opinion. 

Of this boy's powers the Chicago Record gives quite 
a lengthy account, from which we quote the following, 
accredited to "Judge W. Van Sickle of Alpine, a 
member of the Texas Legislature:"— 

"That Guy Fenley, this 14 year-old boy, is possessed 
of an X-ray' sight cannot be questioned. He 
has demonstrated his ability to see underground 
streams of water, no matter what their depth may be, 
on a number of occasions, and the stockmen of west 
Texas have ample proof of his power in this line. I 
engaged him to go to Brewster county and locate two 
wells on the ranch which is owned by D. J. Combs 
and myself. This ranch is situated in a very dry 
country, known as the Glass mountains. We had 
made a vain search for water on this ranch, having 
sunk a well to a depth of 607 feet at a cost of $1,500 
without striking water. This boy has already located 
two wells on the ranch, one at a depth of 250 feet and 
the other at a depth of 400 feet, both containing an 
abundant supply of pure water, and well-drilling outfits 
are now at work sinking other wells on the ranch 
with no doubt about securing water. 

"There can be no longer any doubt about this 
boy's wonderful power of sight, because instances are 
numerous and notoriously known where his X-ray' 
gift, or whatever it may be called, has been proved 
beyond a doubt. He sees the veins or streams of water 
under the ground and can tell with absolute certainty 



the different strata between the surface and the water. 
He has this 'X-ray' sight only at night, and it is much 
stronger in the dark of the moon. When he exercises 
this wonderful power for any length of time, he becomes 
exhausted and falls into a deep sleep, which 
restores him to his former self." 

THE JEWS CLAIMING CHRIST. 



"The oldest and the newest traditions of Israel 
look with favor upon the man of Galilee, who, as the 
prophets of old, was willing to give his soul unto death 
that his ideals might live after him. His noble and 
exalted aims have not been fulfilled. What ideals 
ever were? But we who are Jews today certainly have 
no cause to regret his coming into the world, and have 
every reason to look forward to the time when the 
message of this hour will find an echo in the heart 
and life of mankind. The gospel of Jesus was the 
glad tidings of Israel's own universal truth. The 
teacher of Nazareth was our kith and kin, both in the 
flesh and in the spirit. We revere his memory, claim 
him as our own, and gladly accord him that high rank 
which he deserves as one of the greatest benefactors 
of the human family. 

"How absurd and silly it is to expect us, in this 
age of enlightenment and growing religious fellowship, 
to mourn on this day, to shut our eyes to the 
light like wilful, wanton children, and see only the 
shadows of our past. If we, who are children of the 
house to whom the prophets belong, and whose mission 
it is to proclaim peace to them that are far and near, 
strew the seed of discord and resentment among our 
own, wherein are we better than those who persecuted 
our ancestors for wrongs which they had not committed? 
Shall we hold him whom the millions of our 
fellowmen commemorate today, and through whom, 
according to the unanimous opinion of our best and 
profoundest scholars in ancient and modern times, 
Israel's divine truths were carried out to the nations, 
shall we hold him responsible for the crimes that were 
perpetrated in his name? Nay, we do not mourn, but 
we rejoice that Jesus was born, and through him, despite 
the shortcomings, despite the manifold prejudices 
that still darken human hearts, this world at 
large is infinitely better and brighter than it would 
have been without him. We would not conjure the 
dread spectres of the past; we thank God that we live 
in the present, with its wider liberty, its nobler humanity." 
--RABBI SALEE in Jewish Voice. 

PRESBYTERIAN CREED REVISION. 



The Presbyterian General Assembly committee 
has agreed upon the following summary of returns 
made to them by various Presbyteries. They met 
in Washington City on Feb. 12 to prepare their statement 
for the next General Assembly in May. 

First— The returns plainly indicate that the church 
desires some changes in its credal statement. 

Second— These returns indicate plainly that no 
change is desired which would in any way impair the 
integrity of the system of doctrine contained in the 
Confession of Faith. 

Third— These returns also indicate that a large 
plurality desire that the changes should be made by 
some new statement of present doctrines. 

Fourth— The returns also indicate a desire upon 
the part of many presbyteries for some revision of the 
present confession. 

Fifth— It was therefore unanimously agreed to 
recommend to the assembly that some revision or 
change be made in our confession statements. 

This means that the creed is objectionable as it 
stands, but that it is desired that the changes shall 
be made in such a manner as to cast no discredit upon 
it in the eyes of their own people or other Christians. 
In a word, they want, if possible, to say, The creed 
is all right, none better, could not be better; but some 

R2776 : page 85 

people cannot understand it aright, and for their sakes 
only it was necessary to alter the language without 
changing the sense. And no doubt some will succeed 
in deluding themselves and others— who prefer to be 
deceived rather than to openly acknowledge the wrong, 
for fear of denominational injury. 



R2780 : page 85 

LONGING FOR HOME. 



As pants the heart for water brooks, 

So pants my soul for thee! 
O, when shall I behold thy face, 

When wilt thou call for me? 

How oft at night I turn my eyes 
Toward my heavenly home, 

And long for that blest time when thou, 
My Lord, shalt bid me, "Come!" 

And yet I know that only those 



Thy blessed face shall see, 
Whose hearts from every stain of sin 
Are purified and free. 

And O, my Master and my Lord, 

I know I'm far from meet 
With all thy blessed saints in light 

To hold communion sweet. 

I know that those who share thy throne 

Must in thy likeness be, 
And all the Spirit's precious fruits 

In them the Father see. 

Lord, grant me grace more patiently 
To strive with my poor heart, 

And bide thy time to be with thee, 
And see thee as thou art! 

--G. W. SEIBERT. 



R2776 : page 85 

ACCEPTED AND REJECTED SACRIFICERS. 



GREAT WERE the anticipations of mother Eve 
in connection with her first-born son, Cain. 
Keenly she recollected the blessings of Eden and their 
loss through disobedience, and her memory clung to 
the implied promise contained in Jehovah's words to 
the effect that the seed of the woman should bruise 
the serpent's head— should crush the Evil One, and 
impliedly, in some sense of the word, thus accomplish 
a victory, and a release from some or all of the evils 
entailed through the divine sentence. It was in harmony 
with this that she named her first-born son Cain, 
which signifies, "acquired." In his birth she seemed 
to see a beginning of a fulfilment of the divine promise; 
this much of it had been acquired, for she said, 
"I have gotten a man from the Lord"— the Lord has 
given the promised man, the promised seed. But she 
was mistaken; the divine promise would be fulfilled 
in due time, but Cain was not the promised seed, nor 
even in the line of that promise. This was soon 
manifested. 

In due time another son was born, who was called 
Abel— a feeder or nourisher— he being looked to, probably, 

R2777 : page 85 

not so much as the deliverer promised as a helper 
in the battle for bread with the thorns and thistles, 
etc. The two grew to manhood, the one becoming a 



tiller of the soil, a farmer and gardener, and the other 
a herdsman or shepherd. In process of time it became 
apparent to both of these men that they should make 
acknowledgement to the Lord, their Creator, and that 
it would be but a reasonable service that they should 
present to him offerings expressive of their dependence 
on, and of their appreciation of his kindness; and naturally 
each one took as an offering that which was 
under his care. 

Cain took of the fruits of his harvest, the results 
of his energy, as an offering to the Lord, and Abel 
took of his flocks as an offering. So far as the record 
goes, both were alike acceptable to the Lord up to this 
point; nor can we suppose that God would be displeased 
with Cain for bringing of the fruit of his labor 
as an offering. The fact that he had not respect to 
Cain's offering need not be understood to imply any 
prejudice on God's part against Cain, nor any intimation 
that he had sinned in bringing such an offering; 
neither did the Lord's acceptance of Abel's offering 
necessarily imply a prejudice in his favor, nor 
that he was the holier of the two. The acceptance of 
the one and the rejection of the other was merely designed 
to show the kind of sacrifice which the Lord 
was pleased to have offered and the kind which he 
was not pleased to accept. Cain should have learned 
the lesson quickly, and should have secured animal 
sacrifices and have presented his offering in this form 
to the Lord, and doubtless it would have been accepted 
as was Abel's. 

Probably neither of the brothers knew at the time 
why the Lord accepted the animal sacrifices only, but 
later on no doubt they would have been instructed 
that this was typical, because the Lord intended ultimately 
to accept of a great antitypical sacrifice for 
sins which he himself would provide in the person of 
the man Christ Jesus, and that this sacrifice could 
best be represented and typified by the sacrifice of 
animals, and thus the presentation of the thought that 

R2777 : page 86 

without the shedding of blood there could be no remission 
of sins.-Heb. 9:22. 

But Cain, as the first-born, had no doubt already 
been recognized by his parents as the chief of the 
two brothers, and no doubt knew of his parents' 
expectations respecting him, that ultimately he would 
be the instrument of Jehovah in the crushing of evil. 
And no doubt this thought had engendered a certain 
amount of pride in his heart. He felt himself to be 
the elect of God, the highly honored one of the family; 
and correspondingly sharp must have been his 
feeling of disappointment when his offering of the 
fruits of the field, chosen with great care, and offered 
no doubt with sincere reverence, met with no sign of 



divine acceptance, while the offering of his younger 

brother, whom his parents had viewed as a mere assistant, 

was accepted of the Lord, probably by fire 

from heaven consuming the sacrifice. (1 Kings 18:38.) 

The chagrin of this one who considered himself the 

priest and mediator of the family, and God's specially 

chosen agent, may be imagined; and whatever of love 

and kindness and brotherly feeling had previously prevailed, 

fell before the combination of giant powers 

suddenly developed in his bosom— pride, chagrin, envy, 

—and in the heat of his passion and disappointment he 

smote his brother and slew him. 

We are not to think of Cain's crime as a first-degree 
murder, deliberately plotted and executed; but 
rather as "manslaughter," a crime committed on the 
spur of the moment and under the influence of sharp 
disappointment. The inspired record tells us, "He 
was of [the spirit or disposition of] the wicked one, 
and slew his brother." (1 John 3:12.) He partook 
of the spirit of the wicked one, of Satan's evil spirit. 
Satan's spirit was one of ambition and pride. Already 
highly favored of God as one of the highest angels, 
he was not content with his great honors and blessings, 
but was ambitious, desirous of attaining still 
greater influence and power than God had been pleased 
to grant him; and this unlawful ambition obtaining 
control led him not only to rebel against the divine 
covenant, but led him also to become the "murderer" 
(John 8:44) of our first parents, that thus he might 
attain control over them,— the object of his ambition. 

So, for aught we know, Cain may not only have 
felt the chagrin of seeing the younger brother's offering 
accepted, but may have felt that somehow or other 
this younger brother stood between him and the attaining 
of his ambitions, and that his removal would 
be a means for the maintenance of his own claims and 
position. How short-sighted was the Adversary, that 
he should think to out-general Jehovah, and to exalt 
himself and erect a rival Kingdom ! Soon Satan's 
folly will be manifested, when the Lord's due time 
shall come, and the one who humbled himself in obedience 
to the Father's will shall be exalted to kingly 
power and authority, and to the position at the Father's 
right hand in the Kingdom of the universe; and when 
the one who attempted the usurpation shall be bound 
and utterly destroyed. And how foolish was Cain's 
supposition that fighting against God would avail him 
anything, or that the destruction of his brother would 
leave him the heir of the promise that the seed of the 
woman should bruise the serpent's head! And how 
similarly foolish are all who foster ambition and pride 
—even in respect to the promises of God. How sure 
it is to lead to the murder-spirit of brother-hatred. 
(1 John 3:15.) And, on the contrary, how wise are 
those who follow the example of our dear Redeemer, 
quenching all ambition in devotion to God and burying 



pride under love and humility. Let us, therefore, 

as the Apostle exhorts— humble ourselves under the 

mighty hand of God, that he may exalt us in due 

time, even as he highly exalted our Lord Jesus.— 1 Pet. 5:5,6; 

Phil. 2:5-12. 

Had Cain, on the contrary, yielded to an humble 
and loving spirit, he would have said to his brother 
Abel, "My brother, I congratulate you, that the Lord 
has so remarkably accepted your offering; I rejoice 
with you, and now that I have learned better what 
things the Lord is pleased to accept in sacrifice, I myself 
also will hasten to present an offering like yours, 
and I will gladly exchange with you some of the fruit 
of my labors for some suitable sacrifice from your 
flocks." And who can doubt that Cain's offering, if 
brought in this manner, would have been accepted of 
the Lord, as was Abel's? The thing lacking was the 
humble spirit, the spirit of love, without which he 
could not be acceptable with God, nor appreciate his 
privilege of offering the acceptable sacrifice. 

This same lesson of the first-born occupying the 
position of favor and opportunity, yet being unworthy 
and unready to use it, is illustrated in Abraham's 
sons. First was Ishmael, who for years was looked 
upon as the heir of Abraham and the promises made 
to him, and who continued to so regard himself even 
after Isaac, the child of promise, was born,— mocking 
and persecuting him. Similarly again, Esau, as the 
first-born of Isaac, held the birth-right to the same 
promise, yet not appreciating it rightly, sold it to 
Jacob for a mess of pottage, and then strove to retain 
it unjustly to himself, and was angry with the one 
who did rightly value it. 

The Apostle points out to us (Gal. 4:22-31) that 
these things were allegories or pictures, written aforetime 
for our admonition and instruction, that we 
through these illustrations might gather the thought 
that God foreknew and designed that in bringing in 

R2777 : page 87 

the true Seed (Christ Jesus, the Head, and the Church, 
his body) there should be just such an experience as 
was pictured in these three illustrations. The first 
seed of promise was Moses and his house, fleshly Israel. 
These were represented in Cain and Ishmael 
and Esau— not that there were no exceptions in the 
nation of fleshly Israel, but that the nation as a whole 
was thus typified. 

Israel, like Cain, considered itself as the first-born 
and heir of the divine promise, and it brought to the 
Lord an offering of works under its Law Covenant, 
represented in Cain's offering of the fruits of the 
ground, the labor of his hands; but God did not accept 
the imperfect works of Israel as satisfying unto 
justification. Israel, like Ishmael, was for years recognized 



as the heir to the Abrahamic promises, and 

felt arrogant in connection therewith; yet never was 

the real seed of Abraham meant by Jehovah when he 

made the promise that Abraham's seed should be 

great and should bless all the families of the earth. 

Nevertheless Israel, like Ishmael, mocked at the spiritual 

Israel, the true heir of the divine favors, and persecuted 

those that were born (begotten) after the 

spirit. Israel, like Esau, had indeed a title to the 

blessing, as being the first-born, and had they appreciated 

that blessing they might indeed have been the 

heirs of the promise; but failing rightly to appreciate 

it they had more respect and love for earthly comforts 

and advantages than for the spiritual, and sacrificed 

the latter for the former, even as Esau sold his birth-right 

for the mess of pottage. Nevertheless, while 

not highly esteeming the divine favors represented in 

the promise made to Abraham, the natural Israelite 

at the close of the Jewish age was disposed to claim 

that promise, and to resent the thought that it should 

pass by them and be given to Spiritual Israel, represented 

by Jacob, the second-born. And as Esau's 

anger was so fierce that Jacob was obliged to flee for 

his life, even so spiritual Israel was put in jeopardy 

of life by natural Israel. The Isaac-class was persecuted 

by the Ishmael class, and the Abel class was 

slain by the Cain class. 

It at first seems strange that God's favored ones 
should thus appear to be worsted in every instance, 
and be obliged to flee from, or be killed by those whom 
God rejected. But herein is a great spiritual lesson, 
for we perceive that as the natural Israel was represented 
by Moses and his house, so the spiritual Israel 

R2778 : page 87 

is represented by Christ and his house; and we see 
that the very method by which Christ and his followers 
are to gain the victory in this present time is through 
obedience unto God "even unto death"— and that 
thus being obedient unto death, Christ and his Church, 
which is his body, and which the Apostle assures us 
is to fill up that which is behind of his afflictions 
(Col. 1:24), become the heirs of the world, the inheritors 
of the promises. Why? Because there can 
be no crushing of the Evil One and his power until 
first of all the sacrifice for sin, the ransom-price for the 
sinner, shall be paid; even as there can be no blessing 
of all the families of the earth through the seed of 
Abraham until, first of all, that Seed of Abraham shall 
have redeemed all the families of the earth by offering 
the sacrifice for sins which God has all along indicated 
must first be paid, and must include a sacrifice of life 
—for "without the shedding of blood there is no remission 
of sins." 
Here, then, we may see not only in the plain 



declarations of the New Testament, but in all the 
shadowy pictures which prophesied the same in the 
Old Testament, that it must needs be that Christ 
(Head and body) shall suffer and be raised from the 
dead before these great and precious promises of the 
Almighty to mother Eve and to father Abraham can 
have their fulfilment. 

The position we have here taken will not be disputed 
by any Christian well versed in the Word of 
God, except, perhaps, that some not having studied 
the subject from this standpoint, may at first be unable 
to see how the Church of Christ shares with him 
in all these pictures, and in the great sacrifice, as well 
as in the glorious work to follow. However, careful 
study of the Lord's Word from this standpoint will 
assuredly prove its correctness; and now we offer in 
further corroboration, the testimony of the Apostle 
Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians. In chapter 3:16 
he points out Christ as the promised seed of Abraham, 
and in verses 27-29 he explains to us that all 
who come into Christ during this age and become 
members of his body, are thus members of the Seed of 
Abraham, and heirs with Christ of the promises of 
God made to Abraham. 

Also in Galatians 4:22-31 the Apostle explains in 
detail how Ishmael represented Israel after the flesh, 
born of the Law Covenant, represented by Hagar, and 
how, as such, they could not be heirs of the Abrahamic 
Covenant. He then shows Christ, the son of 
the free woman, the Abrahamic Covenant, represented 
by Sarah, and he not only represents the Lord Jesus 
as being the Isaac seed of promise, but in so many 
words declares that the elect Church of Christ in this 
Gospel age is also of this Isaac seed, and heirs with 
Jesus, and, through his merit, to all the promises 
made to Abraham— that they should be God's agency 
in bringing blessing to all the families of the earth. 
The Apostle's words are, "So, then, brethren, we are 
not children of the bondwoman [the Law Covenant], 
but of the free [the Abrahamic covenant, typified by 

R2778 : page 88 

Sarah.]" "Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty wherewith 
Christ hath made us free." 

While these pictures and lessons relate chiefly to 
the Church as a whole, rather than to each member 
of it as an individual, nevertheless, individual lessons 
may be gleaned from them also, for altho Cain and 
Abel, Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob, represented 
particularly natural Israel and spiritual Israel, we 
may, nevertheless, find similar characters and similar individual 
conditions today, in the "tares" and "wheat" 
of the Gospel Church. The tares, like Cain, have the 
spirit of the wicked one, the spirit of ambition and of 
pride, and as a rule they occupy very leading positions 



in nominal churchianity. They bring to the Lord 
offerings, and not without a certain form of godliness, 
yet their hearts are far from the attitude which would 
be pleasing to the Lord, for the offerings which they 
present are of their own works— they come not to the 
Lord solely in the name and merit of the great sacrifice 
for sins finished at Calvary, and God cannot accept 
their offerings. 

The wheat class of this Gospel age, corresponding 
to Abel, come before the Lord in greater humility; 
not trusting in any righteousness or works of their 
own for their acceptance with him, they present to 
him, according to his own appointment, the sacrifice 
of blood— Christ's sacrifice, and these are accepted 
and God's favor is manifested to them; but so far from 
this awakening in the tare-class a spirit of contrition, 
and a desire to learn the way of the Lord more perfectly, 
it seems to awaken in them hatred, animosity, 
chagrin, that they, worldly-wise and of worldly influence 
and fame, should be rivalled and outdone in 
divine favor and acceptance by those that are nought 
in their estimation and from the worldly standpoint. 
And the wheat-class, represented in Abel, must be 
ready to lay down their lives as the price of their fidelity 
to the Lord. To these the Lord speaks individually, 
saying, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life." (Rev. 2:10.) Their faithfulness 
is sure to lead to consecration to death, which 
ultimately finishes in literal death; for only by thus 
proving their faithfulness and following the footsteps 
of their Master to the end of the way can they be accepted 
of the Lord to joint-heirship with him. 

The persecution of Isaac by Ishmael finds a parallel 
also in the opposition of the tares to the wheat; 
there is a rivalry between the Church nominal, which 
holds the place of influence and power, and which 
ridicules and mocks and persecutes the Isaac class. 
This persecution may not in every instance go so far 
as persecution to death, as in the case of our Lord and 
many of the apostles, and yet it will extend to every 
member of the Isaac class in some manner, even if it 
be not a more severe opposition than that of mocking 
and speaking evil of them. But all these things must 
be endured, and that with patience; yea, they may be 
endured with joy, if we can but have the spirit of our 
Head, and realize the meaning of these oppositions 
which come to us as they came to him, and of which 
he said, "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated 
me before it hated you. If ye were of the world, the 
world would love his own; but because ye are not of 
the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, 
therefore the world hateth you. And again, as the 
Apostle declares, "The world knoweth us not, because 
it knew him not. "-John 15:18,19; 1 John 3:1. 

In all of these illustrations it is well that we note 
the differences of spirit or disposition, that the haughty, 



the proud, the ambitious and self-confident spirit is 
the one which leads to disappointment, and is not of 
the Lord; and that the humble, teachable, obedient 
spirit or disposition is that which is recognized by the 
Lord; and in proportion as we are seeking, therefore, 
to make our calling and election sure to membership 
in this spiritual Seed of Abraham, represented in 
Isaac, represented in Jacob, and represented in Abel, 
let us seek to bring to the Lord such sacrifices as he 
is pleased to receive (Heb. 13:16), and to be exercised 
by such a spirit of faith, of trust and of obedience as 
was manifested by the Head of this body, the Lord 
Jesus. He is our perfect Pattern; he walked this way 
successfully, and has not only opened it for us through 
the merit of his sacrifice, and accepted us as his followers 
in it, but also he has promised us his grace and 
help through the Word and by his spirit and by his 
providence all the journey through; assuring us that 
having begun a good work in us he is both able and 
willing to complete it. Let us then, like him, bring 
unto the Father the acceptable sacrifices of our consecrated 
lives, made acceptable to the Lord's altar through 
the atonement sacrifice which our dear Redeemer gave 
on our behalf. Thus we shall at once and always 
be accepted in the Beloved.— Rom. 12:1; 5:1,2. 



R2778 : page 88 

JESUS BETRAYED AND FORSAKEN. 

-JOHN 18:1-14.~MARCH3.~ 

"The cup which my Father hath 
given me, shall I not drink it?" 

NOTHING connected with the Gospel narrative 
appeals to human judgment more forcibly 
than does its simplicity. The fact that the weaknesses 
and failures and stumblings of the apostles themselves 
are faithfully narrated, and that without apologies or 
excuses or attempts to gloss over the defects, shows a 
sincerity, a truthfulness of intention, very rarely found 
in other writings. Nowhere is this more conspicuous 
than in the present lesson, which records the shameless 
perfidy of Judas, and the weakness of the remaining 
eleven, who, in our Lord's darkest hour, all forsook 
him, seeking personal safety,— one of them subsequently 
denying him. The writers of the Gospels would have 
been excusable had they interjected explanations and 
excuses for their course; but the narrative is really 
stronger as it stands, and we are, perhaps, inclined to 
furnish excuses for them which we might have been 
loath to receive had they offered them for themselves. 
We note that two of them had swords, and that by 



our Lord's permission, if not direction (Luke 22:35-38), 

R2779 : page 89 

that it might be manifest that he was not overpowered 
by the high priest's servants, but that he merely yielded 
himself to arrest. The Apostle Peter probably reasoned 
that if the Lord had directed the bringing of the 
swords they were for use and not for ornament, and 
with commendable courage he drew his sword in defence 
of his Lord against the first of the party who attempted 
to lay hold upon him. The blow was evidently 
intended for the head, but perhaps was providentially 
warded off so as to injure merely the ear. But what 
consternation it must have brought to Peter and to the 
others, when the Master objected to their using the 
swords, objected to their defending him, and even healed 
the servant who was smitten! Confronted with such 
conditions, we can readily see that the faithful eleven 
could do nothing but one of two things— either stay 
with the Master, and, like him, submit to arrest, or flee, 
and thus secure their personal liberty and safety, which 
the Master evidently did not wish to secure on his own 
behalf. 

We can readily imagine that eleven strong men, 
as they were, in the prime of life, even if they had but 
two swords amongst them, could have done considerable 
damage to the band that came to arrest our Lord; 
but while the excitement and activities of a battle inspire 
courage, to be compelled to stand idle and not be 
permitted to lift a hand in self-defence in the presence 
of an armed enemy, is most discouraging to anyone. 
And the natural tendency of all under such circumstances, 
to flee, was in this instance assisted and accentuated 
by the Master's own suggestion, "Let these 
go their way." Under full consideration of the circumstances, 
therefore, we must acquit the apostles of 
anything like cowardice, and must say that under similar 
circumstances to theirs few of the Lord's people 
would know how to do otherwise than flee, as they did. 

The band of men whom Judas led out for our 
Lord's arrest were not Roman soldiers, but merely 
under-officers and servants from the high priest's household, 
armed with such weapons as they could command, 
sticks and swords, etc. The Roman military 
authority, represented in Pilate, took no cognizance of 
Jesus and his work until the next day, when the priests, 
chief rulers, and a multitude of incited servants and 
people, brought him to the tribunal and demanded his 
execution. 

St. John's account does not mention the miserable 
act of betrayal by which Judas indicated which one of 
the twelve was Jesus— the betraying kiss, nor our Lord's 
words of reproof: "Friend, wherefore art thou come? 
Judas, betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss?" 
Judas evidently advanced beyond the band to give the 



salutation, according to prearrangement, that he should 
thus indicate the one they sought. 

It is difficult for any noble-minded person to read 
the account of Judas' course without feeling a deep 
sense of righteous indignation— a sense of the baseness 
of character which could thus betray, for thirty pieces 
of silver, the one whom he recognized as the noblest of 
men, whether or not he was sure that he was the Messiah. 
It may not be amiss that we notice here that 
Judas did not reach this depth of iniquity suddenly, 
but rather that the disposition had grown upon him 
during the three years of his intercourse with the Master, 
when the reverse disposition should have had control. 
At the time when he was chosen to be an apostle 
he evidently was a good man, so far as outward appearance 
at least was concerned; and his name, which 
signifies "Praise," would seem to indicate that his parents 
had been of a religious cast of mind, and had 
wished, and, so to speak, prophesied of him, that he 
would be a messenger of God to sound forth his praise. 
And what a privilege and opportunity he enjoyed in 
this direction! 

From the meager mentionings of the Gospel records, 
we may reasonably infer that the beginning of his downfall 
was the harboring of a love of money. Instead of 
rebuking this wrong spirit, curbing it, and seeking, on 
the contrary, to cultivate generosity and love and benevolence, 
he permitted selfishness to have more or 
less control in his heart and life. We may surmise that 
he chose the office of treasurer for the little company; 
whereas, had he been sufficiently alive to his own condition 
his proper course would have been to have refused 
it, realizing that already he had too much love 
of money, and that the handling of the funds might 
prove a temptation to him. But, on the contrary, he 
sought the office, obtained it, carried the bag, and the 
money that was put therein, and the Apostle John tells 
us that he was a thief. (John 12:6.) This passion for 
money, like all others of the abnormal propensities of 
our fallen nature, grew stronger and stronger as it was 
encouraged and cultivated, until finally it knew no 
bounds, and he was ready to sell his loving Master, 
Messiah, for thirty pieces of silver. 

But while hating such a character, loathing it, despising 
it, and seeking to go as far as possible in an 
opposite direction in our own characters, we are not to 
overlook the fact that there are many amongst the Lord's 
disciples who, in a less degree, commit a crime very 
similar to that of Judas— they sell the Lord, they betray 
him, while professing to love him. True, this cannot 
be done in the same personal and literal way today; 
but the spirit of it may be seen occasionally, we regret 
to say; we find some who really believe in Jesus, some 
who have consecrated their lives to be his followers, 
some who have been engaged in the ministry of his 
truth, as Judas was there, who are willing to sell the 



R2779 : page 90 

Lord for a mess of pottage— for good things of this present 
life— for a salary, for social position, for honor 
amongst men, for popularity, and titles— who are willing 
to sell even their lips, as Judas did, so that, while 
professing to honor and to serve the Lord, they are willing 
to join with those who misrepresent his character, 
his plan, his Word— willing to rejoice with those who 
seek to assassinate the Lord. Ah, how well it is that 
each one ask himself the question raised upon the night 
of the Supper, "Lord, is it I?" and let none be too 
ready to excuse himself, but let each search earnestly 
his own heart and life and conduct, to see that he is 
not sacrificing in any way the truth and the life for any 
consideration whatsoever. 

OUR WARFARE NOT WITH CARNAL WEAPONS. 



In telling Peter to put up his sword our Lord inculcates 
a lesson which many of his well-meaning followers 
since have utterly failed to learn. On the contrary, 
all through the dark ages the sword— military 
power— was invoked and used on behalf of one party 
and then another of professed followers of Christ; sometimes 
against unbelievers, but very frequently against 
fellow-professors. The sword has left a bloody mark 
in the church nominal, and has become a cause of offence 
even to some in the world who see how different 
is such a course from that which our dear Redeemer 
prescribed for his followers. Never was this lesson more 
needed by nominal Christendom than today, when a 
militant spirit seems to pervade all parties and denominations. 
It is the soldiers of professedly Christian nations 
that today are amongst the poor heathen of China, 
"avenging" the death of Christian missionaries and 
others. It is these same representatives of these so-called 
Christian nations that are setting such immoral 
examples before the heathen people that by their evil 
conduct they glorify the soldiers of heathen Japan, 
whose mercy and moderation and self-control are universally 
admitted. 

True, blame for what these soldiers may do cannot 
be properly charged upon the cause of Christ. We deny 
that they are Christian nations, and we deny that they 
are Christian soldiers. We claim that the soldiers are 
"children of this world," and that they are fighting as 
representatives of the "kingdoms of this world," under 
the "prince of this world." Nevertheless, as we come 
still closer to the question we find, upon apparently 
good authority, that the government of the United States 
has been appealed to by Christian ministers and missionaries 
to take vengeance upon the Chinese. From 



the accounts in the public press we may infer that the 

majority of the appeals for mercy and moderation have 

come from nominally worldly people, and that a majority 

of the appeals for vigorous measures have come 

from those who nominally are ministers, servants, representatives 

of Jesus, who said to Peter, "Put up thy 

sword into its sheath." 

But here again we must draw the line, and surmise 
that as in olden times the Apostle said, "They are not 
all Israel who are of Israel," so now they are not all 
true Christians who are of Christendom. We must suppose 
that the Apostle's words are still true, "If any 
man have not the spirit of Christ he is none of his." 
We must suppose that in proportion as the spirit of 
love and gentleness and meekness is lacking it is a good 
evidence that the person, whatever may be his professions, 
is not a minister of Christ, not a minister of the 
true gospel, but merely a minister of some human denomination 
and some false gospel, which contradicts 
the truth. 

It may not be inappropriate here to notice the general 
spread of a fiery spirit, bitter, vindictive, merciless, 
amongst people professing godliness, and of whom we 
might reasonably expect better things. An evidence 
of this bitter and fiery spirit is seen in the greater prevalence 
of lynch law in this enlightened country, where 
all the laws are in the hands of the majority, and where, 
therefore, there is no excuse. Accounts of these lynchings 
seem to indicate that there is, deep down in the 
hearts of many people who are apparently moderate 
and well intentioned, a fierce, brutal, savage instinct, 
which has never been transformed by the renewing of 
their minds by the power of the holy spirit. Just what 
this may lead to in the future, it is difficult to say; but 
it is part of the spirit of anarchy, which the Scriptures 
assure us will before long spread throughout all Christendom, 
and result in the great time of trouble, so long 
foretold, in which everything of law and order will go 
down before the angry passions of humanity. 

The same intemperance as to thought and feeling 
is manifest sometimes merely in words, but it is, nevertheless, 
a piece of the same article, and reprehensible. 
As an illustration of this tendency toward immoderate 
thought and expression, we call attention to the extreme 
and unjustifiable utterance of a Methodist bishop, quoted 
from the New York Sun as follows:— 

R2780 : page 90 

"Shall we have Bryan elected? No; a thousand 
times no ! I'd rather go to sea with a boat of stone, 
with sails of lead, with oars of iron, with the wrath of 
God as a gale, and hell as a port." 

We should not forget, in defence of the bishop, 
that this language was used during the heat of a political 
campaign; and yet the palliating circumstances 



are quite insufficient. No circumstance, no condition 

imaginable, should lead any minister of the Gospel of 

Christ to use any such language; and we point it out 

now merely as an indication of the trend of our times, as 

being of a piece with the lynching and torturing of fellow-creatures, 

R2780 : page 91 

as an indication of the wild ferocity of 
thought which is leading on rapidly and preparing 
Christendom for anarchy, lawlessness, immoderation in 
all things. Let all of Christ's true disciples more and 
more remember the command of the Master, "Put up 
thy sword!" "Love your enemies." "Do good unto 
those who despitefully use you and persecute you." 

THE CUP WHICH THE FATHER POURS. 



Our Golden Text is the cream of this whole lesson. 
It expresses most beautifully, most concisely, most 
forcefully, the principles which underlay our Master's 
obedience to the Heavenly Father, and which enabled 
him in all things to come off conqueror and "overcomer;" 
and all who are seeking to follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, to be his disciples indeed, will do well 
to ponder the thought expressed in these words: "The 
cup which my father hath given me, shall I not drink 
it?" The thought is clear: It is that he recognized the 
circumstances and conditions in which he found himself, 
as being not of those of his own making, nor yet 
those made for him by his enemies. He recognized 
the divine supervision of all of his affairs, and knew 
that nothing could possibly come upon him except as 
the Father would permit; and because the Father had 
so arranged it, had poured out this cup for him, therefore 
it was duty on his part to drink it. 

We would not undertake to say that the Lord's 
people should never look for ways of escape from impending 
trials and difficulties; for we have the Lord's 
promise to this effect, that he will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that we are able to endure, but will with 
the temptation provide a way of escape from those features 
of it which would be beyond the possibility of endurance. 
When, therefore, we feel that our submission 
to evil has about reached its climax, where succor must 
come or we must utterly fall, that is the time for us to 
look about us to see what way of escape the Lord is 
opening for us. But we are to be sure that the way of 
escape which we take is not of our own, but of the 
Lord's provision; for if we should run away from duty 
and trial and testing in one place, it would merely be 
to fall into other trials and testings, perhaps severer, 
in another quarter. We are to know in advance that 
trials, difficulties, persecutions, slanders, are all a part 



of the portion which the Father has poured out, not 
only for the Head of the body, but also for all the 
members. We are therefore to be prepared to endure 
hardness as good soldiers; not fleeing, but courageously 
accepting as of the Lord's providence whatever he may 
permit to come to us, unless we shall see a reasonable, 
proper, honorable way of escaping from it, which will 
not be in violation of our covenant, nor in violation of 
any law of righteousness. 

No other lesson, perhaps, is more needed by the 
Lord's followers than the one of willingness to drink 
the cup which the Father pours— a recognition that 
the Father is guiding and directing in our affairs because 
we are his, as members of the body of the Anointed 
One. In these respects the consecrated children of 
God occupy a very different position from the world, 
with whom the Father is not dealing as sons, who are 
not on trial for glory, honor and immortality, and for 
whom, consequently, he is not now pouring cups of 
trial, testing, endurance, etc. "The cup which we 
drink, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?" 
—a share in his sufferings? "If we suffer with him 
we shall also reign with him; if we be dead with him 
we believe that we shall also live with him." 



R2780 : page 91 

"YE HAVE CONDEMNED THE JUST ONE." 

-MATT. 26:57-68.-MARCH 10.- 

"Thou art the Christ, the Son of 
the living God. "-Matt. 16:16. 

CAIAPHAS filled the office of high priest at the 

time of our Lord's condemnation. It was he 

who had already expressed himself to the effect that it 

was "expedient that one man should die for the nation, 

that the whole people should not perish" (John 11:50; 

18:14), thus illustrating how God may at times use the 

thoughts and intentions of wicked men to express prophetically 

profound truths. It was indeed expedient, 

not only for the Jews, but also for the whole world, 

that a ransom should be given for Adam and his race, 

to the intent that they might be released from divine 

condemnation and ultimately be granted an opportunity 

for return to divine favor and life everlasting. 

But so far as Caiaphas was concerned, he was probably 
thinking only of human expediency. He perceived 
the growing interest of the multitudes in Jesus 
of Nazareth. He realized that even the most learned 
of the scribes and Pharisees were no match for Jesus in 
doctrine and logic, and that the teachings of Jesus were 
so opposed to his own and the general traditions of Judaism 



that their acceptance must mean a religious revolution. 

This, he reasoned, would mean the loss of the 

prestige of the nation with the Romans, and the abrogation 

of all the rights and privileges accorded to them. 

So far as Caiaphas was concerned, his mind, his judgment, 

was already made up in respect to Jesus, and he 

merely sought opportunity to carry it into effect— to 

kill him. But being outwardly and nominally a religious 

R2780 : page 92 

man and a representative of justice, he felt constrained, 
so far as possible, to put the murder of Jesus, 
which he felt to be a necessity for the public good, in 
the light of an act of justice. 

Caiaphas evidently was the ringleader in the conspiracy 
against Jesus. It was he and his associates 
who bargained with Judas; it was the under-priests and 
under-officers of his court and household and his servants 
who had been sent with Judas to arrest our Lord 
in the night, when he would be away from the multitudes; 
and we may presume that it was by his orders 
that our Lord was taken first to Annas, the father-in-law 
of Caiaphas, a man of great influence amongst the 
Jews, who had previously been high priest, and whose 
term of office had not yet expired, according to Jewish 
custom, altho their conquerors had forced a change in 
this respect, and had appointed Caiaphas chief priest 
instead of Annas. The sending of Jesus to Annas was 
evidently intended to secure his sanction to his arrest 
and trial, and the influence which that would imply. 

When the band appeared before Annas he questioned 
Jesus respecting his teachings, etc., but he did 
not attempt a trial of the case, not having the authority. 
When our Lord refused to answer the questions, 
and referred Annas to those that had heard him, he 
was merely following the judicial course, and suggesting 
to Annas the propriety of not departing from the 
law in the examination of a prisoner. Annas signified 
his assent to the arrest by not reproving it or demanding 

R2781 : page 92 

his release, but sending the prisoner bound to Caiaphas, 
—thus saying by implication, I agree in your 
course that this man should be arrested and should be 
tried as a dangerous character,— dangerous to our theories 
and institutions. 

Caiaphas had already the sympathetic cooperation 
of many of the leading Jews, especially of the priests, 
some of whom were in the "band." We may presume 
that the time during which the prisoner was taken to 
the house of Annas was occupied in despatching other 
messengers in various directions, to notify the members 
of the Council— the Sanhedrin— that the disturber of 
their peace had been arrested, and to assemble for his 



trial. It was probably about two o'clock in the morning 

that Jesus was brought before Caiaphas. The Jewish 

law forbids the trial of a prisoner between sunset 

and sunrise, and any verdict secured during the unlawful 

hours would have been invalid, illegal. Nevertheless, 

the chief priest was anxious to have his case 

well in hand by sunrise, and to hasten as much as 

possible the death of the prisoner, which he had already 

determined upon. The matter of the trial was a mere 

farce anyway, but he would see what evidence he could 

lay before the Sanhedrin at sunrise, and hence he immediately 

and illegally began the examination of Jesus, 

calling for witnesses. 

No doubt it had been freely stated that Jesus had 
announced his Messiahship, altho we know that this 
was not the case so far as the gospel narratives show. 
He had been very guarded in his remarks in public, 
and even amongst his chosen twelve disciples he had 
not announced himself freely, but had first drawn from 
Peter the declaration of our Golden Text, "Thou art 
the Christ [Messiah], the Son of the living God." Jesus 
merely acknowledged that Peter had stated the truth, 
and that he had been guided in the statement by the 
holy spirit. When, therefore, Caiaphas sought witnesses 
even on this point he found none capable of 
giving satisfactory testimony. One witness who thought 
he had something of importance gave a somewhat garbled 
account of our Lord's words respecting the Temple; 
but when they sought a second witness to corroborate 
this they could not find one who would testify exactly 
the same, and the Jewish Law required at least two 
witnesses in any such trial. 

Exasperated at his poor success in securing testimony, 
Caiaphas determined to try a different plan, and 
an illegal one— to excite his prisoner so that he would 
make some incriminating confession. Therefore he 
rose up, and with a manifestation of indignation, and to 
give the effect that very damaging testimony had been 
given, he asked the prisoner if he had not heard the 
testimony against him, and if he had nothing to say in 
self-defence. Our Lord made no response; he was not 
there to defend himself, and if he had been there was 
no need of defence. There was nothing criminal in 
what he had said respecting the Temple, even if it had 
been testified by a dozen witnesses. Caiaphas was 
foiled, but being a shrewd man he quickly changed his 
tactics, and affecting to wonder if indeed the claims of 
Messiah might be true he put Jesus under oath, saying, 
"I adjure thee [I put thee under oath] in the name of 
the living God; tell us whether thou be the Messiah, 
the Son of God." 

Our Lord was not bound to answer this question, 
which he well knew would be used to incriminate him 
as a blasphemer. Nevertheless, he was not seeking to 
avoid death, but had already determined that the cup 
which the Father had given him was to be drunk, and 



hence he answered saying, according to John, "Thou 
hast said"— you have stated the truth; or, according to 
Mark, "Jesus said, I am"— the Messiah, the Son of 
God. He followed this with a declaration that those 
who there witnessed his humiliation and mock trial 
should in due time recognize him as the honored of 
God, sitting down at the right hand of the majesty on 
high, and to be revealed in the clouds of heaven as the 
great Judge, the Messiah. 

Caiaphas could not hope to have a clearer expression, 
nor anything that would come nearer justifying 

R2781 : page 93 

his predetermined verdict of guilty of blasphemy, and 
hence with a mock expression of righteous indignation 
he tore his "simla" or upper garment, exclaiming, 
Blasphemy! We have heard blasphemy! Then, appealing 
to the members of the Council present, who 
were already in sympathy with the murderous procedure, 
he enquired whether or not they were satisfied with 
the evidence, and, as pre-arranged, they agreed that this 
was a clear case of blasphemy, and that Jesus was 
worthy of death. 

Dr. C. H. Plumptre has well said: "No other words 
in the whole Gospel records are more decisive against 
the views of those who would fain see in our Lord only 
a great moral teacher, like Socrates or Sakya Mouni. 
At the very crisis of his history, when denial would 
have saved his life, he asserts his claim to be more than 
this, to be all that the most devout Christians have 
ever believed him to be." The most devout Christians 
are those who believe our Lord's own words without 
distorting them,— that he was with the Father before 
the world was; that the Father had sent him into the 
world to be its Redeemer; that "never man spake like 
this man;" and that he was different from all other 
men, in that "he was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate 
from sinners"— that the life of the man Christ Jesus 
was unblemished and from above. But the most devout 
Christians in all ages have avoided claiming for 
Jesus what some of the less devout Christians have 
claimed for him, but what he never claimed for himself; 
viz., that he was his own Father, Jehovah. 

The most devout Christians have believed the words 
of Jesus, when he said, "The Father is greater than 
I;" and, "As the Father hath sent me, so send I 
you." They recognize the oneness between the Father 
and the Son as being, not a oneness of person, but a 
oneness of heart, of mind, of purpose, according to our 
Lord's own declaration in his prayer for his people, 
when he said, "I pray for them... that they may 
be one, as we are [one]." (John 17:1 1.) The most 
devout Christians acknowledge that the only one, "the 
man Christ Jesus," was the perfect representation of 
the Heavenly Father, so that he who saw the Son (who 



was the express image of the Father's person) saw the 
Father also,— in the only way in which it would be 
possible for mankind to see "the invisible God," "whom 
no man hath seen nor can see," but whom the Only 
Begotten of the Father hath revealed to men perfectly. 
-John 1:18. 

Thoughtful and intelligently devout Christians, when 
they examine the words of our Lord in this connection, 
can see nothing in them whatever to the effect that our 
Lord Jesus here contradicted the other plain statements 
of his testimony, but rather they find it in full conformity. 
Nor did the Jews for one moment think that our 
Lord meant that he was the Heavenly Father. This 
was not the question asked: they had no expectation 
that Messiah would be Jehovah, but Jehovah's representative, 
and agent, the Son of God, "The Messenger 
[servant] of the Covenant, whom ye delight in." 
(Mai. 3:1.) The charge of blasphemy against our Lord 
was based upon his claim of being a Son of God— not 
the Father himself. The charge was made on a previous 
occasion (John 10:29-36), when the accusers expressly 
declared his crime was that of calling himself a son of 
God;— that thus he was placing himself on a parity 
with God, as being of the same kind or nature. On 
that occasion Jesus answered their quibble by quoting 
them from the Psalms, where all of the Lord's consecrated 
people, the Gospel Church, are called "sons of 
God," and he pointed out to them that he merely 
claimed the same title that was there freely given to 
those who would come into that relationship, through 
justification of faith, whereas he himself had always been 
a Son of God in full harmony with the Father.* 

When this session of the Sanhedrin, or court, broke 
up it was to wait until sunrise, when the formal meeting 
took place, and the verdict of blasphemy would be 
reaffirmed, and thus have the semblance of legality. 
(Matt. 27:1.) Meantime our Lord stood bound in the 
high priest's palace court for probably three hours, and 
it was during this interim that the high priest's servants, 
etc., took occasion to show their sympathy with the 
great ones by abusing the prisoner. Some spat upon 
him; others smote him with their hands and with sticks, 
and in general displayed their littleness and meanness. 
A favorite diversion with them seems to have been, 
after blindfolding him, to smite him and enquire whether 
or not he were prophet enough to name his tormentor. 
All these things our Lord endured, so far as the record 
shows, without a murmur. He accepted this all as a 
part of the cup which the Father had prepared for him; 
and the Apostle, evidently referring partly to these experiences, 
says, "Consider him who endured such 
contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye be 
weary and faint in your minds. Ye have not yet resisted 
unto blood." (Heb. 12:3,4.) If we refuse the 
cup the Father prepares for us it will only return to us 
later perhaps with a more bitter draught: and if avoided 



entirely we cannot have share with our Lord in the 

glory, honor and immortality for which the trying experiences 

now permitted are our preparation. 

The servant is not above his Lord, and if they 
have smitten and spit upon and buffeted the Master, 
none of the servants should be surprised or complain 
if they should have somewhat similar experiences. 
And when such things come to them while in the line 



*For a treatise of this subject, and of the expression, "Son 
of Man," see MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. V., Chap. 6. 

R2782 : page 94 

of duty they are to esteem them as our Lord did, part 

of the cup which the Father has prepared, and they 

are to endure them without murmuring; on the contrary, 

as the Apostle suggests, they may give thanks that 

they are counted worthy to suffer some of the reproaches 

of Christ.-Col. 1:24; 2 Tim. 1:18; 2:3; Jas. 5:11. 

But the Apostle urges, "Let none of you suffer as 
an evil-doer nor as a busybody in other men's matters." 
If suffering should come upon us justly for our 
faults, we could not glory in it, but rather be ashamed; 
but if any man suffer as a Christian let him not be 
ashamed— if he suffer for the truth's sake, for righteousness' 
sake. It may be urged by some that sufferings 
cannot come now, in our enlightened day, and 
when the name of Jesus is popular; but, we answer: 
Yes; it is still true, as the Apostle said, "Whosoever 
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." 
Many now claim the name of Jesus who know not Jesus 
nor the Father, and who have not his spirit, just as 
many at that time delighted in the name of Moses, and 
sat in his seat as Doctors of the Law, yet knew not, 
appreciated not, the law of Moses and the law of God. 
-1 Pet. 4:15,16; 2 Tim. 3:12. 



R2782 : page 94 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



Question.— I see it is your view that the 144,000 
sealed (Rev. 7) are Spiritual Israel, "the true Israel 
of God," foreknown to him from the beginning, the 
predestinated "Abraham's Seed" which shall in due 
time bless the world. (Gal. 3:29.) I see too that you 
view it as a literal number, claiming that all the numbers 
of Revelation are literal. But let me inquire, 
Would not such a view overthrow the hopes of those 



who live today? Could we suppose that the entire 
Gospel age, with its reputed millions of martyrs, has 
not secured the 144,000 long ago? 

Answer.— It would be a great mistake to suppose 
that the millions of martyrs, Catholic and Protestant, 
were all "overcomers,"— "saints" in the Scriptural 
sense. In a vast majority of cases the principle fought 
for, and suffered for, was chiefly liberty. Politics, too, 
lay at the foundation of much of the butchery. Note 
in another column how a bishop became so excited in 
our own day as to declare himself willing rather to 
go to hell than see a political opponent elected. Many, 
too, would go to death from pride;— rather than yield 
after having taken their stand. 

When we think of the fact that a membership in 
this "royal priesthood" implies a full, living self-sacrifice 
to the Lord and his cause, and the attainment, 
while sacrificing, of the fruits of the spirit— meekness, 
gentleness, long-suffering, brotherly kindness,— Love, 
we rather wonder that so many as 144,000 could be 
found in the past nearly nineteen centuries. And it 
is of those who cultivate these graces, and attain them 
in their hearts (even if they cannot always exercise 
them as fully as they could desire in their flesh) that 
the Apostle declares: "If ye do these things ye shall 
never fall, but so [doing] an entrance shall be ministered 
unto you abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of 
our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ."— 2 Pet. 1:5-11. 

Our confidence is in God,— that he knew exactly 
how long this Gospel age should be to gather the 
"elect" class; and that he will get the exact number 
of "jewels," the "little flock," within the appointed 
time, before "the times of the Gentiles" run out.— See 
also our issue of April 1, 1899, page 67. 

Question.— We are all making considerable effort, 
through the Volunteer work and otherwise, to present 
the truth to others, and through the WATCH TOWER 
we learn that the numbers of interested ones are continually 
increasing, and the intimation is that still 
further increase may be expected. Now, the question 
is, How does this harmonize with the presentations 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN to the effect that the general 
call has ceased since 1881, and that altho the door to 
the high calling is not yet closed, it could not be entered 
except by those whom the Lord will admit to 
take the place of some who have failed to comply with 
the terms of their covenant— to make their calling and 
election sure. 

Answer.— We understand that in 1881 a considerable 
number of justified persons had made a consecration 
to the Lord, but had not yet been proven— how 
many, of course, we cannot judge. Suppose, for instance, 
that the number were 50,000, and suppose 
that only one-half of that number would eventually 
be of the overcoming class: it would mean that gradually 
25,000 would have their names blotted out of 



the Lamb's Book of Life, and the crowns once apportioned 
to them no longer counted as theirs. In order 
to give all of these consecrated ones a full opportunity 
it might be a number of years before any considerable 
number of them would be thus rejected, and the admission 
of others to take their places would be correspondingly 
gradual. We are to remember, too, that 
of those who enter to take their places probably not 
more than one-half would be overcomers— which would 
make 12,500 more to be admitted, and of these probably 
not more than one-half would be overcomers, 
which would mean that more than 6000 additional 
ones must be brought in; and so on. We think it not 
unreasonable that a considerable time has been left 
for many of the consecrated ones to note the tendency 
of the nominal church and her fallen condition spiritually, 

R2782 : page 95 

and to be tested thereby as respects their love 

for righteousness and their hatred of iniquity— their 

devotion to the Lord and to the principles of his Word, 

and their opposition to injustice, untruth, unrighteousness. 

Meantime, the truth, under the Lord's 

providence, has been going hither and thither throughout 

the civilized world, coming in contact with nearly 

all the consecrated, we may presume, and becoming 

more or less of a test to them. Some have gradually 

accepted it; others consecrated are, no doubt, still 

weighing the matter. Still others have probably 

sided against what they know to be the truth, because 

of love for the world or popularity or other selfish 

considerations. The testing of these cannot be expected 

to continue long. The light is growing so 

strong on the one side, and the darkness so strong on 

the other, that any who are unable to make up their 

minds respecting their proper position would thereby 

be showing themselves to be unworthy to be classed 

as "overcomers" and joint-heirs with Christ in the 

Kingdom. We may reasonably expect, therefore, 

that quite a good many places in the Lamb's book of 

Life will be declared vacant and new names be written 

therein to complete the elect number. To our understanding 

the ones thus favored of the Lord will be 

persons fully consecrated to him, and we would esteem 

it probable that such would early be brought in contact 

with present truth for their ripening as wheat for 

the garner, and the hearty acceptance of present truth 

by such as are fully consecrated to the Lord and to 

lay down their lives in his service would, we esteem, 

be in the nature of an evidence of their acceptance to 

the high calling. We would not understand that a 

knowledge of the truth without consecration would 

be an evidence in this direction, believing that many 

can see much that is reasonable in restitution, etc., 

who have never made a covenant with the Lord. We 



would believe, however, that none can appreciate deep 
things of God except by the holy spirit.— 
1 Cor. 2:9,10,14. 

Question.— What is the Christian's robe, of which 
the Apostle says that it should be kept "without 
blemish. "-Eph. 5:27? 

Answer.— We understand it to be the wedding 
garment mentioned by our Lord in one of his parables. 
It represents the righteousness of Christ imputed to 
his consecrated followers who are invited to suffer 
with him, and also to reign with him. Otherwise it 
is called justification by faith— our imputed or reckoned 
righteousness in Christ, through which we have a 
standing and acceptance with the Father, and are permitted 
to enter into covenant relationship with him 
and thus to become "heirs of God, joint-heirs with 
Jesus Christ, our Lord, if so be that we suffer with 
him. "-Rom. 8:17. 

In the representation of the Bride-class in Psalm 45, 
the Church, as the King's daughter, is represented 
as presented at the marriage in this clean linen robe, 
richly embroidered— the embroidery, we believe, representing 
the development of character on the part of 
all the faithful. The robe is the basis of any good 
works that we can perform, and even then before we 
can accomplish anything we must have and must follow 
the Pattern given us by our Lord. 

This garment, if it would be a wedding garment, 
must be spotless, clean and white— "without spot, or 
wrinkle, or any such thing." (Eph. 5:27.) In 
James 1:27, the Apostle urges us to keep ourselves 
unspotted from the world, which implies a possibility 
of having our robe of Christ's righteousness spotted. 
This does not signify that anything we could do could 
destroy the work of Christ, or make of none effect 
his sacrifice for sins, nor blemish it. The robe signifies 
that share of Christ's merit which has been freely 
appropriated to us by him with the Father's consent. 
If, through receiving of the spirit of the world, we 
blemish or sully this wedding garment we shall be 
unfit to be of the Bride class, and be rejected; and yet 
we might say that in our present imperfect condition 
and many unfavorable surroundings and besetments 
it would be a miracle if we should never come so closely 
in contact with evil as to spot our garment or wrinkle 
it-Compare Jude 23; Rev. 3:4; 16:15. 

However, we find that God's gracious provision 
in Christ is not only that our Lord Jesus' sacrifice 
was a sufficient one for all of our imperfections of the 
past, prior to our acceptance with the Lord, but that 

R2783 : page 95 

it is a sufficient one also for any unintentional blemish 
or weakness or misstep that may come to us through our 
own imperfections or the weaknesses of others, after we 



become the Lord's children. In other words, we are 
not only provided with the robe covering all the past, 
but provided also in the same sacrifice of Christ with 
a spot-remover, and any who through weakness or 
temptation stumble by the way and soil their garments 
are to be restored by the brethren "in a spirit of 
meekness, remembering themselves also, lest they 
should be tempted." To restore means to help them 
to see the spot, and by faith to apply the provided 
cleansing, through penitence and prayer. All who 
are in the right attitude of heart, appreciating the 
purity of the robe, appreciating the Bridegroom and 
his favor, appreciating the great King and appreciating 
the honor of being called to the marriage, will be very 
careful indeed to guard against spots and wrinkles, 
and very careful also that if any should get upon their 
robes they should be as quickly as possible removed. 
This work of mutual helpfulness on the part of the 
Lord's consecrated people is represented as "the bride 
making herself ready." 

R2783 : page 96 

Those not thus faithful are in a wrong condition, 
and spot after spot, wrinkle after wrinkle, coming to 
their robes, they become more or less careless, and 
especially as they see so many others in a similar condition. 
These are brought to our attention in Rev. 7:13-16. 
We are there shown that they will not come 
to the position of being members of spiritual Israel, 
the 144,000, filling up the elect number named after 
the twelve tribes. We are shown, however, that their 
unreadiness to be of the elect class was because of the 
spots upon their robes and the carelessness which this 
manifested. But the Lord does not reject them because, 
passing through manifold temptations, they 
have not been properly careful, for in wearing the 
robe they are still confessing their trust in him, in the 
merit of his sacrifice. He therefore provides for them 
an experience which will demonstrate to which party 
they really belong. He causes them to go through a 
great time of trouble in which, if they love sin and 
unrighteousness, they will succumb; but if they love 
the Lord and love righteousness they will come off 
victors eventually through the Lord's grace, and be 
permitted to cleanse their robes with tears and efforts, 
etc., as they should have done voluntarily before, spot 
by spot, as any blemish was noticed. They do not 
become members of the Bride class, even when cleansed; 
they do not sit with Christ in his throne as will the 
Bride; they do not constitute the Temple, but, on the 
contrary, they will serve God in his temple (the 
Church). They will serve before the throne; they 
will have palm branches, indicating final victory; but 
they will not have crowns, because they were not overcomers, 
in the sense demanded of all who will be 



joint-heirs with Christ. 

Question.-I read in the TOWER of March 1, 1900, 
under the caption, "The Consecrated Home Honored," 
your suggestion respecting responsibilities of a husband 
and father as the head of his household. In 
that article you intimate that those who do not exercise 
the office of head of their families have reason to 
question whether or not they are overcomers, etc. 
The question seems to me a very important one, in 
view of the fact that I know a great many of the brethren 
who seem to have comparatively little influence 
or control in their own homes. I therefore inquire 
to what extent is it reasonable for us to expect our 
households to be all consecrated? 

Answer.— You have only partly grasped our 
thought, which is not that all the members of the 
family should be consecrated to the Lord, but that 
the home and its conditions should be of the consecrated 
kind, if the head of that home is consecrated, 
and is exercising the duties and prerogatives of the 
head of the house. Even if every member of the 
family were out of Christ, and out of sympathy with 
the religious views of the husband and father of the 
family, his kind and loving, but positive conduct of 
his house along Scriptural lines should secure to him 
such respect from every member of his family that 
they would not only not oppose his wishes, but, on the 
contrary would take pleasure in cooperating with them. 
Thus, if the Lord himself or one of the brethren, his 
representatives, were to pass that way, and the husband 
and father of the family thought to entertain 
him, the properly ordered household, being under the 
control of his consecrated mind, would be one in which 
all whom he chose to invite would be made most welcome 
and heartily entertained. And even if some 
dissatisfaction were felt, it would be a crime against 
the divine institution of the family to manifest opposition, 
for the husband and father is the head of 
the family, as Christ to the Church, says the Apostle. 
-Eph. 5:23,24,29,33. 

Nothing in this would mean arbitrariness on the 
part of the husband and father, but rather that he 
would wish to consider, as far as possible, the interests 
of his home, and to contribute to the happiness of 
each member of it. But it would be his duty, as a 
child of God, to place the wishes of the Lord paramount 
to those of his family, so that he would be 
prompt to invite the Lord or his brethren into his 
home, as a tribute of his respect and love for the 
Lord. And in requesting his family's cooperation in 
this matter, he would know that he was bringing a 
blessing to them, whether they appreciated it or not; 
and that any failure to follow this course would be 
giving his family and their wishes precedence to the 
Lord and his wishes, a matter not to be considered 
for a moment by any "overcomer." Nevertheless, 



everything should be done, not from the standpoint 
of force and demand, etc., if possible, but rather from 
the standpoint of love. Let the family see your love 
manifested in all ways, and also know your firmness 
in character on every point where principle or loyalty 
to the Lord are involved. 

Nor do we mean that the wife and family should 
be imposed upon and overworked for the sake of visitors; 
on the contrary, their care and comfort are the 
first care of the husband. The head of the family 
must be watchful of the interests of all under his care 
to such an extent that he should sacrifice himself, 
his own comfort and convenience, for their proper 
care. But to purchase peace in the home at the expense 
of his own manhood would be wrong, and would 
encourage a wrong spirit in those he seeks to guide 
in the right way. 

However, where the right way has not been seen 
and the wrong way has become habitual, it would be 
the part of wisdom not to approach the right too ruthlessly, 
but very gently;— praying for and seeking to 
exercise humility, patience, gentleness;— to let love, 
and love only, hold the reins of control. 



page 97 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. MARCH 15, 1901. No. 6. 
CONTENTS. 



Views from the Watch Tower 99 

Christendom's Financial Outlook 99 

National Preparations for War 99 

The Spirit of Lawlessness 100 

"I Find no Fault in this Man" 102 

The Atoning Sacrifice Completed 105 

Paradise Promised 107 

"Father Into Thy Hands I Commit 

My Spirit" 108 

"Despised and Rejected of Men" 109 

"They that Reverenced the Lord 

Spake Often Together" 110 

page 98 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 



FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



CHRISTIAN HOME EMBELLISHMENTS. 

We have just received from London a fresh invoice of wall 
texts, illuminated motto-cards, etc., suitable for the walls of 
your parlors, dining-rooms, and bed-rooms. Our previous announcement 
of these embellishments brought so many orders 
that what we considered a good supply was quickly exhausted. 

The new lot is the choicest we have ever had— about one-half 
the same that we had before and one-half new designs. 
Hence those who got of the previous lot, and want all new patterns 
should say so. Or if they want any of the older patterns 
duplicated, mention which, and if possible, we will accommodate 
you. They are all choice, however, and if you had two 
of the same text, in different rooms, it would not matter. 
Orders will be filled in rotation as received. 

We have concluded to assort these in One Dollar parcels as 
before. You will be pleased with the general assortment, 
which will be known as parcels a, b and c, each different from 
the other. The prices, including postage, are about one-half 
what such goods are usually sold for in this country— though 
not as cheap as the British prices; because ocean freights and 
custom house duties are considerable. British friends will, 
therefore, receive still better parcels for the money from our 
London branch. We are not supplying these for filthy lucre's 
sake; but for the blessings that may result to you and yours 
through frequent suggestions in every part of your home of 
some of the choicest precepts and promises of the Scriptures. 

ONE DAY LOCAL CONVENTIONS. 

Baltimore, Md., Sunday, March 10th, at Dushane Hall (3d 
floor) cor. Baltimore street and Post Office avenue; at 10:30 
A.M., a Praise and Testimony Meeting. At 2:30 P.M., discourse 
by Editor of this journal. At 7:30 P.M., a Question Meeting. 

Wheeling, W.Va., Sunday, March 24th, at 10 A.M., Praise 
Meeting; 1 1 A.M. and 3 P.M., discourses by Editor of this 
journal; at 7:30 P.M., Testimony Meeting. 



R2783 : page 99 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



NATIONAL PREPARATIONS FOR WAR. 

WE CLIP the following from a Pittsburg daily, 
which shows that the Hague Peace Conference 
of 1899 is not taken very seriously by any of 
the nations:— 

"To carry out the various programmes of naval 
construction, as framed by the nations of the world, 
will require an outlay of five billion dollars. England 
set the pace several years ago, and now many of her 
great ships are out of date and out-classed. 

"The United States government arranged to spend 
$60,000,000, of which $20,000,000 will be expended 
in 1901. The cost of the tools and places to repair 
ships, is almost as expensive as the ships themselves. 
The value of ships is ephemeral, owing to the constant 
changes in types. 

"England has under construction 17 battleships, 
24 cruisers, 8 sloops of war and 25 torpedo destroyers, 
at a total cost of $133,000,000. This will not complete 
the fleet but moves them forward and completes 
those ordered, under a former appropriation. 

"France has provided for a naval construction 
reaching to 1907, in which a total of 220 vessels are to 
be built, the outlay of 1901 being figured at 
$124,000,000. 

"The plans of Germany cover 34 battleships, 32 
cruisers and 80 torpedo boats. The appropriation for 
1901 is $100,000,000. Russia's expenditures in 1901 
is placed at $46,000,000 for the beginning of the work 
on new ships and completing those under way. 

"Poverty-stricken Italy will expend $30,000,000 
on her navy in 1901. Japan's budget for naval equipment 
in 1901 is $23,000,000. Austria, Sweden, Holland 
and Denmark are preparing to double their naval 
expenditures. Verily, the wings of the angel of 
peace are not to be spread over the ocean during the 
early years of the new century." 

CHRISTENDOM'S FINANCIAL OUTLOOK. 



Because the great time of anarchistic trouble for 
which the Scriptures teach us to look in the near 
future is to be the agency through which the "present 
evil world [age]" will collapse, and prepare the 



way for the Millennial Kingdom, therefore our interest 
in the financial situation as related to prophetic 
fulfilment. 

"Money -making," the accumulation of vast 
wealth, cannot under present conditions come from 
day-labor in cultivating the soil or otherwise. It 
comes from the use of machinery, which today is so 
complete and abundant in civilized lands that each nation 

R2784 : page 99 

is able to much more than supply its own demands 
and must compete for outside business. This 
is the meaning of the Chinese trouble— she has hundreds 
of millions of people, and Christendom wants 
their patronage and in the name of Civilization will 
insist on having it;— even tho it costs blood and 
treasure it must be had for the future still more than 
for the present. 

Truth to tell, the present era of prosperity would 
have collapsed a year ago had it not been for the wars 
which came just in time to prolong the momentum. 
The Spanish, Philippine, Boer and Chinese wars have 
taken men from the ranks of labor and helped in that 
way; and have drawn money from the treasuries of 
the nations and put it into circulation among the people 
as the price of services, provisions, armaments, 
etc., etc.,— bonds taking the place of money as "collateral." 
Note the above naval expenditures alone, 
and consider how the $500,000,000 to be spent this 
year is already giving employment to miners, coke-workers, 
steel-workers, railroad employees, ship-builders, 
boiler and engine-builders and gun-makers. 

And this is but one item of the world's war expense. 
For instance, in the United States Senate 
one of its most careful and responsible members declared, 
"The military budget of this Republic for the 

R2784 : page 100 

coming year will be nearly $400,000,000. It will be 
nearly twice what any European power is spending." 
Of this amount, only one twentieth is for the navy as 
shown above. 

If present wars continue, or others break out and 
necessitate further expenditures and more bonds, the 
"good times" will last a while longer, until something 
occurs to cause distrust; then a panic will ensue, which, 
because of present conditions, will grind the masses as 
none other ever did;— and then will come the collapse 
which we expect will spread to everybody and everything 
in "Christendom." Money is now pushing the 
lever forward and keeping the people busy, because it is 
more than proportionately profited; and when the time 
comes, as it must come, when national bonds will no 
longer be in demand, it will be the Money-power that 



will take fright and reverse the lever and arrest the 
world's machinery with a jolt that will shake the social 
structure. 

Already both Great Britain and Germany have 
found it expedient to place their bonds in the United 
States rather than at home. Already there are premonitory 
signs of financial trouble in Germany— as 
the result of "over-production," competition, inability 
to find a market for her products. Already British 
manufacturers are suffering from competition; and 
the manufacturers of the United States could do nearly 
double their present business if they had the demand 
for their goods. 

We clip the following from the Boston Herald:— 

"Germany is feeling sharply similar conditions. 
The Berlin correspondent of a London newspaper says 
the German mortgage banks are in a bad way, which, 
indeed, is not news, since it has been known for 
some time. The important point is that the situation 
does not improve. The electrical industries, the iron 
trade and the wool-spinning industry are extremely 
dull, the latter being reported almost ruined. The 
cities are full of unemployed people, and the paternal 
government is busily devising public works and charitable 
arrangements for their relief. There has been 
in late years an enormous industrial development in 
Germany, bolstered up, to some extent, by artificial 
means. Naturally this has been accompanied by an 
enormous speculative movement. Should it collapse, 
the consequence would be a period of hard times, the 
duration of which cannot be predicted with any confidence. 
Germany has been, as it were, intoxicated 
by glory and hope. All classes of the population are 
puffed up with a sense of national destiny. They have 
appeared to think that nothing could withstand their 
progress to the supremacy of the world. Any rude 
shattering of their dreams would result in corresponding 
dejection when its significance was fully realized. 
According to all accounts having semblance of truthfulness, 
the present prospect is dark and threatening." 

Concerning the condition of things in Russia, the 
Industrial World, Odessa, says:— 

"It is no ordinary, temporary, fleeting or passing 
financial and industrial crisis which Russia faces. 
Her staple industries for some time have steadily 
languished, from causes various and deep-rooted, 
which it is the government's duty to investigate. 
Money is daily becoming scarcer. No year in forty 
has opened under blacker auspices. The country is 
within measurable distance, all around, of an economic 
collapse." 

If it is thus in the face of such immense national 
expenditures, how will it be when these and other great 
enterprises are forced to stop by a great panic? When 
it will come, no one can tell; but the Lord's people 
who order their affairs more for the accumulation of 



heavenly than of earthly wealth will be in the more 
favorable condition (both of head and heart) to take 
their share of whatever may be permitted of their 
Heavenly Father, and to profit by it. In view of the 
foregoing, we would not be surprised if wars would 
continue or increase, and thus prolong the present 
"good times" for a while, and thus financially weaken 
the nations for their fall. But we make no predictions. 
The Master's advice is always in order, "Watch 
and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 

THE SPIRIT OF LAWLESSNESS PREVALENT. 



The tendency away from peace toward lawlessness 
and war continues to be evidenced on every hand. 
The passion for blood and destruction still strives, 
however, to justify itself in some "righteous cause;" 
but the appetite, once whetted, will some day be careless 
respecting any claims of justification; and then 
some "good people" will be sorry that they did not 
balance their justice more evenly; that they helped 
unchain the tiger, that lies dormant, but not dead, in 
every fallen human being. 

The war against the Boers— to compel them to 
give the elective franchise to a few hundred foreigners, 
"uitlanders," has not only cost thousands of lives 
and millions of money, but has given thousands a taste 
of blood and fire, of recklessness of life and property 
which will prepare them for the coming scenes of anarchy 
at home. The same is true of the American 
soldiers in the Philippines, and the soldiers of all 
"Christendom" in China. 

The same spirit has manifested itself in nearly 
every nation of Europe against the Jews, and in 
Turkey against Christians. And it is a part of the 
spirit that has made possible horrible lynchings in 
this country; and which backs the present saloon-smashing 
now in vogue in Kansas. In all these cases 
those taking law into their own hands and practicing 
violence, would urge that right was on their side. 
Doubtless to some extent this is often true; what we 
point out is the spirit of lawlessness, anarchy which is 

R2784:page 101 

growing, and which will bear a "whirlwind" harvest 
ere long. 

TRUSTS AS VIEWED BY JUSTICE BROWN. 



"Justice Brown, one of the ablest members of the 
Supreme Court of the United States, in his John 



Marshall address at Parkersburg, W.Va., made some 
remarks pertinent to the trust question in speaking of 
the future of the judiciary of this country. 'The problems 
to be solved in the future,' he said, 'were those 
of combinations of capital and monopoly.... 
Society must adapt itself to the new conditions and 
do all it can to minimize the evils. It will not be the 
judges and the lawyers of the twentieth century who 
will have to face these problems, but the statesmen. 
There will be a struggle fought out with the desperation 
of hunger and possibly with bloodshed, but society will 
have to readjust itself on the basis of justice and 
equity.'"— Pittsburg Post. 



We endorse the above. We do not say that Trusts 
and combinations are unmitigated evils— that serve 
no good purpose; but admitting that such great combinations 
of capital serve a great purpose in economy 
of management and cheapening the cost of life's 
necessities— just as socialism would propose— we see 
nevertheless the impossibility of this reduced cost 
reaching and benefiting the public. We see that selfishness 
will maintain or raise prices and perhaps reduce 
wages to increase the stock dividends, even tho 
the process grind the masses into the dust. Those 
who forget that selfishness is the motive power of "the 
present evil world," will err in all their calculations. 

Socialists err on the other side of the question;— 
in supposing that people in general would work either 
their hands or their brains vigorously, if the incentives 
of gain, selfishness, wealth, were removed by 
legislation or otherwise. Not until the strong hand 
of the Kingdom of God, backed by the strong love of 
the glorified Christ (head and body— Rom. 8:17) takes 
control of earth's affairs can socialistic programs hope 
for success. 

THE POPE CRAVES POWER TO SUPPRESS 
PROTESTANTISM. 



The pope gave a hint respecting one cause of his 
anxiety to recover temporal power in Rome, when, 
addressing the Duke of Norfolk and accompanying 
English Catholics, recently, he said:— 

"Under our eyes, in this holy city, which should 
be the inviolate center of Catholicism, it is permitted 
to associations for religious propagation to take advantage 
of the sad economic conditions of the country 
to corrupt the faith of our children in the name of the 
specious doctrine of judgment, which pretends to leave 
each the right of interpreting in his own fashion the 
doctrine of Christ. You are right in protesting against 



this state of things, which enables you better to 
understand the grievous circumstances in which we 
have lived during the twenty-five years of our 
Pontificate." 

R2785 :page 101 

Commenting on this the London Spectator truly 
remarks:— 

"In other words, temporal power is needed to 
prevent liberty of worship and of conscience in Rome, 
and to cleanse Rome from the defilements of Protestant 
teaching. Yet the Pope praises the British nation 
because it allows full liberty of conscience. Fortunately 
there is little fear of Papacy recovering the 
temporal power. And, in truth, all good Roman 
Catholics should rejoice that this is so. Nothing 
could result therefrom but spiritual injury." 

IMPORTANT CONCESSIONS BY THE PORTE. 



"We are enabled to announce an important concession 
respecting the right of Jews to hold property 
in Palestine, which has been obtained from the Porte 
by M. Isaac Fernandez, President of the Comite 
Regional of the Alliance Israelite in Constantinople. 
For several years past, Jews of all nationalities, even 
Ottoman subjects born in Palestine, have been forbidden 
to buy landed property in Palestine. M. Fernandez 
has now secured for Jews who have been settled 
in the Holy Land for a considerable time, whether 
subjects of Turkey or of foreign powers, the right to 
buy "Miri" (agricultural land) and to have the property 
inscribed in their own names. The special importance 
of this concession lies in the fact that while 
"Mulk" (town land) is owned by private individuals, 
"Miri" is the property of the Sultan. 

"M. Fernandez has rendered an immense service 
not only to his co-religionists, but to the entire population 
of Palestine. The Imperial Treasury will be 
among the first to derive material benefit from the 
measure mentioned above. The government of the 
Sultan has thereby given a fresh proof of the religious 
toleration which is a tradition in its annals."— Jewish 
Chronicle. 



"We are in a position to state that according to 
our latest information from Constantinople the views 
expressed in authoritative Turkish circles are favorable 
towards political Zionism, and the advantages 
the Ottoman Empire will derive from it. We can 
further state that we are now in the midst of negotiations 



of far greater importance than the mere annulling 
of the prohibition of immigration would signify." 
—Report of Zionist Committee in Die Welt. 



R2785 : page 102 

"I FIND NO FAULT IN THIS MAN.' 
LUKE23:13-26.-MARCH 17. 



HAVING gone through the form of a trial, a mockery 

of justice— the chief priests and scribes and 

Pharisees, with a multitude of their retainers and servants, 

a clamoring mob, led Jesus to Pilate, while it was 

still early in the morning. (John 18:28.) But they remained 

in the court-yard while Jesus was led alone to the 

judgment hall, probably by a court attendant or a sentry, 

the Jews declining to enter because so doing would 

make them ceremonially unclean, and hinder their observance 

of the Passover feast which would begin that 

same night. What a curious blending this shows us of 

cleanness and uncleanness! How exact they were to a 

jot and tittle about matters of minor importance, and 

how utterly lost to all sense of heart-purity and love, 

the real essence of the divine law! We who are of 

spiritual Israel need to be on guard against such a development 

of outward religious ceremony and formalism, 

carefulness and purity, which might be accompanied 

by a blackness of heart and utter absence of holiness 

and love for righteousness. As a matter of fact, 

these chief religionists among the Jews were murderers 

at heart, from the divine standpoint, while careful of the 

outward ceremonies of their religion. Let us not be 

like unto them. 

It was an unusual thing to accuse one of their 
countrymen before a Roman governor. It was customary, 
on the contrary, from them to seek to hide their 
faults and to secure acquittal, or at least as much leniency 
as possible. Therefore, these prominent men of 
the nation had no question but what Pilate would immediately 
assent to their demand, and crucify Jesus. 
They seem to have been surprised that he should inquire 
respecting the facts of the case, or show an interest in 
giving justice— especially in protecting a Jew from the 
wrath of his countrymen, particularly the leaders of 
his nation. When, therefore, Pilate inquired, "What 
accusation bring ye against this man?" they answered 
him, "If he were not a malefactor we would not have 
delivered him up unto thee." Pilate then dismissed 
the matter as one of Jew against Jew, and not of Jew 
against Caesar, saying, "Take ye him, and judge him 
according to your law." (John 18:29,31.) But the 
Jews replied, "It is not lawful for us to put any man 
to death." The Roman government had taken away 



from the Jewish Sanhedrin the power of capital punishment, 

and nothing short of Jesus' death was in their 

minds. 

They had failed to have Pilate's speedy endorsement 
of their condemnation, regardless of justice, and 
now they must put their plea upon another ground— 
they must formulate a charge, and it must be such a 
charge as would appeal to the Roman governor. They 
well knew that their condemnation of Jesus for having 
said that he was a Son of God would be nothing in the 
estimation of Pilate; hence, after condemning Jesus 
unjustly for blasphemy, they made before Pilate a new 
charge, of three counts: (1) Sedition— disturbing the 
peace; (2) that he interfered with the collection of the 
Roman taxes; (3) that he himself claimed to be a king, 
and was thus an antagonist of Caesar. 

Pilate quickly saw the true state of the case; viz., 
that "through envy the chief priests had delivered 
Jesus" and condemned him, and not through any new-found 
love for Caesar and his government; and leaving 
the multitude of accusers in the court Pilate went into 
the judgment hall, where Jesus stood, and questioned 
him, "Art thou the King of the Jews?" (John 18:33.) 
The whole matter must have seemed very ridiculous 
to Pilate, who, we must remember, was neither Christian 
nor Jew, but a heathen man, in whose judgment 
all the hopes of Israel respecting Messiah would be 
absurdities on a plane with the chimerical hopes of the 
various nations the world over. He perceived that the 
person before him was a remarkable one, and the answer 
of Jesus led only to greater perplexity, for he told 
him that his Kingdom was not of the present time and 
order, but a future one, and that he had come to bear 
witness to this truth. Pilate found himself getting 
only deeper into problems which he could not comprehend, 
and suddenly broke off the conversation with the 
question: "What is truth?"— without waiting for or 
expecting an answer, as tho he would say, Yes, yes; we 
hear of truth, justice and equity, but what is it, and 
where is it to be found? Who shall determine what is 
the right? Are you right, or am I, here the representative 
of Rome, in the right, and authority, or are those 
Jews who are clamoring for your death in the right? 
What is truth? It is too perplexing a question for us 
to discuss further. 

Pilate, however, had made up his mind definitely 
that there was no danger whatever to the Roman Empire 
from the meek and lowly person whom he had interviewed 
—he was surely not an anarchist, not an insurrectionist 
of any kind. He could do no harm in 
the world, and even if his teachings respecting his 
own heavenly origin and kingship were baseless and 
the product of an unbalanced mind, nevertheless the 
individual himself was no menace to Rome. And thus 
he expressed himself in the words of our Golden Text: 
"I find no fault in this man." (Luke 23:4.) And 



Pilate's decision has been the decision of all honorable, 
fair-minded people throughout the world from his day 

R2785 : page 103 

to the present, irrespective of religious prejudices. 
Whatever fault has been found has been against those 
professed followers who have taken his name— in vain: 
those who have claimed to be his followers, but who 
have not followed him, but have rather gone contrary 
to his teachings in many ways. These have brought 
dishonor often upon the sacred name, but as for Jesus, 
the world today declares with Pilate, "We find no 
fault in this man." Yea, the world loves to quote 
many of his blessed sayings, and many wish for a 
government built upon the principles of righteousness 
which he enunciated, even tho many who thus proclaim 
are unwilling to be guided by his precepts. 

The Jewish leaders were chagrined with Pilate's 
decision, and began to argue the points and to attempt 
to prove that the teachings of Jesus were calculated to 
arouse a revolution amongst the people; that already 
in Galilee it had great influence, and now he was coming 
to Jerusalem, etc. True, the Lord's teachings were 
revolutionary as respected religious matters; but the 
charge was not true in the sense they wished Pilate to 
understand, that he was a breeder of a political revolution. 
And this is a good point for all of the Lord's 
followers to note: we, like our Lord, stand committed 
to a revolution amongst God's people on the lines of 
true religious worship, heart-obedience to the Lord, 
etc., but we, like our Lord, have nothing whatever to 
do with political revolutions. We know that such are 
coming in the Lord's own time and way, but we battle 
not with carnal weapons, as he did not; but as he did, 
so do we, wait for the Kingdom which God will establish 
in his own time and way— we wait for the expiration 
of "the times of the Gentiles," when, as God has 
foreordained and forearranged, the Kingdoms of this 

R2786 : page 103 

world will give place to, and be superseded by the Kingdom 
of God, in which, by the Lord's grace, we trust to 
have a part. 

The mention of Galilee suggested to Pilate's mind 
a way of escape from his dilemma, without either doing 
an injustice toward Jesus or unduly arousing the 
enmity of the Jewish leaders; he would solve the difficulty 
by referring the case to Herod, who was then 
in Jerusalem. This was the same Herod who beheaded 
John the Baptist (the son of Herod the great who 
slew the infants at the time of our Lord's birth), the 
same one who, hearing of Jesus, speculated that possibly 
he was John the Baptist risen from the dead. 
We read that "When Herod saw Jesus he was exceeding 



glad, for he was desirous to see him of a long season, 

because he had heard many things of him; and he 

hoped to have seen some miracle done by him." 

(Luke 23:8.) Herod questioned Jesus with many 

words, but got no reply. Our Lord was not there in 

self-defence, nor to plead his cause, nor to seek to escape 

the penalty for our sins, but the reverse. His 

silence under all the circumstances was the wisest and 

most dignified course. Herod sought for amusement 

as from a sleight-of-hand performer, and was undoubtedly 

surprised and disappointed that his kingly curiosity 

and questions were ignored. However, he and 

his court would have some amusement, so the soldiers 

were given the opportunity to mock the kingly aspirations 

of Jesus, doing mock homage, and then insulting 

him. Herod returned Jesus to Pilate for judgment. 

The Jewish notables and the rabble, clamoring for 
justice and the vindication of Roman law in the death 
of Jesus, again filled the court of Pilate's palace, and 
Pilate came forth and addressed them in the words of 
our lesson, declaring Jesus innocent of any criminal 
conduct, but announcing that in view of the commotion 
and clamor raised against him he would cause him to 
be scourged and that this should be considered a settlement 
of his case. Evidently the scourging of Jesus 
was an act of mercy on Pilate's part, by which he 
hoped to satisfy the bloodthirsty clamor of the accusers, 
yet it was unavailing, and merely caused our Lord 
additional suffering. The multitude cried out the 
more, "Crucify him!" Pilate's next subterfuge was to 
propose that since it was his custom to release one prisoner 
at this season of the year he would release Jesus 
at this time, and thus satisfy them in a double sense 
of the word; first, by considering him guilty, and 
secondly, by his release. But murder was in the hearts 
of those professedly religious people. They were blinded 
to justice as well as to mercy by the selfishness of their 
own hearts, for their enmity to Jesus was based simply 
and purely upon the fact that he and his teachings 
were discounting them and their teachings before the 
people. 

It is well that we should note that selfishness lies 
at the foundation of almost every sin and every crime, 
that is and ever has been committed. Let us, as the 
Lord's people, be specially on guard against this insidious 
evil, which is ours by heredity, and which 
needs to be destroyed, eradicated, and to be supplanted 
with love, as the governing impulse of our hearts and 
lives— love, which thinketh no evil, which is not puffed 
up, which seeketh not her own advantage at the expense 
of justice to the interest of others. We are not, 
however, to think of these Pharisees, scribes and priests 
as wilfully, knowingly, intentionally, crucifying the 
Son of God. They would not have been so bold! On 
the contrary, the Apostle assures us that it was in ignorance 
that they did it. (Acts 3:17; 1 Cor. 2:8.) 



an inexcusable ignorance, we may say, or at least, an 
only partly excusable ignorance, because it was the 
result of prejudice, which in turn was the fruit of 
selfishness. 

R2786 : page 104 

The priests, etc., felt that matters were getting 
desperate, and they must bring to bear upon Pilate 
every influence they could; hence their intimation that 
if he would not crucify Jesus they would report him to 
Caesar at Rome as being a friend of traitors against 
Roman authority— an enemy of the Emperor. This 
was a forceful argument, and Pilate realized it. Were 
such a report to be sent to Rome, signed by the leading 
officials of the Jewish nation, it would not be without 
weight, and the authorities there would wonder, at 
least, why the life of any poor, obscure individual 
would be spared to the alienation of the leading men 
of the nation and at the risk of an insurrection. Pilate 
decided that the only reasonable and proper course for 
him to pursue would be to let the Jews have their way; 
and taking a pitcher of water he washed his hands in 
their sight, as a symbol of his own disagreement with 
the death-decree which they were compelling him to 
render. His words were, "I am innocent of the blood 
of this just person: see ye to it. Then answered all 
the people, and said, His blood be upon us and upon 
our children. "-Matt. 27:24. 

Remembering that Pilate was neither a Jew nor a 
Christian, but a heathen man, we cannot condemn him 
as others have done. Rather, indeed, we must commend 
him as being a man who loved justice and sought 
to mete it out, and who yielded to injustice only after 
he had made every effort to stem the tide of contrary 
influences when it would have been easy for him to 
have curried favor with the officials by quickly assenting 
to the death of a person of no political influence. 
It is to be noticed, too, that the apostles do not implicate 
either Pilate or the civil authorities, but held 
responsible the Jews and their leaders (Acts 2:23), 
and that God has held that people responsible is evident 
from the history of the past eighteen centuries, in 
which their prayer has been answered: his blood has 
been upon them and their children. Thank God, his 
Word does not imply that divine wrath, even against 
these guilty persons, will be manifested and exercised 
through an eternity of torture by devils, but rather, as 
the Apostle intimates, God's wrath came upon them to 
the uttermost in the troubles which befell them as a 
nation and people. (1 Thess. 2:16.) Soon the wrath 
is to be turned away and the commission of the 
Prophet already is due to begin, "Comfort ye, comfort 
ye my people: speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem. 
Cry unto her that her appointed time is accomplished, 
for she hath received at the Lord's hands double for all 



her sins."— Isa. 40:1,2, margin. 

Jesus was now delivered over to Pilate's soldiers, 
to be made ready for crucifixion, and they, heartless 
and brutal, as we might expect, made sport of the 
Master's adversities. Putting upon him a cast-off royal 
robe and a crown of thorns, they jeered him upon his 
claim to kingship, without a surmise, of course, of who 
he really was, and how he is yet to be a King upon the 
holy hill Zion, to whose sceptre every knee shall bow 
and to whom every tongue must confess. It will be a 
surprised awakening to them some day, when they 
amongst others shall come forth from the dead to find 
Messiah's Kingdom established, and to realize that he 
exercised mercy toward his enemies, and that his death 
prepared the way for the blessing of themselves and all 
the families of the earth with an opportunity to come 
to a knowledge of God and of his righteous requirements, 
and thus, if obedient, unto life everlasting. 

It was probably about this time that Pilate's wife 
sent word to him respecting the dream she had, about 
Jesus, and admonishing him to have nothing to do with 
his condemnation. And so Pilate, as a last resort, 
brought Jesus forth, clothed in the purple robe of mock 
royalty, and with the crown of thorns, and presented 
him to the people with the words, "Behold the Man!" 
As tho he would say: Is it possible that you Jews are 
seeking the death of this innocent man, the noblest 
and best specimen of your race, indeed of the entire 
human race? Would not a final look at him appeal to 
your hearts and melt them? If I, a Roman, ignorant 
of your religion and regardless in general of all religion, 
have a pity and a sympathy and a sense of justice, is 
it possible that you are so unmerciful, while claiming 
to be the most religious people on earth? Behold the 
Man! Do you still insist that he be crucified? Then 
the priests cried out, not only that he ought to die 
because of being an enemy to the Roman Empire, but 
because he had taught that he was the Son of God,— 
thus appealing to the Jews that he was a blasphemer, 
one whom God commanded them in the Law to 
destroy. 

Pilate was the more afraid when he heard that 
Jesus claimed to be the Son of God, and again sought 
an interview with him; but Jesus' answer was, "Thou 
couldst have no power at all against me except it were 
given thee from above"— permitted of the Father. 
Pilate could do no more; even Jesus himself assented, 
and claimed that it was in the divine order that he 
should die. Pilate signed the death sentence.— 
John 19:4-11. 

There is a lesson for us in these words of our Lord, 
respecting the Father's permission of all that happened 
to him. We who are members of his body are counted 
in with him as under divine supervision, so that in all 
of our affairs all things are guaranteed to work together 
for our good while walking in his footsteps. This is 



the ground of our confidence in all the various trying 
circumstances of life. This it is that gives the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding, ruling in our 

R2786 : page 105 

hearts, not only subduing self and enabling us to submit 
ourselves to the will of God, but permitting us even 
to rejoice in tribulation, knowing that under divine 
providence, and that rightly received, it will work out 
for us a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory.-2 Cor. 4:17. 



R2787 : page 105 

THE ATONING SACRIFICE COMPLETED. 

--LUKE 23:35-53. -MARCH 24.- 

"Christ died for our sins, according 
to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3. 

"AND when they had mocked him, they took off 

the purple from him, and put his own 

clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him." 

(Mark 15:20.) Jesus was now in charge of the centurion, 

and with the two bandits or highwaymen who 

were to be executed that day, was led to execution, 

each of the three prisoners being under the guard of 

four Roman soldiers, with a centurion in command, sixteen 

persons in all. It was about nine o'clock in the 

morning, and our Lord having been incessantly harassed 

by his enemies from the midnight previous, without 

food or rest, buffeted, scourged, tormented, was, 

according to tradition, weak and faint under the heavy 

load of his own cross, which, according to custom, he 

bore. The Gospel narrative seems to confirm this incidentally, 

by telling us that Simon, a Cyrenian, was 

compelled by the soldiers to bear the cross for Jesus. 

Some, however, claim that Luke's reading respecting 

this matter, that he "bore the cross after Jesus," signifies 

that he walked behind Jesus and merely assisted in 

the bearing of the cross. 

Whichever way it was, Simon had a most enviable 
opportunity of serving the Master— an opportunity 
which would be eagerly seized by some of the Lord's 
people today, who would be glad to share, not only 
the Master's burden, but his ignominy. And, strange 
to say, the opportunity is with us now, and whosoever 
will of the Lord's disciples is privileged to take up the 
cross and follow after him; for the offense of the cross 
has not ceased. True, the cross has become fashionable, 
and is worn by many as an ornament with little 
thought of the original cross and what it signified, and 



with little desire to bear any of its shame or ignominy 
or weight. But there are still some who have the 
Master's spirit, to whom the Apostle appeals, saying, 
"If we suffer with him, we shall also reign with him;" 
for "we ought also to lay down our lives for the brethren," 
and to "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ for his body's sake which is the Church." 
-Rom. 8:17; 2 Tim. 2:12; 1 John 3:16; Col. 1:24. 

Altho the man Christ Jesus was holy, harmless, 
undefiled, separate from sinners— perfect— nevertheless 
he was neither a giant in stature nor in physical strength. 
This indicates to us that the perfect man was not a giant 
physically, nor in brute force preeminent; for all that 
the perfect man was, our Lord Jesus must have been, 
in order to be his ransom price, his substitute. The 
coarseness and brute strength which we find in many 
men is to be esteemed a degeneration, as truly as is 
the weakness and effeminacy of others— only that the 
degeneracy has manifested itself in another form. 
Great brute force and coarseness of organism is rarely 
accompanied by a proportionate strength and efficiency 
of brain power, and of the finer sentiments of the mind. 
The completion of the restitution work, therefore, must 
not be expected to bring coarseness and giant strength; 
but fineness and symmetry, physical as well as mental. 
Additionally, we are not to forget that for three and a 
half years our Lord's ministry had been a constant 
drain upon his vital forces, not merely in connection 
with his public preaching, but specially in connection 
with the miracles which he wrought at the expense of 
his own vitality; as it is written, "Virtue [vitality] 
went out of him and healed them all."— Luke 6:19. 

The journey to Calvary was a sorrowful spectacle. 
It is to their credit that some of those who followed in 
the procession were weeping, and this credit for tenderness 
and sympathy falls to the women, to whom Jesus 
turning said, "Weep not for me, but for yourselves and 
for your children." Apparently the Savior's thought 
was not centered wholly upon himself: he was thinking 
rather how this injustice would shortly react upon 
this nation, whose representatives had said before God 
and men, "His blood be upon us and upon our children." 
No doubt our Lord had in mind the descriptions 
of the trouble that would come upon Jerusalem, as given 
particularly in the prophecies of Daniel and Jeremiah. 
(Daniel 9:24-27; Jer. 6.) We realize how literally 
our Lord's suggestion was fulfilled when we remember 
the story of the siege of Jerusalem, and how the women 
and children especially suffered in the horrors of that 
time. It is a sign of greatness of mind when one is 
able under such trying circumstances to think less of 
himself and more of others. 

Arrived at Calvary the crucifixion took place. It 
is probable that the victim was nailed to the cross while 
it was lying on the ground, and that then the four 
sturdy soldiers lifted it and set it into a socket in the 



earth, the pain from the wound being intensified by the 
jolting of putting the cross into an upright position, 

R2787 : page 106 

and then terribly augmented by the hanging weight of 
the body. Crucifixion is probably the most cruel form 
of death, and even by the Romans, as we understand 
it, was practiced only upon culprits— usually outlaws, 
brigands and seditionists. Thus our Lord was, in harmony 
with the statement of the prophet, "numbered 
with the transgressors."— Isa. 53:12. 

On our Lord's cross, above his head, written in 
three languages, was a statement of his crime— the 
charge upon which he was convicted and sentenced, in 
the words, "Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews." 
It was written in Latin, the language of the Romans, 
representative of authority and power; in Greek, the 
language of culture and learning; and in Hebrew, the 
language of the professedly God-fearing people. It 
was a title of shame and contempt, a brand of blasphemy 
to those who read it; and the multitude, going 
and coming to and from the city jested him upon his 
title, and the miserable failure of the fraud he had attempted 
to perpetrate in claiming for himself such high 
honors and dignities. The priests and rulers, of course, 
followed to see their victim surely dead; and any 
qualms of conscience they may have had respecting 
the injustice of their course seem to have been stifled 
by the apparent confirmation of their verdict in their 
success in accomplishing his death, and in his apparent 
powerlessness to save himself from his calamity. 
The soldiers too, especially those who had him in 
charge, seem to have felt that this was an exposure of 
another fraud, the ignominious termination of another 
one who had asserted himself against the power of 
Caesar. 

The records show that Jesus' mother was there, 
and her sister, and John the disciple, and his mother, 
and Mary Magdalene and Mary the wife of Cleophas. 
(John 19:25; Matt. 27:56.) They were all sorrowful; 
many of them weeping. They could not deny the assertion 
of the rulers and the multitude, that apparently 
the claims of our Lord had been fraudulent; they could 
not understand how he who had such power, and in 
whom they had such confidence, could be so helpless 
in the hands of his enemies. It was incomprehensible 
when they remembered how even the winds and the 
waves of Galilee obeyed him, and how many unclean 
spirits, being unable to resist the command of his word, 
had been cast out of the afflicted. But altho they 
could not make any reply, under the circumstances, to 
the jibes of those who railed at the Lord, they nevertheless 
loved him; for they knew, that regardless of his 
power and his titles, and whether or not he had overstated 
his relationship to the Heavenly Father, nevertheless, 



"never man spake like this man," and never had 
they known any who could compare with him amongst 
the sons of men for purity and nobility of soul. They 
could do naught else but love him and trust him, and 
wait for some indication of the seeming inconsistencies 
which they then beheld. And so it is at times with the 
Lord's followers since. Occasionally things occur in 
respect to the Lord's Word and what he permits his 
people to suffer, and the power he permits their adversaries 
to exercise, which are incomprehensible, and his 
followers may at such times be obliged simply to hold 
their peace; but those who know the Lord through intimate 
communion and fellowship of heart, who have fed 
upon "the deep things of God," who have drunk of his 
spirit— altho unable to explain the difficulties, are fully 
able to trust in him and to hope and to wait for such 
expressions as are sure to come, in vindication of his 
every act and word and providence, in due time. 

Whilst the others were reviling our Lord and calling 
upon him to manifest his Messiahship and to come 
down from the cross, one of the thieves joined in the 
ribald assault; but the other, realizing that death was 
near, and admitting his own guilt, seemed to recognize 
in Jesus a person of an entirely different order and 
character from that of himself. He alone, so far as we 
are informed, raised his voice in protest against the 
slurs, and in defense of the meek and lowly one, who 
said nothing in his own defense, and who thus set us a 
most wonderful example in patient endurance and suffering 
for well-doing. Had he demonstrated his power, 
as they "dared" him to do, he would have been wrecking 
the hopes, not only of those who maligned him, 
crucified him, but also the hopes of the whole world of 
mankind. O, how we rejoice in his faithfulness unto 
death— even the death of the cross! How we praise 
him that he did not exercise his power, and "call for 
more than twelve legions of angels" to deliver him, but 
on the contrary sacrificed himself, laying down his own 
life as a ransom for Adam and his race! 

The contrite thief knew little respecting Jesus, except 
what he saw before him of his patient endurance, 
suffering for righteousness' sake; but this "living 
epistle" made a marked impression upon him, just as 
sometimes the conduct of the Lord's followers, patient 
in tribulation, is the strongest and best lesson that can 
be given to some, "without God and having no hope 
in the world." There is nothing to indicate that this 
thief became a saint in the few moments of his acquaintance 
with the Lord; there is nothing to indicate that he 
had or could develop a character in that time which 
would constitute him an overcomer, a joint-heir with 
Christ in the Kingdom. Everything is to the contrary 
of such thoughts. He merely realized that he himself 
was guilty and worthy of death, according to the law, 
that Jesus was innocent, and that there was a bare 
possibility of there being something in the claims of 



this wonderful man in respect to a future Kingdom. 

R2788 : page 107 

He would at least speak a word in his defense, and then 
he would appeal to Jesus, that if he had a Kingdom, 
as had been intimated, he would graciously remember 
his words of defense and do a kind deed for him when 
his Kingdom should come. 

PARADISE PROMISED. 



Jesus replied, "Verily, verily [so be it, so be it], 
I say unto thee this day, Thou shalt be with me in Paradise." 
It should be as the thief had requested, not 
otherwise. When Jesus' Kingdom should come the 
effect or result of that Kingdom would be the restoration 
of the Paradise lost when sin entered into the 
world as a part of its penalty,— redeemed by the sacrifice 
which he was then finishing at Calvary. When he 
should come into his Kingdom at his second advent he 
would, as the thief requested, remember him there and 
then, and undoubtedly the thief will have an abundant 
reward for the words of comfort spoken to our dear 
Redeemer in his hour of trial; but that reward will 
surely not be a place in the throne, in the Kingdom, 
as a member of the body of Christ; for this position 
amongst the elect is to be given only to those who shall 
attain the character-likeness to God's dear Son. (Rom. 8:29.) 
Besides, none can attain this position without 
being begotten of the holy spirit, and the holy spirit, 
the begetting power of the new nature, was not yet 
given, until after Jesus' death, resurrection and ascension, 
when at Pentecost it came upon those who waited 
to be adopted from the house of servants into the house 
of sons.— John 1:12; 7:39. 

The thief died too soon to have any part in this 
Kingdom, had he been ever so well developed in character, 
—even as John the Baptist died too soon. Of the 
latter our Lord said, that altho there was not a greater 
prophet than he, "the least one in the Kingdom of 
heaven [the spirit-begotten Church, joint-heirs with 
Christ in the Kingdom] is greater than he." (Matt. 11:11.) 
When the Kingdom shall come, and Paradise 
shall be restored, not only the penitent thief will be 
there, but also the impenitent one, and those Roman 
soldiers, and those bloodthirsty scribes and Pharisees 
and priests— all will be in Paradise,— not for any worthiness 
of their own, but by reason of the merit of 
Christ's sacrifice, which paid their penalty and insures 
their having a full opportunity in the Millennial Paradise 
to come to a knowledge of God and through obedience 
then to life everlasting, if they will. 

How forceful the expression, "I say unto thee today," 



—notwithstanding all this seeming weakness on 

my part and seeming triumph of my enemies— I tell 

thee today, that thy prayer shall be answered; and 

that when I come into my Kingdom, Paradise shall be 

restored and thou shalt be there to be blessed, as I shall 

be there to be the King and Priest to give the blessings 

promised in the divine plan.* The garden of Eden 

was the Paradise lost, and on a larger and grander 

scale it shall in due time be restored by him whose sacrifice 

purchased it as well as mankind.— Eph. 1:14; 

Rev. 2:7. 

It was probably during the early part of the crucifixion, 
that the four soldiers who had Jesus in charge 
divided his clothing amongst them; but the seamless 
robe which he wore, a fine and expensive garment, being 
desired by them all, for it they cast lots. That robe 
properly and beautifully represents Christ's righteousness, 
the wedding garment, which is of great value, 
and which, during this present age, is granted to the 
most favored ones as furnishing the opportunity for 
their attainment with Christ of joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom, if they will suffer with him. The lot or 
privilege to have this garment of Christ's imputed righteousness 
has fallen chiefly to us of civilized lands, to 
whom the light of the knowledge of God's gracious 
plan in Christ has been granted. How thankful we 
are that the lot or privilege of possessing the favors represented 
by this robe is ours. Those who appreciate 
it will show their appreciation in the affairs of their 
daily lives, seeking to keep their garment unspotted 
from the world, and that it may be without spot or 
wrinkle or any such thing, and that it may be embroidered 
with all the graces of the Lord's character; 
that under the grace which it implies they may be accepted 
in the Beloved One.-Psa. 45:14; Jas. 1:27. 

The darkness which came over the scene of the 
crucifixion at noon, and lasted until three o'clock, 
after our Lord's death, was evidently a very remarkable 
one, and made a deep impression. A newly found 
version of the Gospel, known as "The Gospel by Peter," 
is represented to say of this darkness, "Many went 
about with lamps, supposing it was night," and that 
the darkness lasted until Jesus was taken from the 
cross, when the earthquake took place. "Then the 
sun shone out, and it was found to be the ninth hour." 

The rending of the Temple vail apparently took 
place at the same time as this earthquake— the moment 
of our Lord's death. This was not the trifling matter 
it might appear from the word "vail," for this vail was 
an extremely large and extremely heavy curtain, the 
tearing of which would be no small matter, but would 
have required superhuman strength. Edersheim describes 
this curtain as being sixty feet long and thirty 



*The comma should be after and not before "today" in order 
to permit harmony with the facts here before us, and agreement 
with other Scriptures. The original Scriptures are not punctuated 
—punctuation being a comparatively modern invention. 

R2788 : page 108 

feet wide, and five inches thick; made of seventy-two 
squares joined together. We have seen (Tabernacle 
Shadows) that this vail was symbolical;— that it represented 
the completion of our Lord's sacrifice by which 
he opened up for us a new way of life beyond the vail, 
through the sacrifice of his flesh. In a figure, therefore, 
the Lord God, by the rending of the vail, declared 
that the death of Jesus made possible the way into the 
Most Holy, even heaven itself, and the fact that the 
vail was rent from the top to the bottom implied that 
the work was God's and not one having its start and 
accomplishment in human design and effort. 

"FATHER, INTO THY HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT." 



Our Lord's words commending his spirit, his life, 
to the Father, reminds us of the words of Stephen. 
(Acts 7:59.) Stephen, however, had little to surrender, 
like us all; his Adamic life, the spirit of life, received 
from Adam, was already forfeited, and the only life 
which Stephen, therefore, could commend to God was 
the reckoned life received by faith through Jesus, the 
Life-giver. In the case of our Lord the matter was different. 
He had life rights which had never been forfeited 
through sin, and was committing these to the 
Father as the ransom price for Adam and his forfeited 
spirit of life: nevertheless, our Lord was firmly trusting 
in the Father's promise to raise him up from the 
dead by his own power, and his trust was in God that 
the restoration of life which he had promised he was 
abundantly able and willing to perform, and raise him 
from the state of death perfect, in the divine nature, 
with its glory, honor and immortality. Thus our Lord 
gave up the "ghost" (an old English term)— gave up 
his spirit of life— he died, and remained dead until the 
Father raised him from the dead on the third day by 
his own power.* 

The closing scenes of the drama evidently were 
very awe-inspiring, not only to our Lord's friends, but 
also to his enemies, and a general hush and feeling of 
grief spread about. The taunts of his enemies ceased 
as the darkness came down, and many were willing at 
the last to admit that the occurrences were remarkable, 
and corroborated to some extent the Master's claims, 
saying, "Truly, this man was the Son of God."— 
Mark 15:39. 

The solemnity of our Lord's dying moments seems 



to have given greater courage to some of his friends, 

two of whom, Joseph and Nicodemus, were members 

of the Sanhedrin, which had condemned him, these 

two being either absent or voting against the condemnation. 

They had been too careful of their reputations 

to avow their interest in Jesus previously, "for fear of 

the Jews," but now they had the courage to own the 

Lord as their friend, and to arrange the details of his 

burial. (John 19:39.) The dilatory acknowledgment 

of Jesus on the part of these wealthy and influential 

men reminds us of the peculiar difficulties which 

hinder all persons of wealth and influence in connection 

with a proper acknowledgment of the way, the 

truth and the life. True, there are many rich men 

today, and many of influence, who, because of popularity 

of churchianity, take a prominent part in its 

service; but churchianity must not be confounded 

with "the body of Christ," the true Church, which, 

like the Lord, is comparatively without influence, power 

or wealth, as viewed from a worldly standpoint. When 

the great drama of this atonement day is completed, 

the last member of the body of Christ has finished his 

sacrifice, there will doubtless be many of the rich and 



*See tract, What is the Soul? Sample copy free. 

R2789 : page 108 

influential to come forward then, to honor the humble 
ones and to garnish their sepulchres. Much more to 
their credit and to their advantage and assistance in 
making their own calling and election sure would it be 
for these to come boldly forward in the time of sacrifice 
and bind their own sacrifices to the horns of the 
altar.-Psa. 118:27. 

THE ATONEMENT. 



Various are the theories advanced in the name of 
Christianity and the Scriptures, respecting the at-one-ment 
between God and man; some acknowledging that 
the work which our Lord "finished" in his death on 
Calvary is the basis of all human hopes respecting the 
life everlasting, and at-one-ment with the heavenly 
Father; others persistently seeking to deny this, advancing 
theories to the effect that the at-one-ment between 
God and man never was broken off, that no ransom 
sacrifice was necessary to a reconciliation, that no 
fall took place, and that hence no restitution back to 
primary conditions is necessary or desirable or was secured 
by the Lord Jesus' death. Many of these theories 
which deny the redemptive value of our Lord's death 



affect to do him greater honor by claiming that his 

work for humanity was solely that of a great teacher, 

and in no sense that of a Redeemer or purchaser. 

These false theories which ignore the ransom are becoming 

more numerous, more persistent and more seductive 

day by day to those who are not well rooted 

and grounded in the divine Word and plan of the ages. 

It is appropriate, therefore, that we here call special 

attention to the fact that according to the Scriptures the 

entire plan of salvation is pivoted upon the great transaction 

of our Lord's sacrifice, which, beginning with 

his consecration at Jordan, was finished with his expiring 

breath at Calvary. Whoever believes this and accepts 

R2789 : page 109 

it is justified thereby, obtaining his share in the 
merit of that sacrifice. Whoever rejects it rejects the 
only name and the only faith by which he can ever be 
reconciled to God and attain to life everlasting. 

We are not in this suggesting that men are saved 
by a theory, but we are suggesting that since all who 
come into harmony with God during this Gospel age 
must come to him through faith in the precious blood 
of Christ, it follows that he cannot have a reasonable 
faith without a more or less clear theory; and that any 
theory which ignores the death of Christ as the basis 
of justification and reconciliation is an unscriptural 
one, and hence of no value whatever. Hence all who 
claim relationship with God upon any other basis of 
faith, any other theory, are deluding themselves— they 
are neither reconciled to the Father nor to the Son, nor 
justified from their sin, nor members of the Church 
which is the body of Christ. 

We do not mean by this to say that only such as 
have a clear conception of the philosophy of the atonement 
are justified; on the contrary, it is our belief that 
many of God's dear people during the dark ages, and 
since, have lived and died without a clear conception 
of the philosophy of this subject as it is now possible 
for it to be seen and appreciated. But while failing to 
see the philosophy, all of God's true people have recognized 
the fact that it was the death of Christ which 
effected our reconciliation to the Father, and upon 
which all hopes of life eternal are based. See MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, VOL. V., The At-one-ment. 

To those who prefer the inspired words of an 
Apostle to the uninspired conjectures of their own and 
other minds, the Golden Text is an all-sufficient answer 
to all no-ransom theories. One of these, Christian 
Science, declares: "There is no sin,"— hence nothing 
to deserve punishment; and "There is no death,"— 
hence Christ did not die. But the Apostle affirms, in 
harmony with both reason and Scripture, that both 
were facts, and that Christ's death was for (as a means 
to our recovery from) our sins. Let us stand firmly 



in the inspired "faith once delivered to the saints. "- 
Jude 3. 



R2789 : page 109 

"DESPISED AND REJECTED OF MEN." 

ISA. 52:13; 53:3, 12. -MARCH 31. 

THIS is the Review lesson and requires little comment. 
The Golden Text serves us as a caption, 
and is itself a summary of the quarter's lessons. Evidently 
to be despised and rejected of men did not signify 
that our Lord was worthy of such treatment, but 
rather that those to whom he offered himself were so 
degraded and blinded by sin as to be unable to appreciate 
the glorious qualities of his character. Nevertheless, 
as the Apostle declares, "To us who believe he is 
precious;" and again, "To as many as received him to 
them gave he privilege to become sons of God." How 
thankful we are, and deserve to be, that the eyes of our 
understanding were permitted to see our dear Redeemer 
in somewhat of his true light of grandeur and holiness; 
and we rejoice also that seeing his glory we have 
been led step by step to transformation and renewing 
of our minds, and that we are being changed from 
glory to glory by the spirit of the Lord even now in our 
hearts. "We have the mind of Christ." Moreover, 
we have the good hope, built upon the divine promises, 
that if we follow on in his footsteps in the narrow way 
we shall ere long be with him and like him and share 
his Kingdom and glory. 

"As he was so are we in the world."— 1 John 4:17. 

If the Master of the house was called Beelzebub 
and seditious and an enemy of law and order, against 
Caesar's government, etc., etc., by the false religionists 
of his day, so it should not surprise us, but should 
rather be expected, that all the way down through this 
Gospel age his followers, the members of his body, 
would be similarly misrepresented, slandered, maligned, 
despised and rejected by the popular religionists of 
Christendom. As a matter of fact, this is what the 
Scriptures teach us is to be expected; what history tells 
us has thus far been true; and what we are convinced 
from the Word of God will continue to be true until 
the last member of the body of Christ has finished his 
course. These oppositions from the world, the flesh 
and the devil (generally operating through some nominally 
Christian channel), are a part of the chiseling 
and polishing, a part of the testing and proving of the 
Lord's people which must determine whether or not 
they are worthy a share in the Kingdom— whether or 
not they esteem most the approval of men or the praise 
of God,— the honors and emoluments of this present 



life or the glorious but unseen things which God hath 

in reservation for them that love him. We cannot pass 

these tests in companies or groups, however small and 

select,— each must be tried, tested, individually, in order 

to prove him an overcomer, and before he can attain 

the promised prize. Each should remember the necessity 

for faith in what God has promised his people or 

he will be overwhelmed and defeated, and miss both the 

mark and the prize. "This is the victory that overcometh 

the world— even your faith." "Greater is he 

that is on our part than all they that are against us." 



page 110 

"THEY THAT REVERENCED THE LORD SPAKE OFTEN TOGETHER." 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have just finished 
reading three volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and to 
say I am much pleased and interested only feebly expresses 
my feelings. The Bible has been a sealed, and to 
a very great extent, a meaningless book. This is the 
first eye-opener I have ever come across. The more 
preaching of the "orthodox" sort I listened to, 
the denser was my ignorance, and the graver my 
doubts. In fact, I had arrived at the conclusion that 
no one knew anything positive about it; it was all 
conjecture, and that of a very flimsy character. I 
thought if men of intelligence and education, who 
had made these subjects a life-study, disagreed so 
radically, plain men like myself have no business to have 
any theories at all; and have for some time ignored 
the whole subject. 

But now, I can begin to see the light. Bible-reading 
has become more interesting to me. Things 
that were before as dark as Pagan theology, now have 
a meaning, and to me, a very pleasing one. Should 
like a copy of the WATCH TOWER. 

Yours, for the truth, A. C. HOWLAND,-Del. 



MR. CHARLES T. RUSSELL, 

DEAR BROTHER:-Having just read the fifth volume 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN with great interest and 
edification, I am very desirous of knowing when the 
next volume will be ready. I have been in the Congregational 
ministry for twenty-five years and have 
been teaching the popular view of eternal torment, 
but with the light on the Word that I have now received, 
I can no longer teach such God-dishonoring 
doctrine. I must believe that your view is the Scriptural 
one. My heart is exceedingly grateful to God 



that your book was placed in my hands. It is indeed 
"meat in due season." Please send further reading 
matter as per enclosed memorandum. 
Your Brother in Christ, I. F. TOBEY,— Oregon. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-Your letters have given 
me much cheer during my protracted sickness, and I 
can but rejoice with you that the Lord's mercy has 
been over me in a very large measure; and, we trust, 
for wise and gracious designs, which he is abundantly 
able to work out in his own time and way. I wish to 
be entirely submissive to his just and holy will. I 
hope to be able to learn the great lesson he would 
teach me, that, ultimately, as well as now, shall work 
out to his glory and my own eternal good. 

The TOWERS have been a source of great pleasure 
and benefit. I read and re-read them with continued 
profit and delight. Of course, I wish them continued 
to be sent to my address, and will remit later, if not 
able to continue in the "Pilgrim" work. 

Last year's Report in December 15 TOWER is full 
of blessed promise, and a token of better and bigger 
things to come. I am very anxious to get into the 
field again; and the days of waiting seem very long- 
but, my Brother, I cannot give you much hope of 
doing anything under five or six months. I am very 
weak, and any extra exertion sends me to my bed 
again, as was the case last week, and I was obliged to 
send for a physician. The cause was improper circulation 
in an afflicted leg, brought on by trying to do 
a little work for my son— office work. I am better 
to-day, and as soon as possible will try to dispose of 
DAWNS and other literature in this town. 

My wife is very hopeful that everything will turn 
out for the best, according to the promise, if we will 
only do the best we know how, trusting every promise 
sure. 

May our dear Lord and Master greatly bless and 
strengthen you in the onerous and responsible duties 
to which you have given your life in the spread of the 
truth. For such we shall always pray. 

With best wishes and regards, in which Sister 
Ransom joins, I remain as ever your devoted friend 
and co-worker in the present harvest. 

Very truly, Z. A. RANSOM,-South Dakota. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose order for one 
dollar for which you will please send Vol. I. of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, "The Plan of the Ages," in cloth binding. 
The remaining 65 cents you will please accept as 
a contribution to the Tract Fund. 

I have read "The Plan of the Ages" twice (I have 



it in paper binding— loaned out) and am now reading 
"The Time is at Hand," and am well pleased with 
them. It has changed me from skepticism to a strong 
belief in and love for the Bible. I am now making it 
my constant study, and with DAWN as a help it seems 
plain and is truly interesting. It has caused me to see 
God in a different light, and I do indeed love and worship 
him. I can never thank you enough for being 
the instrument, through your writings, in bringing 
about this change. I am a poor man, a farmer, working 
all day, and studying nights and Sundays. While 
I am being thus benefited I wish that others may have 
the same opportunity, therefore I offer myself as a 
member of the Volunteer service. I distributed the 
tracts you sent me and some have manifested some interest 
from reading them. I think you are truly "a 
good steward giving meat in due season." I will help 
in a financial way as much as I am able. 
Respectfully, W. A. STANLEY.-Texas. 



ELDER C. T. RUSSELL, 

Dear Brother in Christ Jesus our Lord: It has 
been some time since I wrote you, altho I receive communications 
from you every two weeks in the WATCH 
TOWER; and how I in my old days appreciate it as 
meat in due season! Since we began reading it my 
good wife won't go to hear any of the clergy of our 
town, as she can learn more of God's plan in reading 
one number than she could from hearing all the 
preachers in our town. We read them till we can 
digest them, then send them out to such as we think 
truth-hungry. I sent one to the country some weeks 
ago. The lady sent me word that she would have the 
paper if she had to sell every chicken to pay for it. 
She is very poor in this world's goods, but too proud 
to ask for it gratuitously. 

Oh ! I am so thankful for the help drawn from 
the TOWER and DAWNS, otherwise perhaps I should 
have plodded on in the old rut as others are doing 
who have many advantages over myself by way of 
education and present environments. 

Believe me, I am truly yours, in the fullest meaning 
of the term, with hope of meeting you in the first 
resurrection. N. M. THOMPSON,-Missouri. 

page 111 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wrote you today a 
"business" letter; now I want to send you a few lines 
of a more personal character from myself and wife. 

We wish to express to you our love and gratitude 
for the way in which you have continued to serve us 
during the past year. The January 1 TOWER came 
full of just what we wanted, a clear definition of the 



"mark" towards which we are pressing, and we 
thank God that we can "realize" fully what is the 
mark, and can see we have gained ground in this 
direction during the past year. 

I must tell you of our New Year's eve meeting. 
Twenty-seven of us met together to see the old century 
out and the new one in, and as we could not have 
you with us personally, you were represented by a 
large photo hanging on the wall, and by the reading 
of the TOWER for September 1, defining the law of 
"love." Personally, I am deeply grateful to you for 
that article, and for the corresponding one of January 
1, on the "Mark." I had begun to see that the law 
of "Do to all as you would have them do to you" 
meant so much more than I had thought, and now 
these two articles have made it clearer still. 

At our Sunday evening meetings I have been 
making these my theme, more than anything else, 
and you will be rejoiced to hear that in every member 
of the Church in these Twin Cities there is a noticeable 
improvement along the lines of love. 

You may be sure you were remembered by everybody 
present, and we prayed the dear Lord that you 
might be given continued wisdom to use aright the 
great favor conferred on you by the stewardship over 
the household of faith to give out to them the meat 
in "due season." And we also recognized and deeply 
appreciated the love you must have had to each of us, 
even when unknown to you in the flesh, or else the 
dear Lord would never have placed you in this 
position. 

I thank God that I am permitted to give out to 
others the meat which I have received of God through 
you; and I know that you will pray for me that I may 
have for my aim and ambition during the year begun 
a stronger desire to "serve" the brethren. 

Your brother in the Lord Jesus, 

W. HOPE HAY,-Minnesota. 



R2789 :page 111 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am glad to be able 
to write and tell you that I have about recovered from 
my illness. I am not quite as strong as I should like 
to be, but have no doubt I shall fully regain my 
strength in a little while. I went to Scotland last 
Friday for Brother Burkholder's funeral and was entertained 
by Brother Lehman. Altho the funeral was 
not until Saturday morning, by request I went over 
to see Brother Burkholder's family on Friday evening. 
There were several friends of the family present, and 
as the conversation turned upon Biblical matters we 
had a splendid opportunity for serving present truth, 
and they all showed much interest, and many good 



questions were asked. On account of the family's 
sympathy with the truth, the trustees of the church 
building refused to allow the funeral services to be 
held in that place. This action is significant, from 
the fact that it is a "union church," or rather (supposed 
to be) non-sectarian, and was built by the people 
of the neighborhood, with the understanding that 
it was for the use of any Christians. 

However, a large number of people assembled at 
the house for the service. Therefore, there was a 
good opportunity to witness for the truth. The greater 
part of the people who attended the funeral were 
"Mennonites" (that being a Mennonite settlement), 
so in accordance with the custom of that people, most 
of them returned to the house of mourning and spent 
several hours there. Of course there was a good deal 
of comment on the address, so the whole afternoon 
was occupied in discussing Bible questions, and the 

R2790 : page 1 1 1 

truth as usual proved itself powerful, and we hope 
that many were impressed by its beauty and simplicity. 
Brother Herr, from Pottsville, was present and 
assisted in the service, and also in upholding the truth 
afterwards. 

Brother Faunce wrote you of the experience we 
had at the United Brethren church here, a week ago 
last Sunday. Well, as a sequel, last Sunday evening 
the pastor undertook to show the unscripturalness of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and by invitation several of the 
friends, including myself, were present to hear what 
this very blind shepherd had to say. Needless to say 
he had a very thin argument, and succeeded in making 
himself ridiculous. 

His ignorance of God's word was simply amazing, 
and must have been apparent to every thinking person 
present. On the whole, I think he (unwittingly) 
helped the truth rather than hindered it, for he read 
some excellent extracts from the DAWN. Some of 
them I should have chosen myself had I been debating 
the points with him. He also read the extract from 
Atlanta Constitution from the back of a missionary 
envelope which he had. Whilst he had to admit that 
hades meant the grave, he also said that it meant 
more than that; to use his own words— "Hades is a 
place divided into two compartments, one where the 
bad spirits go to, and the other Paradise, where Jesus 
went." All of his "scriptural" proofs were "home 
spun," and unfortunately (for him) could not be 
warranted not to shrink. Of course, the Morehead 
tract was in evidence, and so were about 200 of No. 
41, Old Theology tracts. All that was done by the 
friends to uphold the truth was done in the spirit of 
love and with becoming dignity. 

I'm sure you will be pleased to know that the 



friends here show much zeal for the truth, and are 
growing apace. We have now started a mid-week 
meeting, which promises to be a success. 

The Volunteer work will also be taken up; the 
arrangements for it are to be made next Sunday. 

I am hardly able to go fully into my colporteur 
work yet, but hope to do so soon; in the meantime, 
shall endeavor to do a little canvassing here, and 
altho this place was worked last year I hope to be 
able to reach some and dispose of some DAWNS. 

Please pray for me that I may have strength and 
courage to walk the narrow way. 

With Christian love to yourself and the Bible 
House family, I remain your brother in Christ, 
ERNEST D. SEXTON,-Pennsylvania. 

R2790 :page 112 

PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, 

MY DEAR SIR:-After services on the first Lord's 
Day of this year, I found in my study a parcel of 
books with no name. I was leaving the next day for 
a 400-mile voyage, and took with me 3 vols, of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, which I perused with growing interest 
in the intervals of services as we sailed from 
island to island. I wish to subscribe to the WATCH 
TOWER, and to have tracts sent me (as per list); for 
this I enclose $2.50, which I hope will cover expenses 
of postage, etc. I am yours faithfully, 

DANIEL WILSHERE,-West Indies, 
Bahama Baptist Union— Supt. of Missions. 



page 112 

MR. EDITOR:-I cannot tell how thankful I am 
to you for sending us a sample copy of your paper. 
Oh, the good, glad tidings! How many wretched, 
awful days it would have saved me had I known it 
long ago. I believe you implicitly in all you say. It 
seems so much more like God ought to be. Oh, my 
words are too crude and I am too ignorant to express 
what I feel, but I am so glad, so glad. For years I 
have been a Presbyterian, and a doubter all the time, 
and only those who have gone through it know what 
that means. I will distribute any tracts you may 
send me, and be glad to do so. 

MRS. FRANK CAREY,-Pennsylvania. 



page 112 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I must renew my 
TOWER, as I could not get along without it. I have 



been wonderfully helped through it and the DAWNS 
into present light and truth, and so am using every 
means and agency through the influence and aid of 
God's Holy Spirit to make my calling and election 
sure. And oh! what a new book my Bible is now. 
How it unfolds to me, and so my pathway is getting 
brighter and brighter. Praise God. I can do nothing 
in the way of money for Good Hopes, but am devoting 
all my spare time and more to the spread of truth. I 
have a large Chart of the Ages in my office, and 
have many callers. 

I am availing myself of every opportunity to let 
my light shine, and correcting my old errors of 
Theology, which I have testified for years. And 
how God blesses me. As I give out he pours in. My 
will is only to do God's will. What an anchorage the 
truth is to the soul, when we see how rightly to divide 
it. Truly, you have been a great help to me through 
the WATCH TOWER literature, to God be all the glory. 

Your brother in a living faith, 

DR. JOHN STRUBLE,-Illinois. 



R2790 :page 112 

DEAR BROTHER C. T. RUSSELL:-Grace and 

peace! Your very kind favor of the 4th inst. to hand. 
Had an injury received to my right hand about a 
week ago. Am getting out on the road now in my 
business as an architect, and the Lord is blessing the 
efforts put forth in spreading the truth. Had another 
experience of his wonderful grace tonight here in 
town. I was planning and thinking how I could take 
along a lot of DAWNS, that I could sell in large numbers 
in single vols. After having depleted my stock 
in the grip to two vols., and taking orders for three 
sets, and coming here after 6 p.m., I went out to 
inquire about business. Finding a hardware store 
(where I usually inquire in every town) and finding 
no news, I showed the DAWN, but being a perfect 
stranger, I did not for a moment think they would 
part with the cash simply on my face and the name 
in my order book, etc. I sold five sets in that store, 
and two in another, spot cash, making 51 vols, for 
today. To God be all the glory. To say I was astonished 
is putting it lightly. I cannot get out of 
here until tomorrow 3 p.m., so can possibly sell 
some more in the same way. Glad to see names on 
the lists where the Lord used me to hand them the 
truth. These blessings should make me run the race 
with much joy. Enclosed please find P.O. order 
for money, and order for books to be sent to various 
parties. Pray that I may be kept humble, as I desire 
and require much more humility and love for the sacrifice 
than I possess, so it will not be a duty love to 



feed the little ones and spread the truth, but so the 
zeal of the Lord may burn me up. Hope to see more 
names on the TOWER lists some day in the paths of 
our DAWN work. 

I feel very happy over this new phase of the 
work, as it seems it ought to be very fruitful. 

February 17th.— Grace and peace! Just home 
from a week's trip on business in the country, and 
the most blessed of trips so far as DAWN sales are 
concerned that I know of. Sold 239 vols, in a week. 
Just returned from Jackson, Minn. Knew of a TOWER 
reader there and looked for him. I found the restaurant 
where he takes meals, and supposed he had sold 
DAWNS there, but when I found he had not I tried, 
and sold a set. This started the ball rolling in Jackson, 
where I am quite well acquainted, and received 
orders for 75 vols, before leaving. Then I had to be 
careful not to sell to the Presbyterians, as I was after 
their church. Hope to sell a volley to them later. 

If I had used my opportunities the last two years 
on the road with the success I now receive, it's 
hard to estimate how many DAWNS could have been 
sold. This is a new venture to get cash in advance 
for books. To the Lord be all the glory. May we 
do continually with our might what our hands find to 
do. Praying God's richest blessing and love to you 
and all the dear ones in the Bible House, I remain 
your fellow-soldier of the cross, 

M. P. THORI,-Minnesota. 

[Our dear Brother Thori is one of the leading 
architects of Minnesota, and in going about attending 
to this business he takes the DAWNS along, and is 
daily becoming more expert in reaching hearing ears. 
He usually sells five volumes at a time, and collects 
in advance, the books being delivered by mail. He 
has a letter from us showing his authority to do this. 
His success of late is phenomenal. He has sold over 
4,400 volumes in the past five years. The Lord is 
blessing his zeal with both still increasing wisdom 
and grace.] 



page 113 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. APRIL 1, 1901. No. 7. 
CONTENTS. 



Patience as an Element of Character 115 

The Hour of Temptation Upon the 

Whole World 117 

Trials of the Passover Season 120 

Poem: "So As By Fire" 120 

"He that Liveth and was Dead" 121 

"He Poured Out His Soul Unto 

Death" 121 

"The First-Fruits of Them That 

Slept" 124 

"Behold, I am Alive Forever More" 125 

Bishop Ryle's Millennial Creed 128 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH BRANCH NO. 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, 
LONDON EAST, ENGLAND. 



REMEMBER the memorial of "Christ our Passover" on its 
anniversary, the night of April 2nd. "As often [yearly] as ye 
do this, do it in remembrance of me,"— "The Lamb of God 
who taketh away the sin of the world." 

Those who precede the supper and follow it by special 
watching and prayer will surely be specially blessed. 

ALTHO the mail-thief who has for three years past been 



stealing letters at the Allegheny postoffice has been caught, we 
still advise that all remittances be sent us in the form of postal-notes 
or bank -drafts. To send money unregistered is to tempt 
men to steal. 

THE EDITOR will attend a One-Day Convention at Wheeling, 
W.Va., on Sunday, March 24. Friends residing near W. 
will be cordially welcomed by the Wheeling Church; and are 
requested to introduce themselves by name and postoffice address 
to the Editor. The morning session will be held at W. 
C.T.U. Hall, 1229 Market st. The afternoon session will be 
publicly announced for Odd Fellows' Hall, cor. 12th and Chap line 
streets. 

WE HAVE plenty of the Missionary Envelopes now. Post-paid 
25 cents per hundred. $2.00 per thousand. 

MARRIED SISTERS will favor us, if when writing they always 
use the same initials. If one time they sign their own and another 
time their husbands' initials it is confusing. 

REGARDING YOUR WELCOME LETTERS. 

Friends writing to us either on doctrinal questions or business 
matters will please remember to make each letter complete 
in itself. Do not trust to our remembering the contents of previous 
letters; for where so many are involved this is impossible. 



R2790 :page 115 

PATIENCE AS AN ELEMENT OF CHARACTER. 

"Because thou hast kept the word of my patience I will also keep thee 
from the hour of temptation which shall come upon all the world to 
try them that dwell upon the earth."— Rev. 3:10. 



WE WILL not here discuss this verse from the 
standpoint of its application to the Philadelphia 
epoch of the Church's history, but will content 
ourselves with examining the principles implied in its 
statement, believing, as we do, that the Lord's dealings 
with his Church throughout this Gospel age follow 
the same lines, are in harmony with the same principles. 
Whatever condition, therefore, would be acceptable 
and pleasing to the Lord as respected the 
Philadelphia epoch of the Church's history would be 
acceptable and pleasing to him in respect to ourselves 
and all others of his people during this age. 

Special stress, we see, is laid upon patience— 
"the word of my patience," or, the patience which 
my word inculcates. Examining the word critically 
we find that two quite distinct words in the Greek are 
translated by our English word patience in the New 
Testament; the one is makrothunia (Heb. 6:12; 
James 5:10; Acts 26:3): this is the word which in 



a general way corresponds to the common thought of 
patience, as we speak of it connected with every-day 
affairs of our lives; it means merely long-suffering, 
and, indeed, makrothunia is generally so translated 
throughout the New Testament. (Rom. 2:4; 9:22; 
Eph. 4:2; Col. 1:11; 3:12; 1 Tim. 1:16; 2 Pet. 3:15, 

R2791 :page 115 

etc.) But this is not the word used in our text, 

nor the word generally translated patience throughout 

the New Testament, viz., hupomonee. 

This word, hupomonee, has a much deeper and 
fuller significance than attaches to our English word 
patience. It signifies rather constancy,— the thought 
being an endurance of evil in a cheerful, willing, patient 
manner. It represents, therefore, an element of 
character, and not merely a temporary condition or 
restraint of feeling or action. For instance, a worldly 
man might have a great deal of patience in connection 
with the prosecution of his business;— he might be 
very attentive to his customers, very obliging, very 
painstaking, and show no dissatisfaction in connection 
with the inconsiderateness of his customers; and "patience,' 
in its ordinary sense, might be ascribed to his 
conduct. But the word in our text rendered patience 
signifies such a development of heart and character as 
manifests itself in an endurance of wrong or affliction 
with contentment, without rebellion of will, with full 
acquiescence in the divine wisdom and love, which, 
while permitting present evils, has promised to overthrow 
them in God's due time. We believe it will be 
profitable for us to examine carefully this element of 
Christian character, of which our Lord speaks in such 
high commendation, that recognizing it clearly, we, 
as his followers, may attain to it more completely, and 
thus have his more abundant approval. 

Since our text mentions this patient endurance as 
being the Lord's "word" or teaching, let us glance 
backward to the Gospel narrative, and note the Lord's 
use of the word in his teaching. Twice it is recorded 
as a part of his utterance. In Luke 8:15, in the parable 
of the sower, we read: "That [sown] on the 
good ground are they which in an honest and good 
heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth 
fruit with patience [with cheerful endurance, constancy]." 
The thought here is that in order to be of 
the fruit-bearing class which the Lord will approve 
and accept to his Kingdom, it is necessary to do more 
than to receive the word of his testimony, even tho 
we receive it with joy— for that class in the parable is 
represented by the stony ground, which at first gave 

R2791 :page 116 

evidence of great fruitfulness and vigor, but which, 



when the sun of persecution arose, withered, because 

of lack of depth of soil. That stony, shallow soil represents, 

the Lord explains, a class of hearers who rejoice 

greatly in the truth, but do not endure, such as 

cannot withstand persecution or opposition, but wither 

under it, become discouraged. Such cannot be of the 

Kingdom class, all of whom must be overcomers. 

In this parable our Lord shows us that patient endurance, 
constancy, is the final test, following after the 
readiness of preparation to receive the seed; following 
after the seed has been received and has sprouted; 
following after love and hope and joy and faith have 
caused it to spring forth and to give fruitage. Patient 
endurance, then, is necessary, in order that the 
grain may be developed and thoroughly ripened, and 
made fit for the garner. Ah! how important patient 
endurance seems to be, in the light of this our Lord's 
word— cheerful endurance; for we cannot suppose that 
he who judges the thoughts and intents of the heart 
would be pleased with his children, even if he saw 
them enduring much for his sake, if they endured in 
an impatient or dissatisfied or unhappy frame of mind. 
They would not, in that event, be copies of God's 
dear Son, our Lord, whose sentiment is expressed in 
the words, "I delight to do thy will, O God!" All 
of the Royal Priesthood are sacrificers, as was the 
Chief Priest, our Redeemer and example, who offered 
up himself: we, as the under priests, have also 
presented our bodies living sacrifices, and are to lay 
down our lives for the brethren— in the service of the 
truth. And God, who accepts these sacrifices through 
the merit of Christ, informs us that he appreciates or 
loves the cheerful giver, those who perform their sacrifices 
of a willing heart, cheerfully. And this thought, 
be it noted, is in the Greek word we are considering. 
It is cheerful endurance, patient endurance, that is 
commended. 

The other instance in which our Lord used the 
word during his ministry is recorded in Luke 21:19. 
He had just been telling his followers what they must 
expect as the result of being his disciples during the 
present time, when sin abounds, and when Satan is 
the prince of this world— they must expect tribulation, 
opposition from various quarters; but he assures 
them that they would nevertheless be fully and completely 
under divine care and protection, even tho the 
persecutions would be permitted to reach and to affect 
them. Then follow the words, "In your patience [patient 
endurance, cheerful constancy] possess ye your 
souls." 

Our faith and trust in the Lord and his gracious 
promises for the future life are to be so strong that 
they will more than counter-balance the oppositions 
of the world, of false brethren, and of Satan's blinded 
servants;— so much so that these persecutions will be 
recognized and rejoiced in as the agencies of divine 



providence in chiseling, shaping and polishing us as 
the living stones for the glorious Temple which God 
is constructing. And viewing our trials from this 
standpoint we can indeed possess our souls, our lives, 
and enjoy them, even amidst tribulation, with cheerful 
endurance, constancy. Yea, we may realize that the 
soul, the real being, to which God has given the exceeding 
great and precious promises of the future, 
cannot be injured by the persecutions of the flesh, nor 
by anything that men can do to us, so long as we are 
faithful to the Lord, accepting the persecutions with 
cheerful constancy, as the ministrations permitted of 
his providence for our ultimate good. 

THE NECESSITY FOR PATIENT ENDURANCE. 



Here the question properly arises, Why is this 
so? In what sense is such endurance necessary? We 
answer that it is one of the conditions which God has 
attached to the call to joint-heirship in the Kingdom, 
and the wisdom of this is manifest when we consider 
the work to which we are called— the work of blessing 
all the families of the earth, as God's Millennial 
Kingdom, under and in joint-heirship with our Lord. 
That will be a great work, and it is eminently proper 
that the Lord should demand that those whom he 
would account worthy of it shall not only appreciate 
his goodness and his character, and prefer these to 
sin and iniquity, but that they should demonstrate 
their thorough loyalty to these principles to the extent 
of a joyful willingness to suffer on behalf of 
right, to endure patiently. A transitory endurance 
of one or two or three brief trials would not prove the 
person to have established character for righteousness; 
but a patient, cheerful endurance even unto death, 
would prove and demonstrate such a character. 

We might illustrate this with the diamond. Suppose 
that we were able to make diamonds out of some 
plastic material, so that they would have the full diamond 
measure of brilliancy; and suppose that they 
became hard, but not so intensely hard as the diamond, 
would they have the value of the diamond? By no 
means. And so with the Christian; if we should suppose 
him possessed of every grace of character that 
could possibly belong to the sons of God except this 
one of firmness, of endurance, he would not be fit to 
be numbered amongst the Lord's jewels. Hence the 
Lord's demand is that the quality of firmness, cheerful 
endurance of whatever his providence may permit, 
shall be a characteristic of all those who will be fit for 
the Kingdom. 

This importance of endurance in the Christian 

R2791 :page 117 



character is fully borne out by the Apostle Paul's use 
of the word; for on more than one occasion he ranks 
it as above and beyond Love, which we have seen is 
the "mark" of character for which we are to run,— 
the mark of the prize. For instance, in writing to 
Titus (2:2), enumerating the characteristics of the 
advanced Christian, the Apostle uses the following 
order: "Vigilant, grave, temperate, sound in faith, in 
charity [love], in patience [patient, cheerful endurance]." 
Tho we have all the other qualities, this 
final test of patient, cheerful endurance must be passed 
before we could be accepted of the Lord as members 
of the "very elect." 

Again, in writing to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:10) 
respecting himself, the Apostle again puts this quality 
of patient endurance in the place beyond Love saying, 
"Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of 
life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, love, patient 
endurance." 

It may be asked, How can this quality rank 
higher than love, if love is the fulfilling of the Law, 
and the mark of the prize of our high calling? We 
reply, that patient endurance does not merely come in 
at the close of our race, but is requisite all the way 
along the race course. We need this cheerful endurance 
of the earliest trials in the Christian way, and 
as we speed along in our race for the mark the spirit 
of cheerful endurance should be growing stronger and 
stronger at every step of the journey. It is with us 
at the first quarter mark, and at the second quarter 
mark, and at the third quarter mark, and still with 
us at the fourth quarter mark, the mark of the prize, 
perfect love. And when we have reached this mark 
of the race in which we love not only our friends, but 
our enemies, it is required of us that we shall stand 
up to the mark faithfully, cheerfully, patiently enduring 
the tests which the Lord will even then see proper 
to let come upon us. Hence it is that the Apostle 
exhorts us, "Having done all, stand"— endure. Having 
reached the "mark," "Let patient endurance have her 
perfect work," or "perfect her work." Let patient 
endurance demonstrate, not only that you have the 
character, the qualifications of love, demanded in the 
race for the prize, but also that you have it as an 
element of character, deep-rooted, immutable, so that 

R2792:page 117 

you can endure oppositions cheerfully. 

Ah yes! we can see now a reason for the Lord's 
arrangement that we should have our trial as the 
Master had his, under an evil environment— that we 
might not only have the qualities of character, but 
have them rooted, grounded, established, and that all 
this should be demonstrated and proven by our cheerful 



endurance of whatever divine providence shall see 
best to permit to befall us. 

INSPIRED APPLICATIONS OF PATIENT-ENDURANCE. 



Everything that will enable us to see the importance 
of this quality of patient, cheerful endurance will 
be helpful to us. Therefore let us notice some other 
instances in which this word is used in the New Testament. 
The Apostle Paul says, "But ye have need 
of patience [cheerful endurance, constancy] that after 
ye have done the will of God [reached the mark] ye 
might receive the promise." (Heb. 10:36.) Here, 
again, we see that it is not merely to do the will of 
God that is the test, but, that after having attained 
to that point, that mark of character in our hearts, in 
our wills (if only partially in the flesh) we should, by 
patient endurance, establish God's righteous will as 
the law of our hearts, the rule of life under all circumstances 
and conditions. Then, and not till then, will 
we be in the heart condition of fitness for the Kingdom. 
The Apostle James (1:3) says: "The trying 
of your faith worketh patience [patient endurance];" 
that is to say, if our faith stands the trial it will work 
this character of patient endurance; of course, on the 
other hand, if we do not attain to patient endurance, 
it will mean that our faith has not stood the test satisfactorily, 
that we are not fit for the Kingdom. 

Thus we see clearly that a great mistake has 
been made amongst Christian people in general in 
supposing that religion is merely a thing that is to be 
gotten as an answer to prayer, or by going to a mourners' 
bench, or standing up for prayer, or in response to 
some human or divine appeal— as one would get a 
dollar and put it into his pocket. On the contrary, 
repentance of sin and acceptance of Christ, in faith 
unto justification, is only the beginning and not the 
end of the Christian way. The next step is consecration, 
and this also, is far from the end; it is merely 
starting in the school of Christ, having our names enrolled 
as those who desire to be pupils, and to be 
taught of God to cultivate the fruits and graces of the 
spirit. All these things are necessary, but much more 
is necessary; we must go on and on, not only to the 
attainment of the faith and the love, but also to the 
demonstration of character as expressed in his word, 
patient endurance. 

The Apostle Paul exhorts, "Let us run with patience 
[cheerful constancy, patient endurance] the 
race set before us in the Gospel." (Heb. 12:1.) As 
already observed, the race must be run with this constancy 
if we would reach the "mark," and after reaching 
the mark the position can only be maintained by 
the grace of constancy, patient endurance, that having 



done all, we may stand. 

THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION ABOUT TO COME UPON 
THE WHOLE WORLD. 



We are not to understand our Lord's words to 
mean that he kept those of his people designated as 

R2792:page 118 

the Church at Philadelphia from all trials and temptations: 

quite to the contrary, we may be sure that 

trials and temptations have been the portion of the 

Lord's people throughout the entire age. As the 

Apostle Peter said to some in his day, "Think it not 

strange concerning the fiery trials which shall try you, 

as tho some strange [new] thing happened unto you." 

(1 Pet. 4:12.) Trials must be the portion of all who 

would be "overcomers." How else could they overcome 

if they had no trials to overcome? The Church 

represented as belonging to the Philadelphia period 

had these common or general trials; but the Lord 

proposed to spare them from certain special trials that 

were about to come upon the whole world. We are 

not of the Philadelphia epoch, but of the Laodicean 

epoch, which goes into these trials, and to our understanding 

this "hour of temptation," which is to try 

all people of the world, is already here, we are already 

in it, and it forms part of the testing of our 

endurance. 

But tho our Lord does not preserve the Laodicean 
stage of his saints from going into the trouble, we 
may be sure that those who keep the word of his patience 
now will have his keeping power, as promised to 
the Laodicean saints: "I stand at the door and knock; 
whoever hears my voice and opens to me I will come 
in and sup with him and he with me." This is the 
special reward of those who are running the race 
with patient endurance in the present time, in the 
Laodicean period; while it was not our privilege to 
escape the hour of temptation, it is our privilege to 
have a counter-balancing special blessing as a result 
of living in the time of our Lord's parousia (presence). 
We may have his fellowship, his instruction, his dispensing 
of spiritual food which is now "meat in due 
season," in a manner and to a degree which none of 
the faithful of past periods enjoyed these. But as we 
might expect, this greatest favor is correspondingly 
offset by the subtilty and severity of the trials of this 
hour of temptation coming upon the whole world. 

If ever patient endurance was necessary it is necessary 
now; if ever it was true, "In patience possess 
ye your souls," it is so now. Those running the race 
acceptably, and possessing this patient endurance, will 



be able "to stand in this evil day," and no others will 
be able to stand; for, as the Apostle says, the fiery 
trials of this day shall try every man's work of what 
sort it is. — 1 Cor. 3:13. 

The hour of temptation seems to bear specially 
upon and test this point of patient endurance, and 
throughout the civilized world we find this quality of 
patient endurance becoming more and more scarce. 
Whether we can compare conditions of today with 
those of fifty years ago, or forty, or thirty, or twenty, 
or ten years ago, according to our experience in the 
matter, we will see that willingness to endure at all 
is growing more and more scarce. Nobody wishes to 
endure anything— for righteousness' sake, for Christ's 
sake or for anybody else's sake, and if endurance even 
be necessary it is generally with very much of impatience, 
very much more of complaint, etc., than 
formerly. And this general tendency of the civilized 
world to non-endurance and impatience, necessarily 
has its bearing and influence upon all who are seeking 
to walk in the narrow way, going against the current 
of public sentiment and custom; the stronger 
that current the greater their difficulty, and only by 
divine grace can progress be made. 

This necessary divine grace is granted to us 
through a knowledge of the divine plan, and is withheld 
from those who are not walking close to the Lord 
in the footsteps of Jesus. It is for this reason that 
we see a growing disposition toward impatience, non-endurance, 
amongst the professed followers of Christ. 
It is at the bottom of the mob violence which in 
Europe is kept down by military force, but which in 
this country is manifesting itself in repeated instances 
of lynching, etc., which proclaims with loud voice 
impatience as the growing sentiment. The same wrong 
condition is illustrated in the recently inaugurated 
attack upon illegal liquor selling in the State of Kansas, 
in which those who love righteousness and hate 
iniquity have participated, not discerning the instructions 
of the Lord's Word respecting patient endurance 
of evil, until his time shall come for the rectification 
of the same;— by the establishment of the Kingdom, 
the binding of Satan, and the subjugation of all evil. 

Indeed, we may expect the growth of this spirit 
in Christendom— the feeling that in the past they 
have been too patient, not sufficiently aggressive— the 
feeling that if they had taken matters into their own 
hands long ago the world might have been converted 
ere this. But those who have kept the Lord's word 
of patient endurance, and who have sought from him 
the needed wisdom from on high, that is first pure, 
then peaceable, easy of entreatment, full of mercy and 
good works, and patient endurance, have learned that 
he has a due time in which his purposes shall all be 
accomplished; and learning this has assisted them in 
cultivating patient endurance as their Lord endured 



the opposition of evil, its malignity, its spite, its falsehoods, 
its persecution— enduring all this cheerfully, 
patiently, as unto the Lord— realizing that it is the 
program which the Lord has not only permitted, but 
permitted for wise purposes in connection with the 
call and preparation of the "little flock" who shall 
be joint-heirs with Christ, their Lord, in the 
Kingdom. 

R2792:page 119 

The Apostle counsels us respecting this hour of 
temptation into which we have just entered. Its besetments 
and trials will be various, and some of them 
will be subtle; so deceptive that all who are not 
thoroughly rooted and grounded in the truth will be 
carried away from the sure foundation (the ransom) 
by the false arguments and sophistries of those whom 
Satan is now permitted to use as his agents in trying 
all them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth. 
Amongst these, no testing seems much more subtle 
than that of Christian Science, which, backed by the 
Adversary's power, is enabled to promise its perverts 
that if they will affirm an untruth and stick to it they 
shall have the reward of relief from certain pains and 
ailments, and those who have not learned to patiently 
endure whatever the Lord's providence shall permit, 
will be ready to accept almost any relief which the 
Adversary may bring to their attention. And as they 
learn to deceive themselves in respect to pain and sickness 

R2793 :page 119 

and gradually to pervert words from their real 
meaning, they finally become so confused in their 
minds that truth appears to them to be falsehood, and 
falsehood appears to them to be shining truth, on 
every subject involved. 

They are led into this partly through curiosity. 
It seems so strange to hear anyone say, "There is no 
death, all is life! there is no pain, all is health! there 
is no evil, all is good!" They say to themselves, Altho 
we know that these are inconsistent statements yet we 
are curious to know how people reason them out,— 
what is their philosophy? This is just what the Adversary 
desires— to attract their attention, that step 
by step he may then lead them from one falsity to another, 
until the whole brain and conscience are subverted; 
rewarding them with physical relief— small 
recompense! They have accepted darkness for light, 
and light thereafter will appear to them darkness. 
Why? How? Because, first, they are unwilling to 
patiently endure, and because, secondly, they would 
not receive the truth, so far as they saw it, with a 
proper constancy. They would not receive the truth 
in the love of it, and hence were ready to exchange 



that which they valued too lightly, either in the quest 
of curious information, or for the sake of physical 
healing of troubles which, if endured joyfully, might 
have worked for them great blessing. 

The hour of trial is not coming alike upon all; 
for all Christendom is not upon the same plane of development, 
mental, moral, physical, spiritual. The 
trial, as it is coming upon Christendom in general, is 
pictured by the Apostle in his letter to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:1-5). 
He here delineates certain characteristics 
of this hour of temptation, otherwise called the 
great "time of trouble" coming upon the world; and 
from his prophetic delineation we see that selfishness 
will be at the bottom of the matter, and that impatience 
will be its weapon. The Apostle says, "This 
know also, that in the last days perilous times shall 
come; men shall be lovers of their own selves; covetous, 
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, 
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, 
truce-breakers, false accusers [enticers to strife], incontinent 
[not under restraint, impetuous], fierce, despisers 
of those that are good, traitors [cannot be 
trusted, would sell out their best friends for selfish 
considerations], heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure 
more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, 
but denying the power thereof." 

In his letter to the Thessalonians (2 Thess. 2:9-12) 
the Apostle gives some further intimations respecting 
the peculiar trials of this hour of temptations, which 
has come upon the whole world, but which has not 
yet reached its intensity, and which probably will not 
reach that intensity in all respects for some years, but 
which is already working, and sifting, separating,— 
because the judgment begins with the house of God. 
He says, speaking of Satan as the prime mover in 
the evils of this present time, and especially active in 
this hour of temptation with which this age shall 
close, that his effort will be "with all power and signs 
and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness 
in them that perish." Then he explains 
to us the reason why it will be so, saying, 
"Because they received not the truth in the love of it, 
that they might be saved. And for this cause God 
shall send them strong delusion that they should believe 
a lie, that they all might be condemned who 
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in 
unrighteousness." 

God's promise is the foundation upon which all 
that we hope for, either of character or coming glory, 
is built. Let us prize this truth so that we will not 
compromise it in any sense or in any degree; let us 
not only hold the truth in the letter but in the spirit;— 
in the love of it, because it is true, as well as because 
it is beautiful and grand. Holding it thus we will be 
careful that no one shall twist it for us or pervert it, 
and equally careful that we do not handle the word 



of God deceitfully ourselves, to the blinding of our 
own eyes of understanding, and thus to our own 
hindrance. And let us ever remember the importance 
of patient endurance, that we may not only cultivate 
the Christian graces, and practise them, but that we 
may take joyfully the trials, persecutions or difficulties 
which our Lord may see proper to permit to come 
upon us for our testing and for the development of 
this character which he explains to us is of paramount 
importance, and without which perfect love could 
neither be attained nor maintained. 

R2793 : page 120 

SPECIAL TRIALS OF THE PASSOVER SEASON. 



Years ago we called attention to the fact that as 
the Passover season brought to our dear Lord the 
sorrows and trials of Gethsemane and Calvary, and was 
a time of sifting and testing for Judas and Peter and 
all the Lord's followers, it would appear to be a time 
even yet in which our Adversary, Satan, is granted 
special license to test and prove the Lord's people. 
And as we get farther and farther into "the hour of 
temptation which shall try all them that dwell upon 
the earth," we expect these testings to be specially 
upon "the house of God"— the consecrated. 

Through the mails we learn of the struggles and 
tears and prayers of many,— some because of their 
own weaknesses and frailties, and some because of the 
frailties of others, and some because of earthly burdens 
which they can neither overcome nor cast fully upon 
the Lord. But while sympathizing with these and 
counselling them as best we can, we remember the 
Master's words, "Blessed are those who weep now, 
for they shall rejoice," and our heart is specially 
solicitous for those whose letters give evidence that 
they are in temptation, but realize it not;— those who 
are being swallowed up of ambition or business or 
other "cares of this life and deceitfulness of riches"— 
spiritual or temporal; and with those specially, whose 
love for the truth seems to grow cooler instead of 
hotter each year, and who see less and feel less than 
they did years ago. We say to ourself, these are like 
the apostles,— sleeping while they should be watching 
and praying, and the hour of trial will find them unprepared; 
while some who are weeping and striving 
are more like our Savior at Gethsemane, and like him 
will be strengthened for the hour of trial. 

Nor can we pray the Lord not to permit these 
trials of faith and patient endurance; for we recognize 
that the "very elect" must be a tried people, because 
of the very object of their election,— that they 
may be joint-heirs with Christ in the long-promised 



Kingdom that is to judge and bless the world 
during the Millennium. As the Apostle says, these 
"fiery trials must try you." It is a matter of must, 
of necessity, as respects all who would be graduated 
from the present school of Christ to a share in his 
glorious Kingdom,— that they must pass the 
examination. 

Ah, if we could but keep this thought before us 
continually, how it would nerve us to will and to do 
the Lord's good pleasure— enduring faithfully and 
cheerfully whatever our loving Master sees best to 
permit, knowing that thus he is working out for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. From 
this standpoint 

"How light our trials then will seem! 

How short our pilgrim way! 
The life of earth a fitful dream, 

Dispelled by dawning day! 

"Then peace, my heart! and hush my tongue! 

Be calm, my troubled breast! 
Each passing hour prepares thee more 
For everlasting rest." 
Let us each, dear brethren, be very solicitous for 
ourselves and for each other; and counting the prize 
set before us in the gospel as superior to all else, as 
the Apostle says, "Let us fear, lest a promise being 
left us of entering into his rest, any of you should 
seem to come short of it." Let us so love all the 
Lord's children that their welfare will be our chief 
concern, and this will mean our own spiritual health. 
Yet we must not permit our love even for the brethren 
to hinder our confidence in the Lord's love and wisdom 
in respect to his terms in the choice of his Bride;— 
even tho the sittings should take from us some, whose 
fellowship we dearly cherish. 
"Why should an anxious load 

Press down thy weary mind? 
Haste to thy Heavenly Father's throne 
And sweet refreshment find." 



R2794 : page 120 

"SO AS BY FIRE." 



"I sometimes feel so passionate a yearning 
For spiritual perfection here below, 

This vigorous frame with healthful fervor burning 
Seems my determined foe. 

"So actively it makes a stern resistance, 
So cruelly it sometimes wages war 



Against the higher spiritual existence, 
Which I am striving for. 

"It interrupts my soul's intense devotions; 

Some hope it strangles at its very birth 
With a swift rush of violent emotions 

Which link me to the earth. 

"It is as if two mortal foes contended 
Within my bosom in a deadly strife; 

One for the loftier aims Jesus intended, 
One for the "Mammon" life. 

"And yet I know this very war within me, 

Which brings out all my will-power and control; 

This very conflict yet through Christ shall win me 
The loved and longed-for goal. 

"And when in the immortal ranks enlisted, 
Sometimes I wonder if we shall not find 

That not for deeds alone, but also what's resisted, 
Our places were assigned." —Selected. 



R2794 : page 121 

"HE THAT LIVETH AND WAS DEAD." 

-LUKE 24:1-12.-APRIL 1 .- 

"Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become 
the first-fruits of them that slept."— 1 Cor. 15:20. 

ON NO Christian doctrine does there seem to 

be a greater confusion in all denominations 

than on the subject of this lesson— the resurrection 

of the dead— the resurrection of our Lord. Nevertheless, 

as with one voice, all Christendom unites in 

declaring that our Lord's resurrection was an indispensable 

necessity to our salvation, in this agreeing 

perfectly with the plain statement of the Apostle, "If 

Christ be not risen then is our preaching vain, and 

your faith is also vain;. ..ye are yet in your sins. 

Then they also which are fallen asleep in Christ are 

perished." (1 Cor. 15:13-18.) How strange that 

a subject of so vast importance as this should be so 

obscure! How strange that, recognizing its importance, 

thinking minds should treat it so lightly, and 

be willing to accept theories respecting it, the absurdity 

of which are manifest to all upon the mere statement 

of them ! 

For instance, it is the generally accepted theory 
that only the body dies— that the soul, the real, intelligent 
person or being, does not die, but merely is 
liberated to a higher condition of life the moment the 



body dies. Now, if we apply this theory to our Lord's 
death and resurrection how absurd it appears, and 
how absurd all the various theories would be that are 
built upon it: (1) If merely our Lord's body died, 
and if our Lord himself were released thereby and 
became instantly more alive than ever before, wherein 
would be the consistency of the claim that without 
his resurrection he had perished, and all hopes built 
upon him and his work had perished? It would be 
unreasonable to make such statements if the premises 
assumed were correct. (2) It is the claim of the 
majority of Christian people that our Lord Jesus was 
the Heavenly Father, Jehovah, and that he merely 
assumed to be, and took the title of the Son, when in 
reality he was as much the Father as he was the Son 
—that he was really both. 

Those who hold this view are forced thereby to 
suppose that the Lord himself never died, else the universe 
would have been without a Master for a time; 
and to be consistent this same error must needs claim 
that the whole work of Christ Jesus was a farce, a 
pretence, that Jesus really was the Heavenly Father 
all the time, and wore a body of flesh just as we do a 
suit of clothes; that he caused this body of flesh to 
pretend to pray to himself, and pretend to agonize 
with strong cryings and tears to the Father, really 
himself; that he let the body of flesh go on to the 
cross and pretend its groans and its crying, "My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" that he let 
the body be buried, and pretended for the time to be 
unconscious, while really he was experiencing none 
of these things that appeared, but was as omniscient 
and omnipotent as ever; that by and by he revived 
the body and took up the flesh and bones, etc., into 
heaven as an everlasting evidence of the deception he 
had performed upon mankind; taking a body of flesh 
into spiritual conditions, where it would be totally 
out of place and inappropriate to the environment. 

All this theorizing, so common amongst Christian 
people, is absurd in the extreme, totally contrary to 
the teachings of our Lord's Word, as well as repugnant 
to reason and common sense. This entire illogical 
theory is built upon and made necessary by two 
fundamental errors; first, a failure to see the sense in 
which the Father and the Son are one— that they are 
not one in person, but in harmony, in spirit, in will, 
as the glorified Church also must eventually be One 
with the Father and with the Son, as our Lord's own 
lips declared, "That they all might be one; as thou, 
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may 
be one in us." Secondly, the theory that the dead 
are not dead, but more alive than ever before. Can 
any one dispute that if the dead are not dead there 
are no dead ones, and to speak of a resurrection of 
dead ones would be an absurdity? 

But when we take the Scriptural account the 



whole subject becomes clear and plain. Jesus was 

the honored Son of God— "the only begotten of the 

Father"— "the beginning of the creation of God." 

To him had been given, while he was in glory with 

the Father, the privilege of becoming man's Redeemer, 

and he had accepted the service gladly: "for 

the joy that was set before him," he left the condition 

of glory, was made flesh, endured the cross, despising 

the shame, and ultimately received the exaltation to 

the divine nature, and joint-heirship through his resurrection. 

The taking of human nature was necessary, 

because it was a man that had sinned, and as by 

a man came death, by a man also must the resurrection 

of the dead be secured. (1 Cor. 15:21.) Only 

the sacrifice of a perfect life could redeem the original 

sinner, Adam, and his children, who shared his penalty. 

This was the necessity for our Lord's earthly 

existence and for his death, as the Apostle explains. 

-Heb. 2:14. 

"HE POURED OUT HIS SOUL UNTO DEATH." 

-ISAIAH 53:12.- 

Those who claim that our Lord himself did not 
die, but that merely his flesh died, are totally unable 
to answer or harmonize the Scriptural declarations on 
this subject, which are most pointedly to the effect 

R2794 : page 122 

that "he poured out his soul unto death;" "he made 
his soul an offering for sin." It was Adam's soul 
(being, existence) that came under the sentence of 
death through disobedience. It was not merely a sin 
of his body, but, as the Scriptures declare, "The soul 
that sinneth, it shall die." It was Adam's soul that 
needed to be redeemed, and not merely his body, because 
if the soul were redeemed God could give it a 
new body as it pleased him. God's proposition is not 
to give back, atom for atom, the same bodies that 
moulder into dust. On the contrary, it matters little 
what becomes of these mortal bodies, for it was not 
these that were redeemed, nor these that are to be restored. 
It was the soul that needed redemption; it 
was the soul that was redeemed; it was the soul of 
our Lord Jesus that was given as a ransom price for 
the soul of Adam; and the result is that the souls of 
Adam and his posterity are all guaranteed a 
resurrection. 

This central thought of the resurrection is wholly 
overlooked by Christian people in general, who leave 
the soul out of the question,— out of redemption and 
out of the resurrection, whereas it is the all-important. 
It is because the Apostle Paul recognized this matter 
so clearly that he stated himself so positively on this 



subject in his great chapter on the resurrection, 1 Corinthians 15. 

He recognized that it was Christ's 

soul that died— that his very existence had ceased in 

death; that not merely his body, but himself, was absolutely 

dead three days, and this is our Lord's own 

statement, "I am he that liveth and was dead." He 

does not say, I am he who lived always and who 

never died, but whose body died for the brief space of a 

few hours. It was because Christ's soul (being) was 

dead that the Apostle could declare that unless his 

soul, being, were made alive again by a resurrection 

there could be no hope in him as a Savior and a Life-giver 

—there could be no hope of his ever exalting his 

Church to joint-heirship with him in his Kingdom nor 

of his and their blessing all the families of the earth 

during a Millennial reign of righteousness— if he were 

dead, extinct, if he had not risen from the dead. 

R2795 : page 122 

The Apostle Peter also marks this point well, that 
it was the soul of Christ that was dead— that went to 
hades, the grave, the state or condition of death. Note 
how the Apostle Peter, on the day of Pentecost, quoted 
from the inspired prophet David, the words, "Thou 
wilt not leave my soul in hell [Heb. sheol, Gr., hades, 
English, the state or condition of death]." Peter informs 
us that the prophet spoke not of his own soul, 
but of Christ's soul, that it was not left in hades— 
that, on the contrary, it was raised up from the dead 
on the third day. (Acts 2:27,30-33.) Whoever 
sees that it was our Lord's soul that went into the 
state of death can see abundant evidence for all the 
stress which the apostles in their writings lay upon 
the fact of his resurrection. If Christ be risen it is an 
evidence of divine favor, and divine favor is an evidence 
of his perfection— that he did the work of sacrifice 
which he undertook, and in a manner acceptable 
to the Father; and these things being true, it follows 
that his exaltation to the Father's right hand of 
power means that we have in this a full assurance of 
faith that all the exceeding great and precious promises 
of God to the world and to the Church, centered 
in him, shall have a fulfilment in due time. 

As an illustration of the confusion which generally 
prevails on this subject by reason of false premises 
above criticised, note the following statement by a 
leading commentator, discussing this subject, and 
published widely in comments on this lesson. He says: 
"The resurrection of Jesus is the crowning proof that 
he is the Son of God. If he could not conquer death 
and come back from heaven he could not prove that at 
first he came from heaven!" Such is the ridiculous 
position into which ordinarily intelligent men are led 
through building upon false theories. 

The Scriptures nowhere intimate that our Lord 



Jesus did or could raise himself from the dead. If it 
were merely his body that had died, and if he were 
more alive than ever, of course he could just as easily 
quicken his own body that had died as he could quicken 
the body of Lazarus, and it be no more of a miracle, and 
no more of a proof. But if, as the Scriptures declare, 
it was his soul that died then he was wholly dead, and 
could have no power whatever to resuscitate himself. 
To this the Scriptures agree, declaring in so many 
words that "God the Father raised him from the dead." 
(Gal. 1:1.) Nor is this an exceptional statement of 
the matter. It is the united testimony of the Scriptures, 
in proof of which note the following: Acts 2:24,32; 
3:15; 4:10; 10:40; 13:30,34; 17:31; 
Rom. 4:24; 8:11; 1 Cor. 6:14; 15:15; 2 Cor. 4:14; 
Eph. 1:20; Col. 2:12; 1 Thess. 1:10; Heb. 13:20; 
1 Pet. 1:21. 

Our Lord's figurative statement, "Destroy this 
Temple and in three days I will raise it up," is not to 
be understood as in conflict with the above literal 
testimony. "He spake of the temple of his body"— 
"which temple ye are"— the Church. (John 2:21; 
1 Cor. 3:16.) Our Lord was living in the end of the 
fifth (thousand-year) day, and on the seventh (thousand-year) 
day "early in the morning," the Church, 
which is his body, is to be delivered by him from the 
power of death, and thus be made sharer in "his 
resurrection"— the first resurrection.— Phil. 3:10; 
Rev. 20:4,5. 

Neither are we to understand our Lord's words, 

R2795 : page 123 

"I have power to lay down my life and I have power 
to take it again" (John 10:18), as meaning that he 
could have any power whatever during the interim of 
death. Rather, we are to understand this in harmony 
with the many plain statements of the apostles under 
the inspiration of the holy spirit, to mean that our 
Lord had authority or commission from the Father to 
make the declaration that tho he would lay down his 
life he would receive it again— this authority, assurance 
to this effect, I have received it from my Father. 
So understood, the whole matter is clear. So understood, 
the doctrine of the resurrection becomes next 
in importance to the doctrine of the ransom, and 
really a part and parcel of it; for as we have already 
seen, for our Lord to have died and not to have risen 
from the dead would have meant no hope for those 
whom he had promised to deliver, and whom the 
Father had promised he should have authority to deliver 
from the power of death by a resurrection through 
judgments.— John 5:28-30. 

"IT WAS NOT POSSIBLE THAT HE SHOULD BE 
HOLDEN OF DEATH."-ACTS 2:24. 



It was not possible, because he had kept the divine 
law perfectly, and thus, according to divine arrangement 
and promise, he had accomplished two things: 

(1) The giving of the ransom price for the human family; 

(2) the attestation of his own fidelity and his worthiness 
of high exaltation to the divine nature and glory 
—"that all men should honor the Son even as they honor 
the Father." (John 5:23.) The same justice which 

had operated for four thousand years against Adam and 

his race because of transgression was now operative on 

behalf of Jesus for his deliverance from death, into which 

he had voluntarily gone as man's redemption price. 

When we come to see matters from the divine standpoint 

and arrangement we can well rejoice that the 

Father's character is unchangeable, and our Lord's 

resurrection becomes an evidence, or, as the Apostle 

says, an "assurance," of the carrying out of every 

feature of the divine plan, all of which centered in 

him and was made dependent upon his faithfulness 

even unto death, even the death of the cross. (Acts 17:31.) 

Now we know that he is the antitypical 

Seed of Abraham, approved of God, through whom 

all the families of the earth are to be blessed. Now 

we know that the Church of this Gospel age is called to 

be the Bride, the Lamb's wife, just as Rebecca was 

called to be the wife of the typical Isaac, and to be 

his joint-heir in the Kingdom and joint-participator 

with him in the carrying out of the promises and oath 

of God made to Abraham. "If ye be Christ's then 

are ye Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise" 

—that in this seed all the families of the earth 

shall be blessed. -Gal. 3:29. 

Coming to the narrative of our Lord's resurrection 
from the standpoint above set forth, realizing 
that all of our hopes of life eternal are dependent upon 
it, we come to it with much more and much deeper 
interest than we could approach it from any other 
standpoint or theory. And we are to remember that 
the disciples and followers of Jesus were Jews, and 
that the heathen philosophies had not yet made great 
inroads upon the people, to mislead them into thinking 
that the dead were not dead. As a people they 
believed the dead were dead, and placed their hopes 
in a resurrection. Thus it was when Jesus comforted 
Martha and Mary respecting their brother; he said 
not to them, Your brother is alive, but, "Thy brother 
shall rise again," clearly implying that he was not 
alive then in any sense of the word. Their answer 
was in accord with this: "I know that he shall rise 
again at the last day"— in the end of this age, in the 
great Millennial age of resurrection, lasting a thousand 
years. But Jesus, being the one who possesses the 
resurrection power, even then suspended temporarily 



the power of death, restoring Lazarus again, and 
thus illustrating the resurrection power which will be 
used in much fuller measure and degree, and generally, 
when the due time shall come, and "all that are 
in the graves shall hear his voice and come forth." 

Similar were the views on this subject held by 
the apostles and others. They believed that whether 
or not Jesus was the Messiah, as they previously supposed, 
but as had seemed to be disproved by his ignominious 
death at the hands of his enemies, nevertheless 
he was a holy man, and they trusted that in 
due time under the divine arrangement, according to 
the promise to Abraham, he, as well as all the dead, 
would rise again. Great must have been their surprise 
when they learned through the angel messengers who 
sat at the tomb that the Lord was risen, was no longer 
dead. 

The women, whose office it was to complete the 
work of embalming the body of Jesus, went very 
early in the morning of the first day of the week, 
"while it was yet dark," to perform their loving 
service. Our Lord was crucified on Friday, the sixth 
day of the week, and buried probably about four 
o'clock. This left no opportunity to complete the 
embalming arrangements, because, as Jews under the 
Law, they were obliged to keep the seventh day 
(Saturday) as a rest day, and in it do no work of any 
kind; but the seventh day closed at sundown, and we 
may presume that immediately the preparation of 
spices began, and that all arrangements were completed, 
and that they were on their way to the sepulchre 

R2795 : page 124 

as early as possible. We may assume that it was 
not the custom to embalm all the dead. Evidently 
Lazarus had not been so embalmed in death. (John 1 1:30.) 
And since the embalming process was only partly 
perfected on the evening of the burial, the women 
were in haste, as soon as the Sabbath was over, to 
complete their service, not realizing how unnecessary 
were their labors— not thinking for a moment of the 
Lord's resurrection. No doubt it was in order to 
better inculcate this lesson, and to prepare them for 
seeing Jesus, that the angels appeared and drew their 
attention to the fact that Jesus had foretold his crucifixion, 
and also his resurrection on the third day. 

Infidelity has objected that the accounts of our 
Lord's resurrection given by the four Evangelists are 
not exactly alike; but we answer that this is another 
evidence that there was no collusion amongst the 
apostles in respect to their statements of the Lord's 
words and doings, and these subsequent scenes. Their 
testimony, therefore, should be considered really 
stronger than if they had word for word declared the 



R2796 : page 124 

same thing. The fact is that each tells the story from 

his own standpoint, and, like any matter, it may be 

viewed from different standpoints, and the facts, related 

in somewhat different language and order, need 

not be understood to conflict. Rather, we are to understand 

that all the various things declared took 

place, and to do our best to find the order in which 

they occurred. 

Nor is it unusual to find differences of opinion 
respecting many things in the testimonies of unimpeachable 
witnesses; for instance, there is a dispute 
to this day as to what hour the battle of Waterloo occurred, 
altho tens of thousands of men took part in 
it. "Two armies beheld the battle of Waterloo, but 
who can tell when it began? At ten o'clock, said the 
Duke of Wellington. At half past eleven, said General 
Alava, who rode beside him. At twelve, according 
to Napoleon and Druet; and at one, according to 
General Ney." We do not think of impeaching the 
credibility of any of these witnesses. Rather, we are 
to suppose that they all may have been correct in that 
the battle began in some places sooner than in others. 
Some would regard the battle as beginning with the 
first skirmish, and others probably ignore those skirmishes 
and speak of the time when the armies fully met 
in the clash of battle. We are to use similar reasonable 
judgment in considering the testimony of such 
unimpeachable witnesses as were the apostles— men 
who not only hazarded their lives, but sacrificed all of 
their earthly interests in the service of him whom 
they declare to us arose from the dead on the third day. 

We might remark incidentally that the terms, 
"on the third day," and three days and nights, according 
to Jewish usage, would properly be applied to 
portions of three twenty-four-hour periods, and did 
not imply three full days and three nights. That the 
apostles so understood their own words is evident, for 
they made no effort to harmonize the statements, as 
they surely would have done had there been any conflict 
between them. Some earnest people, failing to 
realize this fully, have written books endeavoring to 
prove that our Lord was crucified on Thursday afternoon, 
but they seemingly overlook the fact that even 
then they could not count three full days and three 
full nights, and that unless they accepted the 
view that a part of three days is what is meant 
they would be forced to suppose that our Lord was 
crucified on Wednesday afternoon, in order to have 
the three full days, and in that event it would not be 
true that our Lord arose "on the third day," but on 
the fourth day. Furthermore, unless it be conceded 
that our Lord was crucified on Friday, the sixth day, 
too late to complete the embalming which would be 
hindered by the seventh day, no excuse could be 



found for the women coming early on the first day of 
the week with the spices to complete the embalming. 
If our Lord had been crucified on Thursday afternoon 
there would have been all day Friday in which they 
could have completed the work of embalming. 

Dr. Abbott points out that the Christian observance 
of Sunday is of itself a strong testimony in support 
of our Lord's resurrection. He says: "A singular 
and significant testimony to the truth of the resurrection 
is afforded by the change in the Sabbath day. 
It was changed, not by any express command in the 
New Testament, but by the almost universal consent 
of the Church, which could not endure to observe as 
a day of joy and gladness that on which Christ lay in 
the tomb, nor forbear to mark as a weekly festival 
that on which he arose." 

"THE FIRST-FRUITS OF THEM THAT SLEPT." 



Our Golden Text calls attention to the fact that 
our Lord in his resurrection became the first-fruits of 
them that slept— the first-born from the dead. After 
God gave the promise to Abraham that in his seed all 
the families of the earth should be blessed, it was the 
custom of Israelites to speak of their dead as not dead, 
not extinct, but as asleep— waiting for resuscitation, 
resurrection. They realized that such a resurrection 
was unquestionably implied, tho not actually stated, 
in the promise made to Abraham. For how could all 
the families of the earth be blessed until the ransom 
price was paid, a resurrection provided for, that the 
curse of death might be rolled back from off the race? 
Again, as our Lord declares, the intention of God to 
resurrect the dead was shown in his declaration to 

R2796 : page 125 

Moses at the bush, that he was the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob, etc., for if they were dead, extinct, 
without hope of a resurrection, God would never 
speak of them in this manner. (Mark 12:26,27.) 
Israel in general, therefore, had come to speak of the 
dead as asleep, waiting for Messiah and the work that 
he should do, which would culminate in resurrection; 
hence the common use of the words sleep and slept in 
the Old Testament when referring to the deceased. 
The Apostle informs us that some endured torture 
for their faithfulness to the Lord, in hope of a better 
resurrection— a more favorable condition, when the 
resurrection time should come.— Heb. 11:35. 

Our Lord also used this expression, "sleep," in 
respect to the dead, declaring that Lazarus slept, and 
that he went to awaken him out of sleep. (John 11:11.) 
Practically the whole world of mankind has gone 



down into this sleep, and it is called a sleep, instead 
of being called death, extinction, because in the divine 
plan, through the redemption, a provision has 
been made that "all that are in their graves shall 
come forth" at the word of their Redeemer, in the 
morning of the Millennial age. The "little flock" of 
"overcomers" who pass their judgment or trial now 
satisfactorily, come forth to life and joint-heirship 
in the Kingdom; the great mass of mankind, blinded 
by the Adversary, to a greater or less extent, will 
come forth, subsequently, to enlightenment,— when 
Satan shall be bound, to deceive them no more,— that 
they may have an opportunity of coming into harmony 
with God and forming characters in accord with the 
laws of his Kingdom, and so doing that they may 
have life everlasting. 

Our Lord was the first-fruits of them that slept 
—none preceded him; hence the awakening of Lazarus 
and of the daughter of Jairus and the son of the widow 
of Nain were not full and complete resurrections. 
Had they been such our Lord's resurrection would 
not have been the first— he would not have been "the 
First-born from the dead." His being born from the 
dead signifies that he was lifted fully and completely 
out of death conditions to the perfection of life, which 
was not the case with the others— they were merely 
awakened and left in the dead state with the remainder 
of the human family. The Church of Christ, his 
body, is to share with him in "his resurrection," "the 
first resurrection," a complete and instantaneous lifting 
out of the state of death into the perfection and 
completeness of glory, honor and immortality, which 
God has provided for them who follow in the footsteps 
of Jesus, his joint-heirs. These are all called 
the "first-fruits unto God of his creatures." (James 1:18.) 
The after-fruits of God's great plan will be 
developed during the Millennial age, yet there shall 
not enter into the approved condition any who will 
not use the means then within their grasp. 



R2796 : page 125 

"BEHOLD, I AM ALIVE FOREVER MORE."-REV. 1:18. 

-JOHN 20:1 1-18.-APRIL 14.- 

NOT only was it necessary that Christ should rise 

from the dead and become alive forevermore 

in order to accomplish the great work planned 

of God and foretold in the prophets, and secured by 

his own sacrifice, but it was necessary also that indubitable 

proofs of his resurrection should be given 

to his disciples, for themselves and for us through 

them. The necessity for this lay in the fact that in 



the divine plan this Gospel age was marked out to be 
a Faith age— for the selection of a special little flock, 
able, like father Abraham, to walk by faith and not 
by sight. But faith, in order to be faith, and not 
merely credulity, must needs have some reasonable 
foundation upon which to build its superstructure; 
and it was to provide this foundation for faith that 
our Lord remained with his followers for forty days 
after his resurrection, before ascending to the Father, 
—as the Evangelist declares, "He showed himself 
alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being 
seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things 
pertaining to the Kingdom of God."— Acts 1:3. 

The disciples realized that great events were 
transpiring, tho how great and momentous was their 
character, they but slightly comprehended. They 
knew that their hopes as respects an earthly Kingdom, 
and their Master as an earthly Lord, had failed. They 
had vague, indefinite hope that all that he had said 
to them would in some manner have a fulfilment, 
but how or when or where, was beyond their conception. 
They knew not that a change of dispensation 
was occurring;— that the rejection of Israel after the 
flesh, and the calling of a new Israel after the spirit, 
was commenced; and that they themselves were 
amongst the first thus privileged to pass from the relationship 
of servants of God to that of sons.— 
John 1:12. 

As yet they knew nothing about spiritual things, 
not having been begotten of the holy spirit to sonship 
and the knowledge of things to come, Jesus not yet 
having been glorified, and it being impossible for the 
holy spirit of adoption to come upon them until after 
his sacrifice for sins had been presented in the 

R2797 : page 126 

Most Holy, and accepted of the Father. They knew 

not that the new Kingdom was to be a spiritual one, 

and that Christ, its Head, must pass from fleshly 

conditions to spiritual conditions in this resurrection, 

even as he had foretold, saying, "Flesh and blood 

cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." They had much 

to learn, but they had a great Teacher, and, as we 

shall see, his arrangements for their instruction were 

specially adapted to their conditions as natural men, 

to give them such foundation of knowledge and experience 

as would subsequently be helpful to them 

when they should be begotten of the holy spirit at 

Pentecost. 

The Apostle informs us that Christ was "put to 
death in flesh and quickened (made alive) in spirit" 
(we give a literal translation). The Apostle's words 
being true, those who declare that our Lord arose 
from the dead a fleshly being at the time of his ascension 
are grossly in error. Indeed, it is evident that 



they have misconceived the entire subject of the atonement, 
for if our Lord, as the man Christ Jesus, gave 
himself a ransom, he could not be restored to manhood 
in a resurrection, without annulling the ransom 
—taking back the price he had paid for our sins. The 
Scriptural thought is that as man had sinned, and 
been sentenced to death, it was necessary that the 
Redeemer should become a man and should give his 
manhood as the ransom-price for Adam and his race; 
and the Scriptural declaration is not that this ransom 
price was taken back, but that God raised him from 
the dead a new creature of a new nature,— not in 
flesh, not in human nature, but in spirit, a spirit being. 
-1 Pet. 3:18. 

The Apostle Paul agrees with Peter's testimony, 
that Jesus was quickened in spirit, saying that Jesus 
was "declared to be the Son of God with power, according 
to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection 
from the dead" (Rom. 1:4); and again, the same 
Apostle, describing the first resurrection, in 1 Cor. 15:42-45, 
says: "Thus also is the resurrection of the 
dead: it is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; 
it is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; 
it is sown in weakness, it is raised in power; it is 
sown a natural [animal] body, it is raised a spiritual 
body." The Apostle elsewhere declares that the 
Church's highest ambition is to be a partaker in this 
first resurrection, which he denominates "his resurrection," 
the Christ-resurrection, the resurrection to 
spirit conditions, which came first to our Lord Jesus, 
and in which all of his body, his Bride, is to have a 
share. -Phil. 3:10; Rev. 20:6. 

There can be no question that the Apostle, in 
this description of the first resurrection, means us to 
understand his words just as they read— whoever interpolates 
and adds to the Word of God, and declares 
that it was sown a natural (animal) body and raised 
a natural (animal) body, and subsequently changed 
to a spiritual body, wrests the Scriptures to his own 
injury, to the darkening of his own understanding of 
the divine plan. In the same connection the Apostle 
declares that that body which thou sowest is not 
quickened, but in the resurrection God giveth it a 
body as it hath pleased him, to every seed his own 
body— in the resurrection, not after it. (1 Cor. 15:35-38.) 
If the Church belongs to the spiritual seed, 
to which is to be given the spiritual body in the resurrection, 
then unquestionably the Lord Jesus, the Head 
of the Church, belongs to the same spiritual seed, and 
accordingly God gave him a spiritual body in his 
resurrection. Likewise, in a succeeding verse, the 
Apostle declares that our Lord at his resurrection became 
the second Adam, and then contrasting this 
second Adam with the first, he says, "The first man 
Adam was made a living soul [an animal or earthly 
being]; the last Adam was made a quickening [life-giving] 



spirit [being]. "~1 Cor. 15:38-45. 

The lessons to be learned by the Lord's immediate 
followers would necessarily be much more difficult 
to them than to us; because we have been begotten of 
the holy spirit, and are thereby enabled to appreciate 
spiritual things. To meet the exigency it was necessary 
that our Lord, the spirit being, should be present 
with them for forty days,— invisible, as spirit beings 
are always invisible to men, unless through the operation 
of a miracle. It was necessary for them to know 
of his resurrection in order that they should have 
faith in his message, and act accordingly, as he desired; 
yet, had he appeared to them in the glory of 
his spirit being, opening their eyes to see the supernatural 
splendor as he showed himself in vision to 
John on the isle of Patmos, his face as lightning, his 
arms and his feet shining like molten brass in the furnace 
—the effect would have been to terrorize them, 
and their natural minds would have been unable to 
link such manifestations with their Lord, recently 
crucified; neither would he have had opportunity, 
under such conditions, to have given them instructions, 
for they could not have received them by reason of 
terror. 

It was necessary therefore, that our Lord, a spirit 
being, should manifest himself, as he had in the long 
past manifested himself to Abraham and Sarah, and 
as angels, under divine commission, had done on sundry 
occasions— as a man. (Gen. 18:1.) He must 
lead their minds step by step, and their thoughts link 
by link, from the cross and the tomb to an appreciation 
of his present exaltation as a spirit being, respecting 
which he himself explained to them, contrasting 
it with his previous condition, "All power in heaven 
and in earth is given unto me." And this leading of 
their minds must be such as would gradually force 
upon them the conviction that he was "changed," 
that he was no longer a man, and no longer subject 
to human conditions, as before his death. Having 
this thought in mind, we will have no difficulty whatever 
in seeing how our Lord inculcated these instructions 
during the forty days in his various interviews 
with his followers. 

Mary Magdalene was honored in being the first 
to whom our Lord revealed himself. Scholars are 
generally coming to the opinion that it is a mistake 
to suppose that Mary Magdalene had ever been an 

R2797 :page 127 

unchaste woman— a mistake to identify her with the 
woman in Galilee in the house of the Pharisee, who 
washed our Lord's feet with her tears and dried them 
with her hair, and of whom the account says, "She 
was a sinner." The name Magdalene is now supposed 
to signify that this Mary was of or from Magdala, 



a town on the sea of Galilee. However, according 
to the Scriptural account, Mary Magdalene was a 
miracle of grace, for it is distinctly stated (Luke 8:2) 
that she had been obsessed of evil spirits, seven of 
them, whom the Lord cast out. Many think that she 
was a woman of wealth, and the evidences are that she 
greatly appreciated her benefactor, and esteemed it a 
privilege to follow him whithersoever he went. Not 
only had she come from Galilee to Judea, but she was 
near the cross at the time of his death, and the first 
at the tomb on the morning of the resurrection— 
"while it was yet dark." Such love and devotion 
commend themselves to every sincere heart, and are 
surely worthy of emulation on the part of those who 
receive at the Lord's hands spiritual favors, forgiveness, 
reconciliation, the spirit of a sound mind, new 
hopes and aspirations, etc. 

To harmonize the various accounts we must suppose 
that the women charged with the work of embalming 
our Lord's body lived in various parts of the 
city, and did not all arrive at the same hour. Mary 
Magdalene arrived first, and finding the tomb empty 
hastened and first found Peter and afterward John, 
both of whom at once ran to the sepulchre, Mary 
probably returning more slowly to the same place, arriving 
there after they and the other women had gone. 
It was at this second visit that the Lord revealed himself 
to her. She had been weeping and then stooped 
down in order to see through the low doorway, as 
tho to reassure herself that it was empty, and then 
saw for the first time two angels in white, who inquired 
respecting her sorrow. The angels had doubtless 
been there when she was there before, but she 
had not seen them, because not of their choosing to 
"appear:" indeed, the Scriptures assure us, saying, 
"Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to 
minister to those who shall be heirs of salvation"? 
And again, "The angel of the Lord encampeth round 
about them that fear him, and delivereth them." 

Doubtless holy angels had in charge not only 
our Lord's body, but also the interests of his bereaved 
followers; and now, and on other occasions, 
some of these appeared— appeared, because they 
could not be seen without appearing, without a 
miracle— appeared as "young men," tho they were 
not men, but angels; not flesh, but spirit beings— assuming 
fleshly bodies for a time, that they might 
render the service necessary. In Luke 24:4 these 
same angels appearing as men are said to have been 
clothed in shining garments— so that they might not 
be understood to be men, but might at once be recognized 
as heavenly messengers. On the contrary, 
when our risen Lord as a "quickening spirit" similarly 
"appeared" in the flesh, in order to come closer to 
his followers, he did not appear in shining garments, 
but in ordinary apparel, assumed for the purpose, 



and in order that he might have the better opportunity 
for giving the instructions which his followers 
needed. 

R2798 : page 127 

The words of the angels to Mary would be calculated 
to assuage her grief, for they manifested no 
grief, and by their question implied that she had 
no ground for it. At this juncture something drew 
Mary's attention, and turning around she discovered 
another person near her, evidently in ordinary garments, 
whom she presumed to be a servant of Joseph 
of Arimathea, the owner of the garden— his gardener. 
She considered herself a trespasser to some extent, and 
assuming that our Lord's body was not wanted longer 
in the rich man's tomb she inquired where he had 
been taken, that she might take the proper steps to 
care for his reinterment. Then Jesus (for it was he 
who had "appeared" in the form of a gardener) spoke 
her name: "Mary!" At once she recognized the 
voice, and crying, "Master, Teacher!" she fell at his 
feet, grasping them as tho fearful that somehow, if 
she let go, she might never get the opportunity of 
touching his blessed person again. Our Lord's words 
to her, "Touch me not, but go, tell my brethren," 
would more properly be translated, Cling not to me, 
etc.— for I have not yet ascended to my Father; I 
will be here a while yet, before I ascend, but your 
great opportunity for clinging to me and trusting in 
me will be after I have presented to the Father, and 
he has accepted, the great atonement for sins which 
I have just accomplished at Calvary. Mary's touch 
could do our Lord no harm, for others touched him 
subsequently, as the record shows; but our Lord would 
lead Mary's mind away from a mere clinging in the 
flesh,— to the higher relationship and intimacy of 
heart and of spirit, which would now be possible, not 
only for her, but for all his followers, not only then 
but ever since. In a spiritual way the Lord's people 
may be exhorted not only to "look unto Jesus," the 
Author and Finisher of our faith, but also to "cling to 
Jesus," and by faith to place our hands in his that he 
may lead us all through our pilgrim journey, in the 
narrow way until he shall bring us to himself, when 
we, like him, shall be changed, in a moment, in a 
twinkling of an eye, and be like him, spirit beings, 
and see him as he is;— not as he was, before his resurrection, 
nor as he "appeared" during the forty days 
after it— 1 John 3:2. 

Our Lord gave Mary a message, a service to perform, 
and so it is with all who love the Lord and seek 
him and find him: they are not to merely enjoy him 
selfishly, but are given a commission in his service for 
the brethren. This seems as true today as ever. And 
by the way, this is the second instance in which our 



Lord ever addressed his disciples as "brethren," with 
all that that word implies of fellowship and of all being 
children of the one Father. (Matt. 12:48.) Now 
he emphasized this relationship by referring to the 
Father as his Father, and their Father, his God and 
their God. How close this brings our Lord to us in 
fellowship and relationship, not by pulling him down, 
but by realizing him as highly exalted, far above 
angels, principalities and powers, and every name 
that is named; it lifts us up, and by faith enables us 
to consider ourselves, as the Lord considers us, 
"brethren," prospective joint-heirs with him, who by 
and by shall be like him, our elder brother, sharing, 
through his grace and assistance, in his resurrection, 
and participating as joint-heirs in his "Kingdom"— 

R2798 : page 128 

if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also 
glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 

Mary departed with her glad message and was 
undoubtedly much happier in the delivery of it than 
if she had been permitted to remain clinging to the 
Lord; enjoying her knowledge somewhat selfishly. 
To find her Lord alive when she had supposed him 
dead meant to Mary a joy such as the Apostle Peter 
expressed when he said, "Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which, according to 
his abundant mercy, hath begotten us again unto a 
lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead." We may well suppose from our own experience 
in such matters, that every time Mary told 
the good tidings to others and made their hearts rejoice 
also, it brought her a fresh increase of joy. The 
Master similarly sends all who recognize him as "he 
that liveth and was dead, and is alive forevermore," 
to go forth and tell others of the glorious fact that we 
have a living Savior, whose love and interest extends 
to every interest and affair of our lives, and who not only 
is full of sympathy and compassion, but is able also to 
succor those who are tempted, who are in trial, who are 
in distress of any kind;— one who is able to bring us off 
conquerors, to give us strength to endure hardness, and 
who by and by will receive to himself all the faithful. 



R2798 : page 128 

BISHOP RYLE'S MILLENNIAL CREED. 



"FIRST. I believe that the world will never be 
completely converted to Christianity, by any 
existing agency, before the end of this dispensation. 



In spite of all that can be done by ministers, members 

and churches, the wheat and the tares will grow 

together until the harvest; and when the end comes, 

it will find the earth in much the same state that it 

was when the flood came in the days of Noah.— Matt. 13:24-30; 

Luke 17:20-36; Matt. 24:37-47. 

"Second. I believe that the wide-spread unbelief, 
indifference, formalism and wickedness which 
are to be seen throughout Christendom, are only what 
we are taught to expect in God's Word. Troublous 
times, departures from the faith, evil men waxing 
worse and worse, love waxing cold, are things distinctly 
predicted. So far from making me doubt the 
truth of Christianity, they help to confirm my faith. 
Melancholy and sorrowful as the sight is, if I did not 
see it I should think the Bible was not true.— Matt. 24:12; 
2 Tim. 3:1-6,13. 

"Third. I believe that the grand purpose of the 
present dispensation is to gather out of the world an 
elect people, and not to convert all mankind. It does 
not surprise me at all to hear that the heathen are not 
all converted when missionaries preach, and that believers 
are but a little flock in any congregation in my 
own land. It is precisely the state of things I expected 
to find. The Gospel is to be preached 'for a 
witness,' and then shall the end come. This is the 
dispensation of election, and not of universal conversion. 
-Acts 15:14-19; Matt. 24:14; 
Romans 8:20-24,28,29. 

"Fourth. I believe that the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is the great event which will wind 
up the present dispensation, and for which we ought 
daily to long and pray. Thy Kingdom come,' 'Come, 
Lord Jesus,' should be our daily prayer. We look 
backward, if we have faith, to Christ dying on the 
cross, and we ought to look forward, no less, if we 
have hope, to Christ coming again.— John 14:3; 2 Tim. 4:8; 
2 Peter 3:12; Titus 2:13; 1 Cor. 11:26. 

"Fifth. I believe that the second coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ is to be a literal, personal coming: 
that as he went away in the clouds of heaven, before 
the eyes of his disciples, so, in like manner, will he 
return. -Acts 1:11; 1 Thess. 4:14-18. 

[As his going was known only to his faithful 
followers, so only such will have the eye of faith and 
that enlightenment which will permit them to discern 
the second presence of the Lord, while all others will 
continue about the ordinary vocations of life, ignorant 
of the fact that they are living "in the days of the 
Son of Man,"— eating, drinking, planting, building, 
and knowing not of his parousia, his presence. Then, 
too, he went away quietly, unostentatiously, as well 
as unknown to the world, and the manner of his coming 
will be similar— he shall come in like manner. 
"Now the Lord is that spirit," and tho we, the 
Church, shall see him, it will be "as he is," and not as 



he was. At first we will see him with the eye of faith 
through the prophetic word of promise only, but the 
promise is that we also in due time shall be "changed" 
—to spirit beings. Then "we shall see him as he is; 
for we shall be like him." (1 John 3:2.)-EDITOR.] 

"Sixth. I believe that, after our Lord Jesus 
Christ comes again, the earth will be renewed and the 
curse removed; the devil shall be bound, the godly 
shall be rewarded, the wicked shall be punished; and 
that before he comes there shall be neither resurrection, 
judgment or millennium; and that not till after 
he comes shall the earth be filled with the knowledge 
of the glory of the Lord. -Acts 3:20-26; Isa. 25:6-9; 
Rev. 1:5-8; 20:1-6; Isa. 65:17 to end. 

"Seventh. I believe that the Jews shall ultimately 
be regathered, as a separate nation, restored to their 
own land, and converted to the faith of Christ.— Jer. 3:10,11; 
13:10; Rom. 11:25,26; 2 Cor. 3:15,16. 

"Eighth. I believe that the literal sense of the 
Old Testament prophecies has been far too much neglected 
in the present day, and far too much neglected 
by the churches; and that, under the mistaken system 
of spiritualizing and accommodating Bible language, 
Christians have too often completely missed the meaning. 
-Luke 24:25,26. 

"I believe, finally, that it is for the safety, happiness 
and comfort of all true Christians to expect as 
little as possible from churches or governments under 

R2799 : page 128 

the present dispensation; to hold themselves ready for 
tremendous convulsions, and changes of all things 
established, and to expect their good things only from 
Christ's second advent." 



page 129 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. APRIL 15, 1901. No. 8. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 131 

Jews Looking Towards Christianity 133 

Communing with the Lord 134 

Word from the British Branch 137 

As Seeing Him Who is Invisible 138 

"Whosesoever Sins Ye Remit they 
are Remitted" 139 

"Be Not Faithless, but Believing" 140 

Interesting Questions Considered 141 

Not the Lord of the Dead 142 



Words of Cheer and Encouragement 142 

Items: Volunteer Work for 1901, Etc 130 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the Missionary Envelopes now. Postpaid 
25 cents per hundred. $2.00 per thousand. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, postpaid. 

YES ! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

SILENT SERMONS TO VISITORS. 

Notice the statement above— "To Us the Scriptures Clearly 
Teach." We have this printed on fine card board, rounded 
corners, size 11 x 14 inches, with silk cord. This should hang 
prominently in all of your homes. We have also imported a 
new silver text card with motto for 1901, and one of another 
style. We propose supplying the three securely packed in a 
tube, postpaid for 15 cents. 

VOLUNTEER WORK FOR 1901. 

Remarks respecting the new tract "Food for Thinking 
Christians," No. 52, are favorable: all of our readers seem to consider 
it well calculated to awaken interest wherever it may be 
read. We are getting ready large editions for the "Volunteer" 
service on Sundays, near Protestant churches and are now ready 
for your orders; many are already received. We will fill these in 
part soon, and you may order further as needed. 



It is time now to prepare by choosing a "captain" and enlisting 
as many volunteers as may be able and willing to serve. 
Let your "captain" report to us the names of volunteers, the 
numbers of churches, the average attendance at these, and his 
estimate of the quantity of the booklets needed, and the addresses 
to which they are preferred to be sent. 



R2799 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



MISAPPREHENSIONS CORRECTED. 

SOME misunderstood an item in our March 1 
View, namely, that we commended the course 
of the Boers and Filipinos and condemned Socialism. 
Nothing of the kind was meant. 

(1) THE UNITED STATES AND THE FILIPINOS. 

The Filipinos would have been much wiser to 
have thrown themselves upon the mercy and justice 
of the United States and, expressing thanks for deliverance 
from Spanish misrule, to have asked for 
civil and religious liberty under the protection of this 
great Republic. But their ignorant failure to take 
this course did not make it right to ignore their aspirations 
for liberty, and to treat them as enemies on this 
account. Rather they should have had from the very 
start distinct assurances and guarantees of as much 
liberty as they could show capacity for;— eventually 
full freedom. But the right policy was offset by land-hunger, 
commercialism and the spirit of empire building, 
willing to spend thousands of lives and millions of 
money for its gratification. This we condemn as being 
contrary to the spirit of Christ, the spirit of love, 
and as sure to bring its own reward in due time. 

(2) THE BRITISH AND THE BOERS. 

Others thought that we commended the Boers, 
because we rebuked the British Ministry's lust for 
empire extension that would give British capitalists 
the control of Boer gold and diamond fields, at, however, 
a far greater cost of British lives and money than 
they expected. No one is deceived by the claim that 
the war was precipitated by Mr. Chamberlain's desire 
to free the Boer slaves and correct the Boer morals: 
everybody knows that he had plenty of room to work 
along those lines at home, where thousands of white 
children are still the wage-slaves of commercial selfishness, 
and need deliverance and schooling and moral 



training. Neither are sensible people deceived by the 
plea that the war was precipitated by love of liberty 
and the desire to give the ballot to the assorted white 
foreigners, called Uitlanders. This was the pretext 
by which the statesman who engineered the war for 
commercialism and empire deluded the British masses 
and got their support. Indeed, the claim that Britain 
forced the war by insistence, that her own sons, known 
as "Uitlanders," should be allowed to expatriate themselves 
as British and swear allegiance and support to 
the Boer republics, is laughable. The Boers well knew 
that such an oath to such men who openly avowed 
their hostility would be meaningless— that at the very 
time they were ready to take the oath of allegiance 
these men were conspiring for a revolution. In refusing 
the franchise under such circumstances to such 
persons, they did what every Briton would have done 
if in their stead. 

We by no means commend the Boers! We deprecate 
their low ideas of civilization, their practice 
of slavery of the native blacks, and their lack of liberality; 
—their narrowness and selfishness. But two 
wrongs do not make one right; and in our opinion 
the Boers should have been permitted to possess their 
land, and gradually improve its government as their 
ideas enlarged. It is but very few years since Britain 
took the step of giving the ballot, even under limitations, 
to her own sons. We love and respect British 
character far more than that of the Boers; and we refuse 
to believe that the British masses would have 
sanctioned this land-stealing war in South Africa, had 
they not been blinded and deceived by their trusted 
political and financial leaders. Our appreciation of the 

R2799 : page 132 

Britons does not mean a love for their rulers, but for 
the people who more than once have shown their 
sturdy love of principle to the extent of compelling 
their rulers to adopt at home the very liberal government 
which they now enjoy as a consequence. But as 
the "god of this world" is using Doctors of Divinity 
to blind many to the divine plan and its justice and 
love, so he uses Doctors of Finance and Doctors of 
Politics to blind noble and liberty-loving nations to 
the rights and liberties of others. Thank God, the 
liberty of "the prince of this world" will soon be curtailed, 
that he shall "deceive the peoples no more."— 
Rev. 20:3. 

However, it is not and has never been our wish 
to dabble in worldly politics. We are citizens of another 
country, even a heavenly, and have our Lord's 
Word for it that none of the earthly kingdoms are 
his; but that they all are under the domination of "the 
prince of this world"— "the god of this world;" 
Satan, who will continue to blind and deceive the 



masses until our Master, according to promise, takes 
the Kingdom and restrains Satan. (Rev. 20:3.) Then 
the blinding influences being removed and the true 
light shining, all men shall see clearly, and all the 
worthy will rejoice. 

Our object, in these occasional Views from the 
Tower, of Babylon's matters and affairs, is to have all 
those who belong to the "holy nation" (1 Pet. 2:9) 
see how widely astray are all the kingdoms of this 
world, even tho they call themselves "Christian nations" 
—"Christendom." We who are in harmony 
with the Lord and his righteousness must realize that 
the entire social structure is out of joint, else we 
could not so honestly and earnestly pray, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven,"— knowing that the coming of God's 
Kingdom means the utter wreck of earthly kingdoms, 
in a time of trouble such as was not since there was a 
nation. 

Whoever sees no fault in present arrangements 
and conditions, but approves them, is not very fit for 
the Kingdom, nor to be made one of the rulers under 
the new regime. On the other hand, however, we do 
not understand it to be the duty of the Lord's consecrated 
people ("the saints") to tirade and fight against 
the world, but to submit to its ordinances, except 
when conscience would be violated (1 Pet. 2:13), 
waiting patiently for the Lord's promised Kingdom 
as the only hope. Such are to realize that the worldly 
are blinded, and not to expect any to see the truth except 
such as have been specially blessed of the Lord 
and called to joint-heirship with Christ in the Kingdom, 
on condition that now they shall suffer with him 
for righteousness' sake. 

(3) SOCIALISTIC PRINCIPLES APPROVED. 

Some supposed us to be antagonistic to Socialism. 
Quite to the contrary; we are very sympathetic toward 
its aims, and merely object that they are wholly 
impracticable under present conditions. Unquestionably 
the new age will see many of the ideas of the 
Single-Taxers and Socialists, modified, in successful 
operation, under the auspices and backed by the power 
of the Heavenly King and his Kingdom, then in full 
control, and Satan bound. 

But we warn any of the saints against building 
their hopes upon any relief which Socialism now promises. 
That anchor and its cable are of sand, and will 
crumble into direct anarchy as soon as put to the test. 
Our faith and anchor, on the contrary, are sure— faith 
in the promises of God. This faith anchorage fastened 
in the divine power will endure every strain. In proportion 
as any look to earthly sources for the deliverance 
of the "groaning creation" (Rom. 8:19-23) 
they are turning their backs on the heavenly Deliverer. 



And in proportion as we trust in the deliverance that 
is to be brought about by the second advent of Christ 
and the glorification of his elect "little flock," to be 
the Kings and priests of God's Kingdom, in that same 
degree we must rest all our confidence in it. 

True, if all the princes of earth, including the 
financial, the "captains of industry," were to combine 
to establish Socialism, its temporary success would 
seem to be assured; but no sane man dreams of such 
conditions. And if established all will admit that it 
would be but an experiment, with the strong probabilities, 
all would admit (with the certainty, we would 
claim), that it would frequently contend with anarchy 
and have a continual fight. With the spirit of selfishness 
entrenched in the hearts of the individuals, 
could we suppose that the endeavor to live collectively 
on the opposite basis of love would be very successful? 

Socialism can only succeed to a limited degree at 
present— to the extent that it benefits the intellectual 
and wealthy as well as the poor. Any attempt to carry 
it further will precipitate anarchy. Present aggregations 
of capital and industry are favorable to Socialism- 
governmental control, by the people and for the 
people. The masses seeing this will ere long attempt to 
grasp the throttle, expecting capitalists to submit to 
save their lives. But they are mistaken. Money and 
brains and selfishness are a strong combination, self-confident, 
resourceful, powerful. The result, as the 
Scriptures foretell, will not be Socialism but anarchy, 
humbling to the pride of the rich and the poor, the 
reformer and the demagogue. But that extremity 
will be the Lord's opportunity, and on the ashes of 
human avarice and pride and boastfulness and self-confidence 
will be erected the strong equitable government 

R2800 : page 133 

of Messiah for which we watch and pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." 

We commend to the interested a fresh reading of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. IV., The Day of Vengeance, 
in which we discuss this subject at considerable length. 

JEWS LOOKING TOWARDS CHRISTIANITY. 



We have published several articles of late showing 
that Jewish teachers are gradually turning from a 
hatred of Jesus (as the originator of what they consider 
a false religious system) to an admiration of him 
as one of their race, whose teachings have benefited 
the world and influenced it for justice and mercy 
more than any other. Below, however, we give a few 
of the words of a prominent German Jew, B. Levita, 
recently published in the Preussische Jahrbuecher (Berlin), 



in which he advocates (merely nominal) Christianity 
as the only real relief for the Jews from the 
social ostracism under which they grieve. 

After recounting that the Jew is now refused admission 
to many clubs and associations and rejected 
from offices in the Prussian army, he proceeds to point 
out that Jews are neither more nor less religious and 
conscientious than these nominal Christians; because 
both are formalists, but the forms and ceremonies of 
the Jews are sad, doleful, and relate mostly to the remote 
past— the exodus from Egypt, etc., and are national 
rather than personal,— while the nominal Christians 
practice rites and ceremonies which, however 
little they really believe them, are consoling or happifying; 
personal and cheering, rather than saddening. 
For instance, infant christening (for males and females) 
is a bright, sunny occasion, the reverse of the bloody 
circumcision of Jewish male infants; and nominal 
Christian marriage and death services and social functions 
are all bright and attractive and consoling as 
compared to Jewish customs. He argues that it is 
these links between Israel and the past that hinder 
his social progress, and that as people of little belief 
or no belief can and do associate under the name 
Christian, so may the Jew, who may equally maintain 
his unbelief or partial belief, become a Christian and 
share the amenities of life without prejudice. A free 
translation of the conclusion of his plea may be summarized 
as follows:— 

"It is our religion alone that keeps us apart from 
the rest of the German people; yet we reject reform 
upon a Christian basis. We may say that we are no 
longer Jews,— yet we cannot become Christians. We 
can not believe in the divinity of Christ. But do the 
progressive German Protestants, with their higher 
criticism, believe in it? No; yet they hold fast to the 
old forms. The same ministers who teach from the 
pulpit an undogmatic Christianity are compelled to 
pray to the Holy Trinity before the altar and confess 
their faith in the 'Son of God.' This cast-iron 'I believe' 
is still there, and we can not, will not, pronounce 
the formula, for we can not believe. A mere 
formula, a piece of paper, divides us from our most 
enlightened Christian German brothers. 

"But what shall we do? Are we to found a new 
Jewish-Christian sect in which Christ is recognized as 
man only? That would only separate us again, and 
we are tired, so very tired, of separation. Back into 
Jewdom we will not go; into the German nation we 
can not go. The terrible cry of our forefathers is still 
fulfilled in us: 'His blood be upon us and our 
children.' 

"Our children! Why should we transmit the 
curse to them? Why should they suffer for a cause 
which is no longer anything to us? I have it! If we 
find in Christianity the true religion with the exception 



of a single doctrine that has lost its force, then 
we must not educate our children as Jews. The piece of 
paper which hinders us does not exist for our children. 
Let them take part in the great spiritual battle which 
is being fought out in the ranks of Christianity. Ours 
was the prophet who destroyed the law and taught 
eternal love. Let the wandering Jew die. Let our 
children become Christians." 



How evident it is that when, shortly now, God 
shall turn away Israel's blindness they will be in as 
ready a condition to receive the truth as nominal 
Christendom will be;— yes, more ready. But not yet. 
The idea of worshiping Jew Jesus as Jehovah is preposterous 
to him, and so arouses his contempt that he 
is unready to even listen to the truth— esteeming that 
this is the very basis of all Christianity. Hence the 
above suggestion of Levita is merely that, for the 
sake of their children's social future, they join the 
masses in mere outward profession of things they 
could not conscientiously consider for a moment. 

The "great gulf fixed" still remains, and will 
remain unbridged until the special work of this Gospel 
age (to which Israel as a nation was blinded by divine 
decree) has been accomplished;— until spiritual 
Israel, the elect bride of Christ, has been "sealed" 
and "garnered." Then the individual blessings of 
the new age (the Millennium) will begin, and Israel 
will be first to receive the blessing of the "latter rain." 
"I will pour upon the house of David the spirit of grace 
and supplication [in the midst of "Jacob's trouble"] 
and they shall look [with the eye of faith, as we do now] 
upon him whom they have pierced. And they shall 
all mourn because of him, as one mourneth for 
his only son." Then and thus they shall all be saved 
from their blindness and be granted full opportunity 
of obtaining everlasting salvation through the Crucified 
One, then being installed as the King of Glory. 
-Zech. 12:10; Rom. 11:25-32. 

Let us never lose sight of the fact that not until 
"the times of the gentiles" expire, and not until 

R2800 : page 134 

"the fulness from the Gentiles" have come into the 

Church and been glorified, can the individual blessings 

of the Millennium be expected; and then to the Jew 

first. Whatever of Millennial work precedes that time 

is general, pertaining to the nations and systems;— preparations 

for their overthrow and for the establishment 

of Messiah's Kingdom upon the ruins of present 

day systems. 



R2800 : page 134 

COMMUNING WITH THE LORD. 

LUKE 24:13-35. --APRIL 21. 

"Did not our hearts burn within us 
while he talked with us by the way!" 

"A LITTLE talk with Jesus, how it cheers our 
lonely way!" writes the poet, and who 
that is a Christian has failed of this experience? And 
fortunate are those who early learn, that while we 
should greatly appreciate our privilege of talking with 
the Lord, in prayer, we are to recognize that it is not 
this that brings the full blessing; but our attentive 
hearing, understanding and appreciating what he says 
to us;— the Word of Truth. Our hearts burn while he 
talks and we listen, more than when we talk even to 
him. 

Toward evening of the day of our Lord's resurrection, 
two of his followers, one of them apparently 
Simon Peter (vs. 34), the other Cleopas, passed along the 
country road leading from Jerusalem to Emmaus, about 
eight miles distant, evidently the home of Cleopas who 
would entertain Peter, whose home was in Galilee. 
Like all the followers of Jesus they had been greatly 
exercised and perturbed by the remarkable events connected 
with our Lord's last visit, in connection with the 
Passover— his triumphal entry into Jerusalem; the 
cleansing of the Temple; the routing of his ecclesiastical 
foes in debate; his remarkable teachings during those 
few days; his arrest, trial and crucifixion. The excitement 
of their hearts made other business for the time 
impossible, and they spent the day in Jerusalem probably 
without knowing just why, except that they desired 
to be in touch with fellow believers. They shared 
with all the Lord's friends in the considerable excitement, 
resulting from the reports given by the sisters 
who went to embalm our Lord's body, that the tomb 
was empty and that they had seen angels who said that 
Jesus was alive again. 

Full of the subject so close to their hearts, they 
were discussing in animated conversation the likelihood 
and unlikelihood of the reports they had heard, and in 
general the Messianic hopes of themselves and their 
nation, which they had trusted would have been amply 
fulfilled by Jesus, whose death seemed to throw all of 
their expectations into confusion. It was at this juncture 
that Jesus was drawing near them, disguised in a 
body of flesh and ordinary clothing— with a face different 
from what they had previously recognized, yet 
nevertheless gentle, soothing, sympathetic. He inquired 
the occasion of their discussion, which seemed 
to be respecting some sad subject. This kindly interest 



was not resented as an intrusion, but rather their burdened 
hearts rejoiced to find a sympathetic ear to which 
their perplexities could be related. How much of 
human nature there is in all this ! How favorable is a 
time of adversity and perplexity in which to approach 
those whom we desire to assist; but how necessary it is 
that we should learn of the Master how to approach 
with such sympathy in word and act as to gain the 
hearts of those whom we would serve and bless. Love 
is the secret of gentleness, of sympathy, of all real 
heart-helpfulness. In order to be more useful in life, 
the Lord's people need to become more and more filled 
with his spirit of love;— copies of God's dear Son. 
It was no deception on our Lord's part to inquire 
what things they were sad about, altho he knew everything 

R2801 :page 134 

better than they. It is sometimes the part of 
wisdom not to tell all that we know, if we can the better 
help others by inquiring of them. In this instance 
we can see the wisdom of our Lord's course, for the 
minds of the two travelers were lifted from any points 
of disputation and drawn to a general review of the 
circumstances of the preceding days, and this furnished 
the best foundation for our Lord's exposition of the 
meaning of and the reason for the things which perplexed 
them. 

Jesus did not reply to their surprised expression 
that he must be a newcomer in the city not to have 
heard of the wonderful things that had recently transpired. 
He let them proceed to declare their faith in 
him and how they viewed the situation. The portion 
of their conversation recorded implies clearly that however 
much their confidence might have been shaken 
respecting our Lord's Messiahship, and their hopes, 
that it would have been he that would have redeemed 
(delivered) Israel from the Roman yoke and exalted 
her as God's agency, the seed of Abraham, for blessing 
all the families of the earth, they still believed in him 
as a great Teacher, a prophet— "mighty in deed and 
word before God and all the people." This was a good 
confession, all that could have been asked, and quite 
sufficient for our Lord to use in rebuilding their confidence 
in himself, in his Messiahship— on a surer, a 
better, a more positive foundation. 

R2801 :page 135 

While it was expedient for him to start the matter 
by questioning them, it would not have been wisdom 
to have continued thus to any great length; for he had 
the message, they needed the instruction: we, as his 
followers, may learn a lesson from his course in this 
also. As soon as he had their minds in the channel to 
receive the lessons he would give them, he began to 



open unto them the Scriptures concerning himself— to 
expound them, to show their true meaning and fulfilment. 
We here see the proper course of the teacher 
illustrated by the great Teacher himself. As he went 
to the Scriptures and brought forth from them evidences 
of divine foreknowledge and prediction respecting the 
things that were transpiring before their eyes, so we, if 
we attempt to teach others, should not be content with 
offering our views, our opinions, our conjectures, but 
should search the Scriptures and be able, from that source 
to give to every man a reason for the hopes that are 
within us— that his hopes, as well as ours, may be built 
up, not upon the theories of men, but upon the inspired 
teachings of God's Word. Higher critics, Evolutionists, 
etc., never follow the method which our Lord 
Jesus here emphasized as the proper one: on the contrary, 
denying any special inspiration of Moses and the 
prophets, they ignore them, and offer instead, as of 
superior value, their own conjectures. Let us not only 
ignore such teachers as blind guides, attempting to mislead 
the Lord's flock, but let us also, to whatever extent 
we have opportunity to teach others, see that we 
follow not in their footsteps, but in those of our dear 
Redeemer. "To the law and to the testimony; if they 
speak not according to this word there is no light in 
them." (Isa. 8:20.) And those who follow such teachers 
as have "no light" are sure to get further and 
further into darkness. 

We are not informed what features of the Law and 
the Prophets our Lord enunciated; but we can surmise 
that he pointed out to them in Moses' writings various 
features of the Law which pointed to himself as the 
paschal Lamb, whose death must take place before the 
first-born and all Israel could be delivered from the 
bondage of sin, and from the great task -master, prefigured 
by Pharaoh, and be led ultimately into the 
Canaan of promise. We can surmise that he recalled 
to them Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac, the typical seed 
of promise, and how this represented the actual death 
of Messiah, the antitypical seed, the Son of God. We 
may presume that he called their attention to various 
of the psalms, which prophetically spoke, not only of 
the glories of his reign, but also of his sufferings and 
his death, and his subsequent exaltation to the right 
hand of the majesty of God. No doubt he called their 
attention also to the utterances of Daniel the Prophet, 
respecting Messiah's being cut off in death, but not for 
himself. Undoubtedly he reminded them of the words 
of Isaiah, that Messiah should be led as a lamb to the 
slaughter, be despised and rejected of men, and how, 
nevertheless, in due time God would set him as his 
King upon his holy hill, Zion. 

Spellbound with this wonderful exposition of the 
divine Word, his listeners drank it in, realizing its 
truth by the manner in which it harmonized the various 
testimonies of God's Word— nor did they think for a 



moment of inquiring of their teacher whether or not 
he had an ordination from the scribes and Pharisees, 
with a license to preach. They perceived that he had 
a divine ordination, and this was fully attested by his 
ability to make clear to them what other teachers could 
not make clear. 

The eight miles of the journey seemed all too 
short, as they reached their home, and they were loath 
to part with the wonderful teacher, whom they supposed 
they had fallen in with by accident, never dreaming 
to what extent divine providence was guiding their 
affairs. It was drawing toward evening, and the stranger 
was bidding them adieu, as tho intent upon a further 
journey; and indeed, he surely would have gone from 
them had they not been sufficiently appreciative of 
what they had already heard to constrain him earnestly 
to remain with them and partake of their hospitalities. 
So it is with all of us, as the Lord's disciples whom he 
is instructing, after we have been taught of him. If 
our hearts fail to burn with responsive love and zeal 
and appreciation, the blessing will pass from us and we 
will fail to reach the climax of joy in a full recognition 
of who our Teacher has been. While the Lord draws 
nigh to us with his grace and truth, without solicitation, 
he passes us by unless his message is appreciated 
so that we shall constrain him, urge him to abide with 
us, to continue the conversation— unless we shall proffer 
him in turn our hospitalities, our temporal things, 
in endeavoring to make some slight recompense for the 
spiritual favors showered upon us. 

Our Lord accepted their urgent invitation and remained; 
supper was prepared, and recognizing their 
new acquaintance as a great teacher or prophet they requested 
that he should return thanks for their evening 
meal. It was while he was thus asking a blessing upon 
it and upon them that the eyes of their understanding 
were opened— it dawned upon them that their guest 
was no other than Jesus himself! Perhaps the language 
used in the blessing was such as they had heard him 
use before, or perhaps in some other way their understanding 
was opened. 

Having accomplished his purpose, our Lord vanished 
from their sight. Thus, in addition to the instruction 
impressed upon their minds, he showed them 
by this vanishing that he was no longer the man 

R2801 :page 136 

Christ Jesus— that he was "changed"— that the resurrected 
Jesus was a spirit being, who could come and go 
like the wind, as he had explained to Nicodemus 
(John 3:8), appearing and disappearing, as he had 
never done previously, but as angels had frequently 
done. Moreover, they realized from this illustration 
that our Lord could appear in any kind of a body, 
and with any kind of clothing, as might best serve his 



purposes. They did not know him by the marks in 
his hands and his feet, nor by the seamless robe; for 
he had not appeared to them in these, but in another 
form, as an ordinary traveler whose features they did 
not recognize. Had he borne the prints of the nails in 
his hands and his feet they surely would have noticed 
them during their long walk; just as Mary would surely 
have noticed them when she grasped our Lord by the 
feet. But they had an explanation of the whole matter 
now; they understood why this stranger had been 
able to present the divine word with such clearness and 
force and beauty as to cause their hearts to burn with 
fresh love and zeal and hope. They were glad. 

Let us pause here to note some of the conditions 
which evidently led up to this blessing, that we may apply 
the same to ourselves, realizing that our Lord 
operates very generally along the lines of fixed principles, 
and that if we would be the recipients of his 
special favor and instruction, and have our hearts burn 
with the spirit of his truth, we should expect such experiences 
along somewhat similar lines to those observed 
in connection with the two who went to Emmaus. 
We remark, first, that this is an illustration of our 
Lord's promise that where two or three are together in 
his name— considering him, his word, his promises, 
his blessings— there he will be in the midst, and a blessing 
shall result. This may be in a country road, in 
the home circle, or in the more general gatherings of 
the Lord's people for worship, prayer and study of the 
truth. How this reminds us of the injunction, "Forget 
not the assembling of yourselves— and so much the 
more as ye see the day drawing on." Who has not 
noticed the blessing that comes to those who remember 
these promises of the Lord's Word, and who act upon 
them? Who has not noticed in his own experience, as 
well as in that of others, the danger of neglecting 
these admonitions— the danger of doubts, fears, indifference, 
coldness, worldliness? It is undoubtedly 
true today, as much as or more than ever, that we need 
such fellowship, and it is to such who seek it that the 
Lord reveals himself. 

Let us mark again the word of the Prophet, "They 
that feared the Lord spake often together; and the Lord 
hearkened and heard it," and noted it in the book of 
remembrance. Let us remember, too, that it is declared 
of such, "They shall be mine, saith the Lord, in the 
day that I make up my jewels." (Mai. 3:16-18.) We 
are not saying that others will not be the Lord's, nor does 
the Lord say so; but we may be well assured that those 

R2802 : page 136 

who have opportunities for meeting together and speaking 
together, and who fail to use the opportunities, are 
manifesting a lack of interest in our great salvation; 
and that such are very likely to lose the remainder of 



their interest, and failing of the Lord's instruction given 

to such, that they may fail also to be amongst the 

"jewels" whom he will gather. If on the contrary one 

feels little interest in the heavenly things, little disposed 

to discuss the features of the divine plan and its 

promises, and happy only when conversing on worldly 

matters, business, etc., it is an unfavorable sign. The 

Lord is not likely to approach such and open their understanding 

respecting the Scriptures, as he surely is 

pleased to do to those who are hungering and thirsting 

after truth. 

Many are so situated that they are unable to gratify 
the desires of their hearts in respect to assembling 
frequently with others of like precious faith, to talk 
over the good things of the Lord's Word of promise; 
but the isolated should not feel disappointed that the 
Lord's Word says that he will meet with the twos and 
threes, and does not promise the same to the solitary. 
They should rather look about them to see what provision 
the Lord has made whereby at least two can 
meet and discuss his Word together. We suggest, dear 
friends, that the Master has made special arrangements 
for all of his people in this respect in our day; for all, 
the world over, who so desire may have such a meeting 
at least twice a month, through the regular visits of the 
WATCH TOWER-and he that hath no money has the 
same opportunities as others (as will be seen by the 
terms on the second page of each issue). We believe 
this is a divine provision for the necessities of many, 
and we urge that all avail themselves of this as well as 
of every other privilege the Lord may grant for fellowship, 
for communion in spiritual things. The written 
message is not different from the spoken one. 

The Editor of this journal, through its columns, is 
pleased to meet with those of the Lord's people who 
desire fellowship and communion respecting the Lord's 
Word; and the reading of expositions of the Scriptures 
in the WATCH TOWER differs nothing from hearing the 
utterance of the same words by any living person who 
might meet with you. We claim no infallibility for 
our presentations, nor do we simply offer our opinions 
and conjectures, after the manner of the scribes and 
Pharisees; but rather after the manner of the great 
Teacher, we seek to present to the minds of those interested 
the teachings of Moses and the prophets, and 
to voice the testimony of Jesus and the apostles, and to 
show the harmony of the Scriptures. 

R2802 : page 137 

As soon as the Emmaus brethren recognized their 
guest, and he vanished, they understood well the meaning 
of the joy, the refreshment and the burning zeal in 
their hearts which his expositions of the truth had inspired. 
They had thus a confirmation of the words of 
the angels to the sisters in the morning, that Jesus 



was risen. The news was too good to be kept, even 

until the next morning. They must and did start immediately 

for the city, altho it was a journey of at least 

eight miles. How different their feelings as they set 

out in return from those when they left the brethren at 

Jerusalem, their hearts sad and their minds full of 

questionings! Now they were full of joy; for they 

saw that our Lord's crucifixion, so far from being the 

end of their hopes, was really the foundation for them; 

that as our Lord explained, "Thus it behooved Messiah 

to suffer before he would enter into his glory"— that 

unless he had suffered— died— the race would not have 

been purchased at the hands of Justice, and the condemnation 

of death would still rest upon it and make any 

permanent blessing impossible; but now, the redemption 

price having been paid, the way was open, first for 

the reconciliation of the Royal Priesthood who should 

be joint-heirs with Jesus as the Seed of Abraham, and 

subsequently, in God's due time, would follow the times 

of restitution of all things, the blessing of all the families 

of the earth. 

Some such thoughts as these engaged them as they 
returned to Jerusalem, and arriving at the upper room 
found the eleven (except Thomas— the term "eleven" 
being used in a general sense, and not a particular 
sense, as referring to the apostles in general and not to 
the exact number) with others of the company assembled. 
Then there was general rejoicing in the information 
that Jesus had revealed himself to Peter, as 
they related their joyful experiences, and how the Lord 
had been known to them in the breaking of the bread 
and the asking of the blessing. Doubtless it was this 
experience that led subsequently to the custom of the 
disciples having a meal in common on every first day 
of the week, at which they again in imagination recognized 
the Lord present in their midst, blessing the 
bread and opening the eyes of their understanding. 
Thus each first day of the week they called to mind 
how he opened unto them the Scriptures and sought to 
keep the eyes of their understanding open and to grow 
in grace, in knowledge and in love. 



R2804 : page 137 

WORD FROM THE BRITISH BRANCH. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There is nothing special 
to narrate at present, but I shall drop you a line 
on general principles. The 13 cases came on Friday 
about 6 P.M. By Saturday evening at 10, they were 
all opened and the contents properly stowed away, 
thanks to the fact that they were so far as possible 



packed in parcels, and thanks also to two brethren 
who came in to help— one on each evening. 

The outlook for DAWNS is good this year, and if 
the 5,000 last ordered are sent via Baltimore I think 
they will not be here much in advance of the time 
they are needed. The lot just received came in the 
nick of time, so far as cloth and leatherette are concerned. 
I think we will not at present go very deep 
into the matter of Volunteer work by secular hands, 
as a more excellent way seems to be available; i.e., 
moving the Colporteurs into some of the territory 
where at present we have no readers, and thus getting 
Volunteer as well as Colporteur work done there. 
They all do Volunteering on Sundays, so it will be no 
new thing to them. 

The Church in E. London had their annual business 
meeting last Tuesday. They unanimously requested 
me to serve as pastor for the coming year 
(from March 1), and at my request as unanimously 
requested Bros. Bull (A. C), Guard and Lightfoot to 
serve as assistants. 

Some time ago you gave it as your opinion that the 
twentieth century would not have advanced far without 
showing some great "sign." I reckon you hit it 
pretty close, if the Morgan-Rockefeller-Hill Trust 
be taken as a "sign." The papers in England talk 
about Mr. Morgan "syndicating the world." What 
do you think of Isa. 5:8 in this connection? If the 
parable be taken as a representation of "Christendom," 
which was foreshadowed by the first "house of Israel" 
(v. 7), we see that God gave Christendom the advantage 
of the "choicest vine" (Christ, John 15), and 
when he looked for justice and righteousness as the 
fruits (Gal. 5:22), behold oppression and a cry. The 
combine seems to be losing no time in seeking to acquire 
control of the world's interests in various lines 
(Mr. Morgan is coming to Germany this month to 
combine his crowd with the German steel combine), 
"that they may be placed alone in the midst of the 
earth," and may make great profits out of it. But 
verse 10 should be a warning to them, and a comfort 
to God's people, for one bath equals only eight gallons, 
and one ephah is but a tenth of a homer. "Great 
will be the fall thereof" in anarchy, I presume. 

Spoke last evening on Matt. 6:33, showing that 
the Lord here puts God and the things of this world 
as possible "masters" of his disciples. We cannot 
serve both, "therefore I say unto you," etc. If we 
serve the things of this world, as the nations do (cares 
of this life, etc.), God's word will be unfruitful in us; 
but if we serve God, seeking first his Kingdom and 
righteousness (if we seek and find his righteousness, 
we shall also find his Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1:5-15), all 
these things shall be added to us, and in fact shall be 
OUR servants, instead of we in bondage to them. 

Notwithstanding the course of this world being 



opposed to those who seek God's righteousness, the 
Father will overrule in the affairs of his people that 

R2804 : page 138 

those who seek first his Kingdom, etc., shall not be 

deprived of the necessaries for an honest living. Godliness 

has "the promise of the life that now is," etc. 

Showed how some misunderstand this passage to authorize 

an idle waiting for the necessaries of life to fall 

down on them, because they take the wrong thought 

from the Lord's reference to birds and lilies. It is true 

that birds do not sow or reap, and that lilies do not toil 

or spin, but also true that birds do not know how to 

sow and reap, nor do the lilies know how to spin. 

But the birds get their food in God's appointed way 

for them, and the lilies get their glory in God's appointed 

way for them. So man must get his food in 

God's appointed way for him, and any Christian who 

seeks to get it in another way is "disorderly." (2 Thes. 3:7-11.) 

R2805 : page 138 

The idea was to show that this passage 

does not authorize begging or idle waiting for 

the Lord's people to supply one's needs. Would you 

think these views correct? 

Hope you are as well as usual. We are in fair 
health, and rejoicing in the Lord. With love to all, 
in which Sister H. joins, 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 
E. C. HENNINGES. [Manager British Branch.] 



R2802 : page 138 

AS SEEING HIM WHO IS INVISIBLE. 

-JOHN 20:19-29.-APRIL 28.- 

"Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed.' 

AS THE news of our Lord's resurrection spread 
amongst his disciples it naturally drew them 
together seeking for fresh evidence respecting it. Then 
arose the fear that the spite of the priests, etc., which 
had seemingly been satisfied in the crucifixion of Jesus, 
would now extend to his disciples; and no doubt this 
thought was emphasized by the recollection that the 
Lord, speaking of his own sufferings and experiences, 
warned the disciples that they would be cast into prison 
and suffer persecution for his sake. No wonder, then, 
that when they met in the upper room that first Sunday 
night, the doors were shut for fear of the Jews, and 
we may safely conclude that this means that they were 



barred, bolted, locked in some manner. 

Scarcely had the two from Emmaus finished their 
account of how Jesus had appeared to them on the way 
and at Emmaus, when suddenly they were all terrified 
at seeing a stranger standing in their midst. It was 
Jesus, and this was his third manifestation on this day 
of his resurrection (counting that of Matt. 28:9 and 
John 20: 14 as the same; and that of Luke 24: 15 and 34 
as the same). He came into their midst, not by 
opening the doors, as some have suggested, but strictly 
as the narrative reads, "the doors being shut." The 
security which was felt from having the doors fastened, 
caused the disciples to feel the more terror, when they 
beheld a stranger with them, but Jesus quickly assuaged 
their fears, saying, "Peace be unto you!" and then 
showed them his hands and his side, that they might 
note the marks of his crucifixion and the spear-wound, 
that thus they might identify him with the crucified 
one. This evidence, added to what they had already 
heard, was convincing to all who were present, and 
they were glad. No doubt our Lord's previous manifestations 
were intended to lead up to this general presentation. 
He had stimulated and cultivated the faith, 
not only of the ones to whom he had appeared, but 
also of the entire company, through them, by the 
method adopted. 

Women seem to be able to exercise faith more 
readily than men; hence our Lord appeared first to 
Mary, and through her prepared the hearts of the others, 
as we have seen. It requires the masculine mind rather 
longer as a rule to reach the position of implicit faith; 
he calls for more evidences, more proofs, and our Lord 
was not unwilling to give these. However, had this 
appearance in the upper room in the evening been the 
first manifestation and information respecting our Lord's 
resurrection, we can readily suppose that it would not 
have produced the faith and joy it did produce. Wonder, 
astonishment and "reasonings" required the entire 
day for their exercise, and by the time our Lord showed 
his hands and his side this culmination of evidence 
was convincing. 

After the disciples believed, Jesus again used the 
words, "Peace be unto you," but now as believers the 
words had to them a new meaning; they began indeed 
to find a peace for their troubled hearts which they had 
not known for some time. Since they realized their 
Master to be again alive they could afford to have peace, 
for they had learned to have confidence in him and in 
his love, and intuitively realized that all things would 
work together for good to them, under his care, tho as 
yet they knew not how. And so it is still. It is only 
those who realize in Jesus their Redeemer and Lord, 
who died and who rose on their behalf, and who have 
given themselves to him to be his disciples— only such 
can really receive of his peace— "the peace of God 
which passeth all understanding" ruling in their hearts. 



So today, as well as then, and even more abundantly 
under the holy spirit's guidance, they can realize that 
they are not their own, and that all things are under 
divine supervision, working for their highest welfare. 
"My peace I give unto you," were our Lord's 

R2803 : page 139 

words on the night of his betrayal, at the supper, and 

"Peace be unto you," were his words when first he met 

the disciples together after his resurrection. He is indeed 

the Prince of Peace, and the grace of peace which 

he gives to his faithful disciples is a blessing beyond all 

measure, such as the world can neither give nor take 

away; but this peace is based upon certain conditions 

of the heart: first, faith, trust in God; secondly, obedience, 

on our part, endeavoring to do those things which 

are pleasing in God's sight. To such and such only 

comes the heavenly peace, and in proportion as either 

the faith is lost or the obedience lacking, the peace flies 

away. Whoever, therefore, believes himself to be a 

child of God, trusting in Jesus and consecrated to the 

Lord's service, and seeking to walk in his footsteps, 

should expect the Lord's peace to rule in his heart, 

giving him rest, no matter what his circumstances or 

conditions in life; and if any of this class are without 

the peace let them look to it and repair the difficulty, 

for they are lacking either in faith or in obedience, and 

with the revival of these the dove of peace will surely 

return. Another lesson here is, that however much 

strife and contention his message, the Truth, stirs up 

among men, our Lord himself was always peaceably 

disposed and a peacemaker as respects others; and so 

all of his disciples are to be. "Blessed are the peacemakers; 

they shall be called children of God." Whatever 

of strife may come in contact with the Lord's 

people it is not to be of their production or cultivation; 

and even when they speak the truth, which will necessarily 

cause strife, they are directed to "speak the truth 

in love," in meekness, in gentleness, and with long-suffering 

and patience, and not in strife. 

Then, saying to his disciples, "As the Father commissioned 
me so I commission you," our Lord breathed 
upon them, adding, "Receive ye the holy spirit." The 
Father's commission to the Christ, the Royal Priesthood, 
was all addressed to the Head, the Chief Priest, 
we having no standing with the Father except through 
him, and no other commission than his for our service. 
Our Lord's words imply that we as his disciples are to 
be engaged in the same work that he is engaged in. He 
did not finish the work completely, but merely finished 
one part of it— the part which he was to perform in 
the flesh, the redemption. Another great part of the 
work is to be accomplished at his second advent in 
power and great glory; viz., the blessing of all the families 
of the earth with a knowledge of divine grace and 



an opportunity for returning into full fellowship with 
the Father and to eternal life. His commission covered 
this entire work, as represented in the promise of God 
to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed," and our Lord explained to the two 
brethren on the way to Emmaus that it behooved him 
to suffer for the sins of the world before he should enter 
into his glory, and ultimately begin the work of their 
blessing, because he could not have the power or the 
authority to bless until first he redeemed from the sentence 
of death. 

And this is the commission which our Lord and 
Head has in turn committed to his followers. We are 
sent on the same mission, and hence it is declared that 
we are to suffer with him in the present life— to "fill 
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ"— 
and then to share with him in his glory in the blessing 
of all the families of the earth. How grand a commission! 
What a great privilege to be invited to walk in 
his steps— of trial and suffering now, and of glory, honor 
and immortality by and by! Whoever appreciates this 
privilege will show his appreciation, not only in words, 
but in deeds, in truth, by laying aside every weight, 
and the easily-besetting sin, and running with patience 
the race set before us in the Gospel. 

The breathing upon them was evidently symbolical; 
an illustration of his words, "Receive ye the holy 
spirit," by which, when, fifty days later, they would 
receive the Pentecostal blessing and adoption of sons, 
they might know that while the holy spirit is of the 
Father it is nevertheless by the Son. And so the apostles 
understood it, as Peter subsequently explained.— 
Acts 2:33. 

"WHOSESOEVER SINS YE REMIT THEY ARE REMITTED. 

We are not to understand that either the Father 
or the Son gave over to the apostles or to others the 
power of remitting sins. We see, indeed, that sins 
could not be remitted by power, but only by the satisfaction 
of Justice, and that hence it was necessary for 
Jesus to die for our sins, and to rise for our justification, 
before those sins could in any sense of the word 
be remitted. The most that could possibly be understood 
from our Lord's words is that he would so supervise 
the words and writings of the apostles that in every 
instance they would lay down such directions respecting 
sins and their forgiveness as would be in full accord 
with the divine arrangement— that thus they might act 
as mouthpieces of God explaining to men the nature of 
sin and the terms of its forgiveness. This view we 
know is fully borne out by the facts in the case. The 
apostles did define sin and the terms of forgiveness, 
justification, reconciliation, etc., in a manner entirely 
satisfactory, in a manner in which our Lord himself 
never explained these things; because he left this work 



for his apostles to accomplish in his name and under 
the guidance of the holy spirit. 

This commission is grossly misunderstood and misapplied 
by Catholics, who claim for the pope, the bishops 
and the lower clergy of their institution the right, 
the power, the authority, to forgive sins,— to determine 

R2803 : page 140 

what penalties shall be inflicted, and to offer release 
from such penalties on certain conditions of their own 
making. It is in support of this claim, and as an adjunct 
to it, that Papacy has established "the sacrifice 
of the mass," by which it claims that all of its priesthood 
can so consecrate flour and wine and water as to 
make of these the actual flesh and blood of Christ, 
which then being broken they claim is Christ sacrificed 
afresh, as the basis or authority for their forgiveness of 
sins. 

We claim, on the contrary, that all of the Royal 
Priesthood (under Christ, the Chief Priest, and under 
the directions given them through the chosen apostles), 
are fully empowered to declare to the world the terms 
upon which sins will be covered, cancelled, remitted,— 
and consequently the terms without which there is no 
remission. The right to do this comes, not through 
any power or authority enjoyed by the under-priesthood 
now, but as a result of the information which they receive 
of the holy spirit, through the inspired utterances 
of the apostles. By these means "we have the mind 
of Christ," and know clearly the terms upon which he 
is willing to receive sinners; viz., upon repentance, and 
faith in him, and consecration to his service. Any and 
all of the Royal Priesthood are privileged to tell this 
good message to whoever may have an ear to hear it;— 
but we are instructed of the Lord not to expect that 
many will have the hearing ear now, but to know that 
the present is rather the time when only the few specially 
blessed of the Lord will be able to understand and 
appreciate this grace of God by faith. 

"BE NOT FAITHLESS, BUT BELIEVING." 



One of "the eleven," Thomas, was not with them 
on the evening mentioned. This would imply that he 
had disbelieved the stories told by the sisters respecting 
the message of the angels and the Lord's manifestation 
to Mary. He evidently thought them laboring under 
some delusion and excitement, which he ought to discountenance, 
and he therefore did not meet with the 
others to confer respecting their newly begotten hopes; 
they might enjoy such ephemeral hopes if they chose, 
but as for him, he could not do it. Having seen the 
crucifixion and the wound in the side, he could believe 



nothing else than that the Lord was still dead. And 
even when the apostles met him the next day, and told 
him how Jesus was in their midst and showed them his 
hands and his side, Thomas still disbelieved, and told 
them that he would not even trust to the sight of his 
eyes, which might be deceived. On his part he would 
want also an opportunity to feel the print of the nails 
and to thrust his hand into the spear-hole in the Lord's 
side. If he could have such evidence he could believe, 
but not otherwise. 

Our Lord's followers today, as then, differ constitutionally 
to a considerable extent. Some find it easier 
to exercise faith than do others. It was right that 
Thomas should take care not to be deceived in the matter, 
but it was wrong that he should be so deficient in 
faith as to stand out stoutly in disbelieving when he 
had his evidence from so many of the brethren whose 
honesty he could not doubt. However, the Lord is 
very patient and long-suffering toward us all, and so he 
was with Thomas to the extent of granting him the 
very evidence which he had said would be satisfactory. 

A whole week passed without any manifestation 
of the Lord to any of the disciples; however, the next 
first-day of the week (Sunday, "the eighth day," the 
Jewish method of counting including both days) found 
the Lord's followers gathered in hope of some further 
reports, evidences, etc., connected with his resurrection, 
when Jesus again "appeared," and we may well 
suppose them full of interest and suppressed excitement 
not unmixed with disappointment, and fear that 
they might see him no more. But all this was a part 
of the lesson they needed;— for meantime they must 
have reasoned out that a great "change" had come to 
our Lord, that he was no longer a man as before, but a 
spirit being, who exercised the powers of angels in respect 
to his appearing and disappearing,— coming and 
going invisibly "like the wind." Thomas meantime, 
altho still sceptical, had become sufficiently interested 
to want to be present, to want to receive any 
proofs or evidences that could be adduced by which he 
would know that his dear Lord was now alive again. 
As before, Jesus came into their midst, the doors being 
shut, and again gave the word, "Peace." How beautiful 
and how blessed it would be if the Lord's people 
whenever they come together, to meet each other and 
to meet Jesus in spirit, would greet each other with 

R2804 : page 140 

this salutation from the heart,— "Peace be unto you!" 
Uttered in the right spirit it should imply that their 
hearts were in a peaceable condition, seeking each 
other's peace and welfare and to avoid strife. This 
meek and quiet spirit would have a quieting and pacifying 
effect to a considerable degree upon any others 
present in such a meeting who had less of this holy 



spirit. The spirit of peace is contagious amongst the 

Lord's people, even as the spirit of anger is contagious 

in the flesh. "My peace I give unto you," said our 

Lord; and hence whoever has not this spirit ruling in 

his heart lacks an important evidence of discipleship. 

The Apostle classes the contentious with those who are 

disobedient to the truth (Rom. 2:8); yet allowance is 

to be made for weakness of the flesh in this as in other respects; 

and to "contend earnestly" for the truth (in a 

spirit of love) is commended. (Jude 3.) Whatever our 

natural dispositions may be, the indwelling of the Lord's 

R2804 : page 141 

spirit is sure to be manifest in "the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness."— Heb. 12:11. 

Immediately our Lord addressed Thomas, thus indicating 
his thorough knowledge of his doubts and 
fears; he invited him to come forward and have the 
very evidences which he had declared would be necessary. 
We presume that Thomas did as he said, altho 
the account does not mention it; it is implied in his 
prompt confession of his faith in the words, "My Lord 
and my God!" We are not to suppose that by this 
expression Thomas meant that he recognized the risen 
Jesus as being the Heavenly Father, as some would 
suggest: on the contrary, we are to remember that 
amongst the Jews the word "god" signified mighty 
one, and was sometimes applied to angels, and sometimes 
to great, influential men, as well as to the All-mighty 
One, Jehovah. God, mighty one, was an appropriate 
title to apply to our Lord Jesus; but in no 
event should Thomas' words be understood either to 
be wiser or truer in any sense than our Lord's own expression 
of a few days previous, when he said, "I have 
not yet ascended to... my Father and your 
Father; my God and your God." As the angels were 
elohim, mighty ones or gods, to mankind, so Jesus, 
God's beloved Son, was properly recognized by his disciples 
as being far more than man, as being a mighty 
one, a god; and Jesus, in turn, recognized the Father 
as his God as well as ours. With this view all is 
reasonable, consistent and harmonious. With any 
other view of the subject there is confusion. 

Our Lord did not reprove Thomas for his hard-headed 
determination to have indubitable proofs before 
he would believe; but he did tell him of a more excellent 
way,— that while it is good to believe upon the 
basis of physical sight and physical touch, there is a 
still higher attainment of faith than that, which is able 
to see things that cannot be seen with the natural eye, 
and to feel things which cannot be felt with the natural 
touch. He would have Thomas and us all realize this 
well; so that we might the more cultivate this spiritual 
sensibility: not that he would have us credulous and 
ready to believe without evidence or testimony, but so 



filled with true faith and confidence in the Father's 
mighty power, and in Christ's own promises, that we 
would be ready to believe certain things upon the evidence 
of others, yea, to expect those things. 

And this has been the condition of acceptance with 
the Lord throughout this Gospel age. We have not 
seen Jesus except with the eyes of our understanding; 
we have not heard his voice except as we have heard 
with the ears of our hearts; yet this is the more blessed 
faith;— the kind more appreciated by the Lord himself 
than the kind which would be satisfied with nothing 
but a tangible demonstration. A time is coming in 
which God will give to the whole world of mankind 
tangible evidences respecting all the features of the 
divine plan. Faith will then be swallowed up in sight, 
but when that time shall have come the rewards of faith 
which are now held out will no longer be open. Other 
rewards will be given, rewards of obedience; but they 
will not be so great as the rewards of faith. 

Now, while it is dark, before the Sun of Righteousness 
has arisen with healing in his beams, to scatter all the 
doubts and fears and hindrances, the Lord puts a premium 
upon faith, and only those who can and do exercise 
it may and do have certain rewards, privileges, 
opportunities and blessings. Of the Gospel-age-little-flock 
it is written, "We walk by faith and not by sight." 
We endure, "as seeing him who is invisible;" we run 
for a crown and a throne which we may see only with 
the eye of faith; we obey the voice of him who speaketh 
from heaven, but whose voice now is the still small 
voice, which only the few who exercise faith can hear, 
appreciate and understand. By and by the time will 
come when this voice shall shake the earth and cause 
the knowledge of the Lord to fill the whole 
earth. Obedience then will be proper and bring a 
blessing; but obedience now, even unto sacrifice of 
earthly interests in following the footsteps of him who 
set us an example, brings the greater blessings— the 
blessings which pertain not only to the life which now 
is, but also to that which is to come,— the blessings of 
glory, honor and immortality. 



R2805 : page 141 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS CONSIDERED. 



EARTHLY TREASURES VS. HEAVENLY TREASURES. 

Question.— Since I find that the approaching time 
of trouble will mean anarchy and the destruction of all 
values, I feel little disposed to put forth energy for 
more than life's necessities. Is this right or wrong? 



Answer.— In reply, we are sending you a TOWER 
of April 15, 1896, which contains some interesting items. 

It is our opinion that the disorders prevailing during 
the time of anarchy will render title to property 
null and void, so far as transfer or sale will be concerned. 
Nevertheless, it would not be unreasonable to expect 
that a home of modest appearance would as likely be 
respected as anything. Rents and mortgages, we think, 
would be of little account as a reliance for income. 
Similarly, insurance will probably be of little value; 
the mutual societies failing first when the "hard times" 
come, and thus assisting in bringing the anarchy. People 
who are learning to depend on such assistance will 
be the more despondent and desperate when this reliance 
fails. 

R2805 : page 142 

But all this, while it should properly hinder us 
from having the world's spirit of land and money 
hunger, should not hinder us from reasonable energy 
in our business; for surely, even if money would lose 
all value at that time, there is still opportunity for 
using it wisely in the Lord's service in the interim, and 
should we not thus to some extent be conforming our 
course to the Master's words, when he admonished 
that we lay up treasures in heaven, where it will be safe? 

NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD. 



Question.— If the dead are dead, and an awakening, 
a reanimation, is necessary to future consciousness, in 
what way should we understand our Lord's comments 
on God's words to Moses, "I am the God of Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob"— "Not the God of the dead, but of 
the living, for all live unto him?"— Luke 20:37,38. 

Answer.— This is to be understood from the standpoint 
mentioned by the Apostle when he tells us that 
the believers should not sorrow for their dead friends, 
as do others, "For if we believe that Jesus died and 
rose again, let us also believe that those who sleep in 
Jesus will God bring [from the dead] by him." While 
the original sentence was not that man should sleep, in 
Jesus or otherwise, but that he should utterly die, 
lose all life and all rights to life, yet God shows us that 
it was his plan from the very beginning to provide a 
Redeemer, and that in the redemption sacrifice the ransom 
would be paid and mankind be released from the original 
sentence. It was in view of this plan that God 
spoke to all the faithful of the times past respecting his 
purposes. Thus it was that he said to Moses that he 
was the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob— the God 
who had made promises to these that would surely be 
fulfilled, promises which declared that in them and 



their seed all the families of the earth would be blessed, 

promises, therefore, which implied their awakening 

from the dead, and which implied, therefore, that from 

the divine standpoint they were not extinct, not annihilated, 

but merely resting in death until the due time 

should come, mentioned by Job, when he says, "O 

that thou wouldst hide me in the grave until thy wrath 

be overpast; then thou shalt call and I will answer thee, 

for thou wilt have a desire unto the work of thy hands." 

(Job 14:13,15.) The "wrath of God is revealed 

from heaven against all unrighteousness" now, and 

has been so revealed ever since father Adam's transgression. 

It is revealed and may be seen in all the 

sickness and pain and trouble and dying, and just as 

the Apostle says, makes of the world in general a 

"groaning creation, travailing in pain together, waiting 

for the manifestation of the sons of God"— waiting 

for the establishment of the Millennial Kingdom, under 

Christ the Head and the Church his brethren, his 

bride, his body. 

Our Lord was answering the Sadducees, who deny 
that there will be any resurrection of the dead, and he 
offered this testimony in proof, not that Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob were not dead, but in proof that there would 
be a resurrection for them, which would have been an 
impossibility had they become, as the Sadducees 
claimed, extinct. Our Lord, in other words, tells us 
that all those who are in harmony with him are not, in 
his estimation, dead, in the full sense of the word dead, 
but merely for the time being sleeping and waiting until 
the morning. As the prophet declares, "Weeping 
may endure for a night, but joy cometh in the morning" 
—the resurrection morning. Had it not been his plan 
to have a resurrection, God would not have referred to 
Abraham and others in such a manner as he did. 



R2805 : page 142 

WORDS OF CHEER AND ENCOURAGEMENT. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We have to report for 
"Volunteer" work for 1900 as follows:— 

Churches. TOWERS distributed. Under direction of 
53 8,000 Bro. W. T. Thorn. 

317 28,672 Bro. A. M. Graham. 



Total 370 36,672 

We still have about 1,000 TOWERS which we will distribute 
during the present month. 
We are all prepared for a new campaign. At a 



meeting held Sunday p.m. Brother A. M. Graham 

was chosen "Captain" for 1901, with instructions to 

make requisition for necessary ammunition. I send 

you a copy of the New Volunteer roll-call of 43 names 

—21 brethren, 22 sisters. We think the above report 

a good basis; we will certainly need as many as 36,000 

as there is little doubt of our being able to accomplish 

as much as last campaign, as shown above. We did 

more last year than in the previous one, covering more 

territory and giving out more TOWERS. We have 

reached every suburb within 10 miles, and in some directions 

going 14 miles out. It is 20 miles from extremes 

of this territory (Boston). The enthusiasm and 

zeal was inspiring; there was no grumbling and no shirking. 

Our last day's work was done with the thermometer 

at 3§ above zero, some of the friends traveling 16 

miles to get to the field. 

The fact that this work is "doing with our might 
what our hands find to do" has stimulated the zeal of 
us all. No other service has ever seemed so fruitful in 
blessings to the Lord's flock. It was grand to note the 
tact and skill some of the Volunteers learned to use in 
managing the "rams" and "goats" in the Babylonish 
flock, who made trouble occasionally. Generally the 
"soft answer turned away wrath." We received many 
a "God bless you," and met many who had read and 
enjoyed the DAWNS. We found our Brothers Sherwood 

R2805 : page 143 

and Jones in the Babylonish camp. Both withdrew— 
Brother Jones becoming a Volunteer. On one occasion a 
Bible class teacher came out and asked for TOWERS to 
give to his class, saying, "I want every one of my scholars 
to have one of those papers." Again, on another occasion, 
the Pastor of a church came out and asked to 
see the TOWER, and after looking it over said, "Stand 
right there on the steps; I will be glad to have my people 
read that paper." There is scarcely a week that we 
do not meet some one who read that TOWER and was 
blessed in the reading. It has been a blessed work, every 
way and no doubt the present healthy spiritual condition 
of the Church here may be considerably attributed 
to this work— its influence is sanctifying. 

Our yearly meeting on Jan. 2 was a love feast, and 
gave evidence of spiritual growth on the part of all. 
All hailed the news of another tract for distribution 
with joy and responded to the call heartily. During 
the past year Brother and Sister Black and Sister Mason, 
and quite recently Sister Mower, have entered the Colporteur 
service, and we still pray the Lord of the harvest 
to send more laborers into the field. The past year 
has been one of spiritual growth and blessing under 
our dear Lord's leading, for which we praise him and 
gather fresh courage and confidence for new battles, and 
we trust, new victories— both within our hearts and 



without, as he may be pleased to send. Dear Brother, 
pray for us. Your brother in Christ, 

ALEX. M. GRAHAM,-Massachusetts. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write to express, as 
well as I may in words, my thanks and love to you for 
this grand message of helpfulness to the Church in the 
April 1 WATCH TOWER, on Rev. 3:10. It came to us 
in the "nick of time," and O, how it has cheered and 
strengthened our souls. It is a companion piece to 
"Pressing Toward the Mark," and I wish we had the 
two articles in pamphlet form together. I have been 

R2806 : page 143 

thanking our heavenly Father and you over and over 
again (nor do I consider it a vain repetition) for those 
helpful, solicitous words. I am so rejoiced to believe 
that the Lord is directing your mind to the upbuilding 
of the "little flock," and we are getting in each issue 
of the TOWER just what each individual case requires. 
I read with pleasure and profit often those hymns in 
"Zion's Glad Songs." 

We are still having severe trials in a business way, 
and also on account of the Truth, but we have plucked 
from the orchards God's precious promises, hope, love 
and patience and, as a result, thank God, are still pressing 
on toward the mark of love, the perfection of character 
which is most pleasing to our Lord. My prayer 
for all the saints is that nothing shall hinder or separate 
us from the love of God, but that we may come off 
more than conquerors through him who hath loved us. 

With much love from Brother Raymond, myself 
and the brethren here, I remain, yours in the one Faith, 
MRS. G. B. RAYMOND,-New York. 



page 143 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Many, many thanks for 
your very kind letter of encouragement to me last October. 
I am the one of whom Brother Henninges wrote, 
telling you of my dismissal from the Farnsfield Wesleyan 
School, Notts., because of my loyalty to King 
Jesus. There was not one other thing they could find 
against me, and they admitted I was the very best 
schoolmaster that had ever been there, but my religion 
they would not have. My testimonial from the chairman 
of the managers says, "His moral character is 
without reproach." 

I have not yet heard of another situation, but I am 
glad that this has happened to me, for I take it that it 
is a "Witness of the Spirit that I am a child of God." 



Is not that so? 

With care, and God giving us (my wife and myself) 
a comparative measure of health and strength, we 
have been enabled to save a few pounds, and thus I 
have been enabled to go into the Harvest Field, "Gathering 
Sheaves for Jesus," [colporteuring] and doing 
whatever I can for the dear Master who has done so 
much for me. 

My work so far, with regard to the sale of the 
DAWNS, has not been very successful, but I am "content 
with what it is my Father's pleasure to bestow," 
and thus "gladly all surrender to the Lord." 

My dear wife is also trying to do the same, but 
she is not as firmly grounded as I am, and therefore, 
dear Brother, pray for us, that I may stand firm, and 
that I may help her along the pathway. I find the 
work very profitable as regards growing in love for the 
groaning creation, in the same sense that God so loved 
the world. I hate the sin, but love the blinded ones 
for whom Christ died, and would gladly do anything 
that lies in my power for their benefit, my enemies as 
well. Praise the Lord, it is my enemies that are 
keeping the fire under the sacrifice, and therefore I 
cannot be angry with them for it. 

There is a great apathy amongst the people for 
religion, and they would much rather talk upon any 
subject than Christ. Several people have refused to 
listen to me on the DAWNS, because of the free WATCH 
TOWERS which we have been distributing at the doors 
of the different places of worship on Sunday mornings, 
but on the other hand there are instances where they 
have been the means of selling DAWNS. Last Thursday 
I had the grand opportunity of witnessing for the 
Master to two ministers of the Gospel, one a Baptist 
and the other a Mission minister. The former said he 
had not any time for reading them, but the latter after 
some little talk took a book— Vol. I., and I pray the 
Master may open his eyes to the glorious light. My 
whole time is now devoted to gathering the "wheat" 
from the "tares." I am glad to be doing this work, 
and prefer it to teaching in school, if I can only make 
a simple living. L.l per week in the Saviour's army 
is more to me than double the amount in secular work. 

Dear brother, I must tell you of the kindness I 
have received from several of the brethren on this side 
the water. Our Brother and Sister Smedley of East 
Kirkby, Notts., said to us before leaving the district, 
that "so long as Tom and Mary Smedley had a home" 
we could share it with them; and since I have been 
here (300 miles away), I have received a letter from 
them asking whether I needed any financial assistance. 

Again on New Year's day there was a convention 
at Manchester (I was the speaker in the morning, taking 
for my subject 2 Tim. 2:15), and when I was coming 
away, Brother Hodge, with whom I was staying, 
said that if ever I was short of money I must let him 



know and he would gladly give me some, as he only 

page 144 

holds what he has as a steward. I just mention this 
to let you see the spirit that pervades the whole family. 

Dear Brother, altho we have never seen you, yet 
we love you and all the dear brethren. You are daily 
mentioned in our prayers, that the Master may strengthen 
you and be with you. 

Yours in our Redeemer and King, 

JAMES HODSON,-England. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL AND ASSOCIATES:-My visit 
to the "Bible House" has been a blessing to me. It 
has let me into an experience that adds a significance 
to life. If I know myself I have made a full surrender 
of myself and of the powers of my being to God in 
every sense of the word, and I do hope I shall be kept 
faithful to my present attitude. I am ignorant, but I 
have realized this,— that full consecration to God brings 
the blessing, and won't you remember me in your 
prayers for all the dear brethren and sisters that I may 
be kept and that my life may be spent in God's service? 
I had despaired of ever coming to a knowledge of the 
truth; but surely if you have come to a satisfactory 
understanding of the Bible why may not I? I feel that 
I have hope of becoming grounded in the truth, but it 
is this experience— this realization of full consecration 
to God and of my acceptance in the Beloved— that I am 
most anxious to maintain. 

Excuse my writing, I can scarcely write for attending 
to my flowing tears of joy. Oh, what an experience 
has come to me! I ask myself, will it last? For if it 
does I shall indeed be a changed man and my life will 
be a changed life. 

I am so glad I went down and found such a devoted 
company of brethren and sisters. I have the 
card "To-Day" hung up by my desk; I am committing 
it to memory, and want it to be the rule of my daily 
life. I wish I was nearer the Bible House so that I 
could get strength from Christian fellowship. It was 
like a heaven to me being amongst the brothers and 
sisters there. I had no idea there was such a work 
being carried on. 

I have been greatly exercised long— indeed all my 
life with varying interest— but especially for some years 
back, over questions which I realize it is for my highest 
welfare to have settled. I hope my visit to the "Bible 
House" will lead to this end; I shall spare no effort to 
accomplish it. While amongst you an influence took 
hold of me that I believe will have a lasting effect upon 
my life. Last night while reading "Tabernacle 
Shadows" and looking up a reference in 1 Peter, I read 



the epistle through, and felt that it was all for me. 
There is a oneness of spirit between me and the Bible 
now, that seems to make doubt of its authority impossible. 
Evidence of the divinity of the Bible comes, I 
believe, through the spirit of God upon the heart, and 
not through the intellect from outside testimony. By 
my visit to Allegheny I have been led to consecrate 
myself and all my interests to God, and I do hope I 
shall be a faithful follower of the leadings of the spirit. 

As you know, my visit in its inception was purely 
a business one, and came about in rather a strange 
manner. I had no idea I was going amongst such a 
devoted and deeply interested people, among whom 
there is such brotherly love as of one family and one 
spirit. 

Surely God will keep me from this time on and 
forever if I only continue to trust, and not fall into my 
own way, and my own desire that my life shall be so 
and so; but be willing from moment to moment to accept 
my task and my burden and rejoice that I am 
counted worthy to suffer— to suffer for what shall I say? 
—for God? for Christ? for the truth? I don't know 
what to say for fear I may say wrong, and this is for 
lack of a knowledge of the truth. But I don't want 
to wait till I read anything before beginning to live 
and experience what I found your people living and 
experiencing. Your brother in the spirit, 

L. SHUTTLEWORTH,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed please find 
"Pilgrim" Report for past 15 days, with nine WATCH 
TOWER subscriptions. The audiences at Hayne have 
been unusually large and appreciative. 

Nearly four years ago, while en route to Hayne 
from the preceding appointment, it was necessary to 
lie over at Selma an hour or two, while waiting for a 
train. During this time I distributed "Do You Know?" 
tracts amongst the business houses of that town (as I 
had done before, and have done frequently since, while 
waiting for trains); Brother Hare, proprietor of a drug 
store, receiving one, and becoming interested, sent for 
DAWN, and reading it, became deeply interested. He 
then presented the work to Brother Homer, who also 
became deeply interested, and later he presented it to 
another brother, who also became very much interested. 
By one tract these three brethren are now TOWER subscribers, 
and two or three others are becoming interested. 

This circumstance encourages me to continue the 
work of Tract distribution in the future— to "Sow the 
seed beside all waters." 

With much Christian love to yourself and other 
dear friends in office and home, I remain your brother 
and servant in the Lord, 

FRANK DRAPER-North Carolina. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We have been reading 
the DAWNS and TOWERS for over five years and have 
never written to thank you, but we can assure you they 
have been appreciated, and have established us in the 
precious faith. We thank God continually for being so 
good to us in sending us such help for the study of his 
Word. It was but a few months after we started in the 
Christian way that the dear Lord sent them to us. We 
have been so glad that we got no further into Babylon. 
We joined the Methodist church on probation, but when 
we got the truth we saw we were in the wrong place 
and quietly dropped out. 

We tried to convince some of the brothers and sisters 
of the truth of this glorious doctrine, but only one 
seemed to have "ears to hear" the good tidings, and he 
seems to have a hard time to overcome his love for 
popularity, and until lately has made but slow progress; 
but thank God, he is beginning to see more plainly 
now. We attended the Chicago convention, and what a 
wonderful feast it was to us to see so many of like precious 
faith, and feel the hearty shake of their hands, 
and hear the words of love and wisdom proceed out of 
their mouths. And now may the dear Lord grant you 
wisdom day by day to carry on the good work he has 
intrusted to you. Pray for us that we may endure to 
the end. Yours in the love of Christ, 

MR. & MRS. J. W. BELL,-Michigan. 



page 145 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. MAY 1, 1901. No. 9. 

CONTENTS. 



"Lovest Thou Me more than These?" 147 

Duty-Love Illustrated 149 

Disinterested Love Illustrated 149 

Peter Wisely and Gently Reproved 150 

"If I Will, that He Tarry till I Come" 151 

The Church's Great Commission 151 

Discipling the World 153 

Interesting Queries Answered 156 

Is Faith the Gift of God? 156 

Who Were Those Saints? 156 

Memorial Celebration Reports 157 

Items: One Day Conventions 146 

page 146 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post paid. 

SILENT SERMONS TO VISITORS. 



Notice the statement above— "To Us the Scriptures Clearly 
Teach." We have this printed on fine card board, rounded 
corners, size 11 x 14 inches, with silk cord. This should hang 
prominently in all of your homes. We have also imported a 
new silver text card with motto for 1901, and one of another 
style. We propose supplying the three securely packed in a 
tube, postpaid for 15 cents. 

ONE DAY CONVENTIONS. 

ON SUNDAY, APRIL 28, the Editor (D.V.) will address the 
friends at Indianapolis, Ind., at 10:30 A.M. and at 3 P.M., at 
Mansur Hall, N.E. corner of Alabama and Washington streets. 
Social meetings will precede the above addresses, and an evening 
program will be announced. We will make a day of it! 
Refreshments can be secured nearby the hall. A Cincinnati 
cheap excursion for the day is advertised. 

ON SUNDAY, MAY 12, the Editor (D.V.) will address the 
friends at Altoona, Pa., at 3 P.M., at Opera House and at 7:30 
P.M., as may then be announced. 

These are merely local conventions, and friends from great 
distances are not expected, tho all coming in the name and 
spirit of our Lord will be heartily welcomed. 



R2806 : page 147 

"LOVEST THOU ME MORE THAN THESE?" 

-JOHN 2L15-22.-MAY 5.- 

WE NOW come to our Lord's fifth manifestation 
of himself after his resurrection— some would 
say the seventh, not counting, as we do, that our Lord's 
manifestation to Mary was the same referred to in 
Matthew as his appearance to "the women," and that 
his showing himself to Peter was in the walk to Emmaus. 
All of these manifestations, whether we count 
them four or six, occurred within the first eight days 
after our Lord's resurrection— on the two first-days or 
Sundays, and were in or near Jerusalem. What we designate 
the fifth appearance was in another part of the 
country altogether— in Galilee— and was probably at 
least two weeks later. No account is given of the doings 
of the apostles in the interim, but we can surmise 
them. They probably waited in expectation at Jerusalem 
over the third and possibly over the fourth Sunday 
after the resurrection, and were disappointed that our 
Lord made no further manifestation. They then 
remembered, perhaps, the message which Jesus had 
sent by Mary, that he would meet them in Galilee. 

Having no business further at Jerusalem, and their 
Master and leader having thus disappeared, "changed," 
so that altho they believed him to be no longer dead 
he was invisible to them except as he would appear for 



a few moments talking to them, and again disappear 
indefinitely, they were at a loss what to do, and decided 
to return to their home country on the Sea of Galilee. 
More than this, as active men in the prime of life, they 
must be doing. Several of them had been fishermen, 
and Jesus had called them from their nets to be "fishers 
of men," and they had left all to follow him; but 
now they could no longer follow him. Everything 
was changed when he was changed, so far as they could 
see. They could not carry on the work longer, for 
what could they preach? How could they tell others 
of their hopes in a King who had been crucified, and 
whom they, altho he was risen, could no longer see nor 
point out to others? They had not yet received their 
new commission; nor were they quite ready for it. 

It is not surprising that under these circumstances 
seven of them with one consent, under the lead of Peter, 
determined to reengage in the fishing business. This 
was the one business in which they had experience, and 
that only three years before. They fished with nets, 
and the habit seems to have been to do the fishing at 
night. This was the very occasion Jesus was waiting 
for. He wished the disciples to reach the extremity of 
thinking and reasoning on the matter of his resurrection, 
and what they should now do, in order that they 
might be prepared to receive definitely and profitably 
the instructions he had to give respecting their future 
course. The reactionary tendency to turn from preaching 
to the fishing business would be sure to come; and 
he considered it expedient that it should come while he 
was with them, that they might be profited to the utmost 
in respect to it. Now that they had reembarked in the 
fishing business the time had come for our Lord to demonstrate 
to them two things: (1) That he had a mission 
for them to perform in connection with the fishing for 
men which they had not yet accomplished, and which 
his death and resurrection would not interfere with, 
but rather stimulate and make really effective. (2) It 
would enable him to demonstrate in a most practical 
manner that the divine power by which he had hitherto 
provided for their necessities, and had at times fed multitudes, 
was still his, and would be continually exercised 
in their interest if they would continue to obey 
him. 

It is interesting for us to note thus that while our 
Lord was invisible to the disciples they were visible to 

R2806 : page 148 

him, and all of their plans, arrangements and doings 
were fully known to him; and he was ready to take 
advantage of every circumstance and to make all things 
work together for their good. Thus, by miraculous 
power exercised in some manner unknown to us, he 
hindered fish from going into their nets that night. 
They, not knowing the true situation, were no doubt 



greatly disappointed, grieved, vexed, at their poor success, 
and perhaps classed it as a part of failure and tribulation 
which had in some respects followed them ever 
since they had espoused the cause of Jesus. And there 
is a lesson here for each and all of the Lord's people today: 
We know not what is for our highest welfare. Sometimes 
those things which we crave and desire to grasp, 
considering them to be good, might really be to our 
disadvantage. Blessed are they who are able by faith 
to pierce the gloom of every trial and difficulty and 
perplexity, and to realize that "The Lord knoweth 
them that are his," and that he is causing all things to 
work together for their good. So it was with the apostles: 
their disappointment became a channel of blessed 
instruction. 

In the dawn of the morning Jesus appeared to 
them as a man, standing on the seashore. He called 
out to them to inquire if they had any fish, as tho he 
would purchase. They replied that they had toiled 
all night and caught nothing. The stranger then 
suggested that they cast the net on the other side of 
the ship, and so humbled were they by their disappointment 
that they did not stop to argue the question and 
to declare that they were old experienced fishermen, 
and that they did not know if he had any experience 
whatever; they merely concluded that as they had 
been lifting and casting the net all night they might 
just as well do it again, and thus demonstrate to the 
stranger that there were no fish in that vicinity. But 
behold! immediately the net filled with great fish, so 
that these seven strong men (Peter, Thomas, James, 
John, Nathanael, and two others whose names are not 
given) were unable to draw it, and were obliged to 
drag it ashore. 

Immediately the disciples grasped the thought that 
the stranger on the shore was Jesus, and none of them 
more quickly than loving John. The devoted and 
impulsive Peter whose heart still burned as he remembered 
the Lord's words, and perhaps as he remembered 
also his own weaknesses in connection with our Lord's 
last night of earth-life, could not wait for the boat 
to take him to the shore, but swam,— apparently 
fearing lest the Master should disappear again before 
he would have another opportunity to see and converse 
with him. When the disciples got to shore with their 
netful of fish they found, not only Jesus, but a fire 
and fish thereon already cooked. Here they had the 
lesson that under the Lord's care and supervision they 
could either be successful or unsuccessful in the fish 
business, and that he had the power, not only to give 
them fish in the ordinary way, but to provide cooked 
fish by miraculous power if it better served his purpose 
so to do. 

They breakfasted with Jesus, for they knew him 
—not by any marks of nails, but by the miracle which 
he had performed. We read rather peculiarly, "None 



of them durst ask him, knowing it was the Lord;" 
they were so sure that it was he that they could not 
think of even seeming to question the fact by inquiry. 
The conversation while they breakfasted is not recorded, 
the Evangelist coming directly to the important 
words by our Lord addressed to Peter, the senior and 
leader of this new fish-business partnership. He 
addressed Peter, not as he had been accustomed, by 
his new name, Peter, but by his old name, Simon, 
possibly as an intimation to Peter that he had not 
manifested in the last few days the rock-like qualities 
implied in his surname, and was now inclined to 
leave the work for the Church for secular business. 
And the inquiry was most pointed, "Lovest thou me 
more than these?"— boats, nets, fishing tackle, etc.? 
You started out to be my disciple, and now I ask the 
question, In which place is your heart— with me in 
the service of the Kingdom, or in the fish business? 
Peter's answer was prompt, "Lord, thou knowest that 

R2807 : page 148 

I love thee." Jesus responded then, "Feed my lambs" 
—my little ones— instead of longer following the fish 
business. Then Jesus said the second time the same thing, 
and Peter made the same reply, and then our Lord 
answered, "Take care of my sheep"— give your 
thought, attention, care, to them, rather than to these 
fishing implements, boats, etc. Jesus asked him the 
third time the same question. Peter was grieved with 
this: it seemed to imply doubt on the Lord's part, and 
perhaps the third time reminded him that he had 
denied the Lord three times, and that now the Lord 
was requiring him three times to confess his love for 
him. It touched a very tender spot in Peter's heart 
and experiences, and we may be sure that it was not 
done by our Lord, even in this delicate manner, with a 
view merely to pain Peter, but with a view to his 
blessing, his profit. Peter's confession this time was 
still stronger: "Lord, thou knowest that I love thee." 
Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep." 

It is worthy of notice that our Lord's words on these 
three occasions were not exactly the same altho the 
Common Version so represents them. In the New Testament 
Greek two words are used for "love," agapee 
and phileo. When our Lord said "lovest" in the first 
two inquiries, he used the former word, agapas, which 
signifies kind love in its strongest, purest and most disinterested 

R2807 : page 149 

form; but in his third inquiry our Lord used 

the other form, phileis, which signifies attachment, duty-love, 

the obligatory love such as relatives bear toward 

each other, even when the other, deeper, love is lacking. 

Peter in all of his answers uses the latter form of 



the word, thus asseverating his personal attachment and 
devotion to the Lord, but, in view of recent experiences, 
he refrained from claiming the highest love for which 
our Lord inquired. This humility was an excellent 
sign, as showing that Peter had learned a needed lesson 
and had ceased to boast, but rather to fear his own 
weakness. Our Lord's use the third time of the word 
indicating duty-love grieved Peter specially because 
by changing the word he implied— Are you sure that 
you have even the duty-love, Peter? This discrimination 
as between these two words is borne out by other 
uses of the same in the New Testament. 

DUTY -LOVE (PHILEO) ILLUSTRATED. 



"He that loveth father or mother more than me is 
not worthy of me, and he that loveth son or daughter 
more than me is not worthy of me.— Matt. 10:37. 

Duty-love to our family relatives is right, but it 
must not equal our duty-love toward the Lord, else we 
can never follow him as "overcomers." 

"He that loveth his life shall lose it."— John 12:25. 

It is our duty to love life, in the sense of appreciating 
it and being unwilling to destroy it or waste it foolishly; 
but he who has become Christ's disciple and 
who is pledged to walk in his footsteps even unto death 
is to remember that he has already surrendered his life 
as a man, exchanging it for the hope of life as a "new 
creature," a spiritual being. He is no longer to be 
controlled by phileo or duty-love toward earthly life, 
but, moved by agapee love, he is to willingly lay down 
his natural life in the service of God— "for the 
brethren." 

"For the Father himself loveth you, BECAUSE ye 
have loved me."— John 16:27. 

In both of these cases phileo signifies duty-love. 
This was the highest form of love the disciples as a 
whole could as yet appreciate, as Peter testified. And the 
Father's love for them was the same duty-love: the 
disciples had not yet received the holy spirit and its 
agapee or higher disinterested love and its character, and 
hence the Father could not love them for themselves 
but exercised a duty-love toward them merely because 
they had attained a duty-love toward Christ and had become 
his friends and disciples. 

"If ye were of the world, the world would love his 
own."— John 15:19. 

Phileo or duty-love is exercised by the worldly parent 
and child and neighbor on the selfish basis— "his 
own." 

"If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him 
be Anathema Maranatha [—he shall be accursed or 
condemned to the Second Death when the Lord comes]." 
-1 Cor. 16:22. 



An appreciation of the work of Christ will be expected 
of all when brought to a knowledge of the salvation 
which God has provided in him: and whoever 
refuses to respond in phileo or duty-love will be cut off 
from life early in the Millennial reign. But those who 
exercise the phileo or duty-love will be expected to press 
forward and to attain the "mark" of agapee love, true, 
disinterested character love,— if they would attain life 
everlasting. Thank God that the present life does not 
close the door of opportunity to any that have never 
known phileo or duty-love, nor to many who have 
known this, but have not yet attained agapee. 

"Love of money," "lovers of their own selves," 
"loveth to have preeminence," "lovers of pleasure," "lover 
of hospitality," and friend, are from phileo, duty-love or 
a love which has a cause or demand upon it. Peter exhorts 
that we add to brotherly kindness (phileo) the 
next and higher grade of disinterested love— agapee. — 
2 Pet. 1:7. 

DISINTERESTED LOVE (AGAPEE) ILLUSTRATED. 



"God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten 
Son."— John 3:16. 

The love prompting man's redemption was not 
phileo or duty-love, for God had not wronged his creature 
in the sentence of death; nor had man ever done 
anything for his Creator which could put the latter under 
obligation or duty-love in return. God's love prompting 
to our redemption was agapee, or disinterested charity, 
benevolence, love. 

"God commandeth his love toward us in that while 
we were yet sinners Christ died for the ungodly."— 
Rom. 5:8. 

This love (agapee) which God exemplified is the 
kind he sets before us as the highest standard or "mark" 
toward which we must run if we would gain the prize; 
—a mark which is impossible to our fallen flesh, but 
which is attainable by our renewed minds, wills, hearts. 
This standard is expressed in the words:— 

"Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
soul, mind, strength; and thou shalt love thy neighbor 
as thyself. "-Luke 10:27; Rom. 3:9. 

"The end of the commandment is love."— 
1 Tim. 1:5. 

That is to say, the object of all instruction and discipline 
on God's part is to bring us to this character 
likeness to himself represented in this word agapee— 
love; for "God is love [agapee], and he that dwelleth in 
love [agapee] dwelleth in God and God in him."— 
1 John 4:16. 

R2807 : page 150 



We are to recognize as "brethren" those who have 
only the phileo degree of duty-love, as Paul did when 
he wrote, "Greet [for me] all that love [phileo] us in 
the faith" (Titus 3: 15); but we are to see to it that we 
"love the brotherhood" (1 Pet. 2:17) with agapee or 
higher love, which counts not present life precious and 
to be saved, but gladly lays down life for the brethren 
—in daily and hourly sacrifices of time and money and 
all earthly interests on their behalf.— 1 John 3:16. 

Peter contrasts the two loves in one verse, saying, 
"Seeing ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth 
through the spirit unto [the extent of] unfeigned love 
[phileo] of the brethren, see that ye [go on to] love 
[agapee] one another with a pure heart, fervently."— 
1 Pet. 1:22. 

"Love [agapee] worketh no ill to his neighbor: 
therefore love [agapee] is the fulfilling of the Law."— 
Rom. 13:10. 

It is agapee that is mistranslated "charity" in 1 Cor. 8:1 
—"Knowledge puffeth up, but agapee buildeth up." 

It is agapee that is misrendered "charity" in the 
Apostle's great discourse on love in 1 Cor. 13:1,2,3,4,8,13; 
14:1. Here he styles agapee love the principal 
thing of Christian character, the crown of all 
Christian graces, telling us that without it all sacrifices 
and self-denials would be valueless in God's esteem, 
while with it as the inspiring motive our feeblest efforts 
are acceptable through Christ. 

PETER WISELY AND GENTLY REPROVED. 



So far as the record shows these questions respecting 
his present love were the only reproof our Lord 
gave Peter on account of his temporary deflection and 
denial of his cause; and here we have a lesson which 
many of the Lord's people will do well to lay closely 
to heart. Many feel as tho they must exact from a 
brother or a sister a very decided apology for any act 
of discourtesy, even tho much less important than 
Peter's misdeed. Let us learn well this lesson of reproving 
others very gently, very considerately, kindly, 
by a hint rather than by a direct charge and detail of 
the wrong— by an enquiry respecting the present condition 
of their hearts, rather than respecting a former 
condition, in which we know that they have erred. 
We are to be less careful for the punishments that 
will follow wrongdoings than for the recovery of the 
erring one out of the error of his way. We are not to 
attempt to judge and to punish one another for misdeeds, 
but rather to remember that all this is in the 
hands of the Lord;— we are not in any sense of the 
word to avenge ourselves or to give a chastisement 
or recompense for evil. This is not to be understood 
as annulling parental obligation to judging 



and chastening children; tho the principle of love is 

to have full control there also, to the extent of our judgment. 

We are to have kindness, love and benevolence 

toward all, especially toward those who are followers of 

Jesus. As for Peter and his denial of the Lord, and as 

R2808 : page 150 

to the offences which may come to us through brethren, 
we may know that under divine providence some corrective 
penalty or discipline, direct or indirect, always 
follows; but we are not to attempt to inflict those penalties, 
nor to impress a condemnation, upon those who 
are in error and who realize their error, but rather to 
sympathize with them wisely, by helping them to learn 
the good lessons. 

On the other hand, however, we would all have 
considered it a noble act on Peter's part had he fallen at 
our Lord's feet at his first opportunity and entreated 
his forgiveness for the weaknesses of the past. We 
would have loved and honored him the more for so 
hearty a manifestation of his repentance: indeed, altho 
the account does not so state, he may have done this. 
And brethren who at any time trespass upon the rights, 
interests or feelings of others, however unintentionally, 
should be prompt and hearty in their apologies; even 
tho brethren filled with agapee would not demand this 
as a condition of fellowship. 

In replying to Peter our Lord uses three different 
Greek words in his three different exhortations: the 
first time he exhorts him to feed the lambs; the second 
time to care for or tend the sheep; the third time to 
feed the weak or delicate sheep. This gives us three 
views of the Lord's flock. There are the young, the 
beginners, the lambs, the babes in Christ, undeveloped 
in Christian character, and who need special feeding 
with the truth,— "the milk of the Word." Secondly, 
there are the more matured sheep of the Lord's flock, 
of riper knowledge and character, who have learned to 
attend to their own feeding upon the precious truth, 
but who, nevertheless, need tending or guidance, direction, 
oversight. Thirdly, there are the weak sheep, 
who for the time ought to be strong, ought to be able 
to feed themselves upon the bounties which the Lord 
has graciously provided in his Word, but who, through 
weaknesses of the flesh, or besetments, or bad provender, 
or some reason, have not made progress, and are therefore 
weak in the faith. These are to be fed, cared for. 
And all of these matters are parts of a bishop's or 
overseer's duty in the Lord's flock. 

While the Lord's words were addressed specially 
to Peter, as the leader of the group, undoubtedly the 
instructions were meant also for all of the "eleven," 
for the apostles were all bishops, all caretakers of the 
Lord's flock. And the same message is applicable, tho 
not in the same degree, to all ministers of the truth today; 



whoever, by the grace of God, is placed in a position 
of opportunity to feed the Lord's flock should 

R2808 :page 151 

consider it one of the highest privileges of life, and 
should gladly lay aside every weight and hindrance, 
that he might thoroughly enjoy and perform this service. 
Thus the Apostle said to the elders at Ephesus, 
"Take heed, therefore, unto yourselves, and to all the 
flock, over which the holy spirit hath made you overseers, 
to feed the Church of God."-Acts 20:28. 

These three classes of the Lord's flock are to be 
found today: the young, the advanced and strong, and 
the weak and delicate, who need special assistance. Of 
this latter class many today are in Babylon, and need 
the helping hand which the Lord's people are able to 
extend to them— they are weak, impoverished through 
lack of nourishment, through a famine, not of bread 
nor of water, but for hearing of the word of the Lord. 
(Amos 8:11.) They have been hearing the words of 
human theory and "tradition of the elders" for a long 
time, and have been starving upon its inconsistencies; 
and so, wherever found, they are hungering and thirsting 
for the truth, and need that Peter and all of the 
Lord's followers shall do with their might what they 
are able to do to deliver such from the chains of error 
and darkness by which they are held— to liberate them 
and bring them in contact with the spiritual food which 
the heavenly Father is now so abundantly supplying. 

In view of Peter's prompt and unhesitating answers 
respecting his filial or duty-love, the Lord gave a prophecy 
indicating that he would indeed be faithful to the 
last; and implying that he would be a martyr by crucifixion, 
his hands being extended. And tradition tells 
us that Peter was faithful even unto death, and that 
being ordered to be put to death by crucifixion by Nero, 
at his own request he was executed head downward, as 
being unworthy, according to his own statement, to be 
crucified as was his Lord. 

Our Lord's words, "Follow me," referred not merely 
to a spiritual following, but he walked along the shore 
of the sea, the disciples following. Peter having heard 
the Lord's prophetic declaration respecting himself, 
seeing John near, inquired respecting his future 
—What will he do? What will happen to him? 
Will he be faithful unto death, and will he also be 
a martyr? Our Lord's refusal to answer may be considered 
rather in the light of a reproof to Peter and a 
lesson to us all. We are not to question divine providence, 
but rather to submit ourselves thereto. It seems 
to be a trait of human nature to think of companionship 
even in trouble, persecution, etc., and many, like 
Peter, have wondered why they should have trials and 
difficulties different from those which came upon some 
others of the Lord's flock. The Master's answer to Peter 



is his answer to all such: "What is that to thee? 
Follow thou me." Each of us should learn the lesson of 
reliance upon the Lord's wisdom in all of our affairs, 
whether he has particularly indicated them or left them 
still obscure. We may know of his love and wisdom 
and power, and may trust him where we cannot 
trace him, and be contented whatever lot we see, since 
we know it is his hand that it is leading. 

"IF I WILL THAT HE TARRY TILL I COME." 



These our Lord's words respecting John, seem to 
have raised the suggestion in the minds of the disciples 
that John would not die— that while the others would 
die he would remain alive until the second coming of 
Christ. But John himself tells us that Jesus said 
nothing of this kind; it was purely an inference on the 
part of the disciples. We may see in John a figure 
of some of the Church living in the end of the Gospel 
age— unto the second presence of the Lord. John is 
not alive, but a class whom he represented has continued 
and still remains and will then be "changed," etc. Let 
us who are privileged to remain to this time of favor 
and blessing and enlightenment give glory to the Lord, 
and see to it that the loving disposition of John is manifested 
in us, and also his energy, his zeal; for while he 
is called the loving disciple we are to remember also that 
he was, because of his impetuous zeal, styled, with his 
brother, Boanerges— sons of thunder. Let us be full of 
energy, full of sacrifices which love prompts, that we 
may glorify our Lord in our bodies and spirits which 
are his. To this end it will be well that we remember 
the Lord's words, which applied to the entire seven as 
well as to Peter, tho he was spokesman for the entire 
number: "Lovest thou me more than these?" The 
same question arises with all of the Lord's people today. 
It is necessary that we have more or less contact with 
the world, with business, with home duties, with social 
amenities, etc., and the question is, How shall we discharge 
our duties, balancing them with our duties toward 
the Lord, as "new creatures," his "royal priesthood"? 
Shall the Lord see that we love the earthly 
things better than him? If so, he declares that we are 
not worthy of him, and he will not recognize us as 
members of his Bride. He will have in that select 
little flock only such as love him supremely— more than 
they love houses or lands, husbands or wives, or children, 
or any earthly thing.— Matt. 10:37. 



R2808 :page 151 

THE CHURCH'S GREAT COMMISSION. 



-MATT. 28:16-28. -MAY 12.- 

"Lo, I am with you alway, even 
unto the end of the world [age]." 

OUR Lord's next manifestation to his disciples was 

near the close of the forty days of his invisible presence 

after his resurrection. It was, according to our reckoning, 

the sixth occasion of the kind, and much more 

marked in some respects than previous ones, for, in 

common with others, we believe that at this time our 

Lord manifested himself not only to the eleven apostles 

mentioned in our lesson, but also to the whole multitude 

of believers whom the Apostle Paul mentions as 

being "over five hundred brethren." (1 Cor. 15:6.) 

This meeting, we are informed, was by special appointment 

of time and place; hence there was an opportunity 

for all the deeply interested ones to be gathered together. 

Dr. Bordman suggests some of those composing 

R2809 : page 152 

this number to have been "the eleven apostles; 
the seventy evangelists; Mary of Nazareth; Mary of 
Magdala; Mary of Bethany; Mary the wife of Cleophas; 
Mary the mother of John Mark; Martha, and Joanna 
and Susanna, and the woman of Jacob's Well; Peter's 
wife's mother and the impotent man of Bethsaida; the 
centurion of Capernaum and the widow of Nain; the 
penitent woman of Simon's feast and the woman 
healed on the way; Jairus and his daughter and 
Bartimeus; the Syro-Phoenician woman, and the deaf 
mute of Decapolis; the grateful leper of Samaria and 
the woman bound with the spirit of infirmity; Zacchaeus 
and Lazarus, whom he raised from the dead; and the 
blind and deaf and mute and halt and palsied and 
lunatic whom he had healed; and Joseph and Nicodemus." 
We would certainly expect these to be 
amongst our Lord's friends who had great confidence 
in him, and who, after experiencing great disappointment 
respecting his death would have great hopes 
enkindled in their hearts through the reports of the 
apostles of his resurrection and his manifestations 
to them. 

Wise was the plan which gave to his followers the 
"infallible proofs" of his resurrection, and the instructions 
necessary to appreciation of the same, in so 
gradual a manner as we have seen. Three manifestations 
on the day of our Lord's resurrection; one a week 
later, on the eighth day; the fifth probably two weeks 
later on the 22nd day after his resurrection, and now 
the sixth manifestation, probably ten days after that, 
about the thirty-second day. Thus gradually the 
two lessons necessary were taught: (1), the fact of our 
Lord's resurrection, that he was no longer dead but 



alive; and (2) that he was "changed," that he was no 
longer "the man Christ Jesus," but that he was now 
"a quickening spirit," manifesting the powers and 
attributes which they knew belonged to spirit beings 
—invisibility and power to appear in various forms as 
a man— power to come and go as the wind, none knowing 
whence he came or whither he went.— John 3:8. 

We note the wisdom manifested in the order of the 
appearances also: first to Mary, who seems to have 
been a woman full of faith as well as full of zeal, and 
one whose word would have influence with the apostles; 
next Peter, a leader amongst them, was convinced; 
then the remainder of the eleven, except Thomas, who 
doubted; then the eleven, Thomas included, and 
perhaps some of the women with them, not mentioned; 
then what would seem to them the long interim of 
non-appearance, in which some of them started back 
again to the fishing business; then the convincing of 
these that the risen Lord had all the power that he 
ever possessed, and was as able to be with them and to 
guide them and to provide for their necessities as when 
he was a man, and with them daily in the flesh; then 
the instruction of them that their mission should still 
be to feed his sheep and his lambs; and his appointment 
for this general meeting, which would be rendered 
doubly forceful by reason of its previous 
appointment. 

The time had come; the friends of Jesus were 
gathered; for nearly five weeks they had been studying 
the great lessons of divine providence connected with 
the death and resurrection of the Lord, and how all 
these could happen to him and he still be the promised 
Messiah— yea, as he explained, how all these things 
were necessary to him in order that he might be the 
Messiah and accomplish all the great and wonderful 
work predicted in Holy Writ— how he must first suffer 
to redeem mankind, before, as the King of Glory, he 
should be fully authorized and empowered to bless 
them with eternal life and all the privileges and blessings 
proper to the redeemed and reconciled. 

When they saw him they worshiped him, "but 
some doubted." The ones who doubted we cannot 
reasonably suppose to have been any of the eleven 
apostles, for they were fully satisfied, thoroughly 
convinced, and had so expressed themselves previously. 
Those who doubted must, we think, have been of the 
"five hundred brethren" present at this appointed 
meeting, who had had no previous intercourse with 
him since his resurrection, and some of whom, we may 
reasonably suppose, were much weaker in the faith 
than the apostles and the special friends already 
communed with. The statement that "some doubted" 
is an evidence of the candor of the Evangelist's record. 
It shows us, too, that the Lord's followers were 
not over credulous, but rather disposed to sift and 
weigh the evidences presented, and the subsequent 



zeal, energy and self-sacrificing spirit of those who 
believed gives us abundant evidence of the sincerity of 
their convictions respecting our Lord's resurrection, 
which they as well as we recognize to be the very 
keystone of our faith in him. If Christ be not risen 
our faith is vain and we are yet in our sins.— 
ICor. 15:17. 

When our Lord appeared his message was the very 
one they needed to have impressed, and which he had 
been to some extent impressing at his previous appearances. 
It was that all power in heaven and in earth 
had been given unto him. We are not to understand 
by this that the Father had abdicated or surrendered 
any of his own power or authority, but rather are to 
remember that, as the Apostle Paul elsewhere states, 
in any such declaration the Father is always excepted. 
(1 Cor. 15:27.) Nor are we to understand that our 
Lord meant that power and authority were given him 
to set aside or overrule or violate any feature of the 

R2809 : page 153 

divine law and plan. We are rather to understand his 
words to mean this: I came into the world to do the 
Father's will, and by manifesting my obedience to 
that will, and fulfilling its demands, to not only redeem 
mankind from the sentence of death through Adam, 
but also to secure to myself the title and authority 
promised of the Father to belong to the Messiah. From 
the time I made my consecration I was reckoned to be 
the Messiah, but my Messiahship depended upon my 
faithfulness even unto death— even the death of the 
cross. I was faithful in this, and as a reward the 
Father has raised me up from the dead, a partaker of 
the divine nature, and the heir of all the gracious 
promises and blessings before mentioned as pertaining 
to Messiah. All this Messianic power and authority that 
was once mine reckonedly or prospectively is now 
mine actually; for I have finished the work which the 
Father gave me to do, and that acceptably; and its 
acceptance has been manifested in my resurrection to 
my present condition of spiritual glory and power.— 
Acts 17:31. 

"Therefore go ye, disciple all nations." Their 
commission to go and spread him as Messiah was based 
on the fact that the Father had accepted his work, finished 
at Calvary, and had recognized him with full 
authority as Messiah, by his resurrection from the dead: 
therefore we may preach Jesus, the power of God and 
the channel of all his promised mercies and blessings 
to all who have "an ear to hear," to all nations, and not, 
as previously, to the Jewish nation only. 

Following the assurance of his authority as the 
Messiah, our Lord, addressing especially the eleven 
apostles, but indirectly, with and through them, 
addressing all his followers, gave them and us the great 



commission under which we, his people, have since 

been operating. It might be termed the ordination of 

his apostles and all his followers as preachers, ambassadors, 

members of the royal priesthood, speaking and 

teaching in the name of the Master, the fully empowered 

Messiah. The commission divides itself into 

three parts: (1) "Make disciples of all nations;" (2) 

"baptizing them;" (3) "teaching them." The word 

teach, in the Common Version (vs. 19) is not from the 

same Greek word rendered "teach" in vs. 20. The 

word in vs. 19 signifies proselytizing or making disciples 

of. The word "teach" in vs. 20 signifies instruct. 

A wrong thought is derived from this text by 
many students of the Scriptures, when they consider it 
to mean, Go and convert all nations. This is not the 
thought, but rather, Go ye and gather converts from 
all nations, and baptize them and teach them, etc. This 
view is in accord with our Master's declaration on 
other occasions, in which he testified that they would 
not be converted at his second coming, but quite the 
reverse: "When the Son of Man cometh, shall he find 
faith on the earth?" This interpretation is in harmony 
with our Lord's statement in Matt. 24:14, "This 
Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the 
world for a witness unto all the nations; and then shall 
the end come." Whoever gets the wrong thought 
respecting the commission is apt to take the wrong 
action in his endeavor to comply with it. Those who 
have concluded that the Lord intended the conversion 
of the world are led to various subterfuges, both in 
mind and in conduct, in order to attempt to carry out 
the commission they misunderstand. This is leading 
some at the present time to ignore the Scriptural definition 
of the terms of membership in Christ's Kingdom 
—to lower the standard both of faith and of conduct, 
in order to admit a larger proportion of the 
human family and in order to, if possible, convince 
themselves and others that the world is growing better 
and being converted. Some have not only concluded 
that the preaching of the cross of Christ and faith in 
the redemption is unnecessary but have even gone 
further than this, and have claimed that even a 
historical knowledge of Christ is unnecessary, and that 
heathen religions are to be esteemed as part of the 
preaching of the Gospel, and that the heathen obedience 
to their religious customs is to be esteemed as obedience 
to the Gospel. Thus more or less false views of 
the commission are leading astray many who see no 
hope in any other way of ever attaining to that which 
our Lord commissioned nearly nineteen centuries ago, 
and which otherwise they would feel has thus far 
failed most miserably, and has no hope of ever being 
accomplished. 

R2810 :page 153 



On the other hand we hold that the commission 
rightly read and understood has been fulfilled; that the 
message of Christ and the Kingdom has been proclaimed, 
directly or indirectly, with more or with less 
force and energy, in every nation under heaven, and 
that as a result some from every nation have been 
made disciples; and that incidentally a "witness" has 
been given to all the peoples of the earth respecting the 
redemption and the divine provision for salvation 
through the Redeemer. Of these disciples gathered out 
of all nations by the message of the Lord a "little 
flock" will be found to whom it will be the Father's 
good pleasure to give the Kingdom, in joint-heirship 
with Jesus in glory as the Seed of Abraham, through 
whom, in the Millennial age to follow this, all the 
families of the earth shall be blessed. From this 
standpoint only can our Lord's commission be properly 
appreciated and its fulfilment recognized. 

DISCIPLING THE WORLD. 



The work of the Evangelist comes first- 
Go, make disciples of as many as will hear 
your message. The word "disciple" signifies pupil, 

R2810 :page 154 

and those interested through the evangelist are 
only supposed to be pupils in the school of Christ, 
in the primary department. As they become instructed 
in righteousness their full consecration is in 
order, as represented in baptism— death to self and to 
the world— buried with Christ by baptism into his 
death. (Rom. 6:3-5.) Then comes the third step, 
teaching them to observe all things whatsoever Christ 
commanded. Any neglect of this commission and its 
order of procedure means comparative failure; and yet 
on every hand we see that its specific features are 
neglected. We find the majority of professed Christians 
giving the baptism first, in a wrong order as well as of 
a wrong kind. Secondly, they disciple them into sectarian 
denominations and make them members of 
these, and get them to consecrate their money and 
energies to these rather than to the Lord. Thirdly, 
having thus gotten them into sectarian bondage they 
neglect them, and go out after others, failing entirely 
to give them the "teaching" which the Lord indicates 
is necessary as a preparation for joint-heirship in his 
Kingdom— teaching respecting the divine character and 
plan, and the graces of the holy spirit and the necessity 
for rooting out the spirit of worldliness and selfishness, 
and developing the spirit of the Lord,— meekness, 
gentleness, patience, brotherly kindness, love. 
To follow the Lord's instruction the Royal Priesthood 



should first, when discipling, inform those who 
have ears to hear that they are sinners through the 
fall;— imperfect in thought, in word and in act; and 
consequently unacceptable to God and under sentence 
of death, extinction; but that God has made a provision 
for their rescue, and their return to harmony with him 
and to life everlasting: that Christ Jesus, in harmony 
with the Father's plan, paid the penalty of Adamic 
sin and condemnation, and thus purchased the whole 
race of Adam, and proposes to set at liberty all who 
obey him. That now he is offering release by faith to as 
many as have the hearing ear— "even as many as the 
Lord your God shall call," and that such as hear and 
accept the call may reckon themselves as "justified by 
faith," as having their sins covered, and as being thus 
reconciled to the Father through faith in Christ; and 
that now, if they become followers or disciples of 
Christ they may become joint-sacrificers with him, and 
by and by be made joint-heirs in his Kingdom, and 
its great work of blessing the world. 

So many as are interested in the message will inquire 
the way by which they can attain this, and the 
answer must be that the full acceptance of discipleship 
must be indicated by a full consecration, heart, mind 
and body, to the Lord— even unto death; and that this 
submission of the will to the Lord is counted as a 
baptism, a burial, an immersion with him into death; 
and that as soon as they have performed this real 
baptism or immersion of the will they should submit 
themselves to an outward immersion in water, which 
would symbolize this, portraying their death and burial 
to self, to sin and to the world, and their resurrection 
to newness of life and conduct as members of the body 
of Christ. 

They are to be urged to take this step of consecration 
unto death, not in their own strength or name, 
nor in the name of their instructor; but are to be 
pointed to the fact that this course is authorized by the 
Father, by the Son and by the Holy Spirit. It is 
thus to be done "in the name of" or by the authority 
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, and not in the 
name of a sect or denomination or any human teacher. 
It is a mistake on the part of some to consider this text 
to mean that converts are to be baptized into the name 
of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. On the contrary 
the Apostle distinctly declares, that we are baptized 
into Christ as members of his body.— Rom. 6:3-5.* 

Those who go thus far, who respond to the preaching 
of the Gospel, and inquire concerning the way, the 
truth and the life, and who, with true repentance from 
sin and contrition of heart, desire to become disciples 
of Christ, and who then take this step of consecration, 
are baptized thereby into the Church, "the body of 
Christ"— not the Baptist Church nor any other human 
institution, but the one true Church, the Church of the 
living God, whose names are written in heaven. (Heb. 12:23.) 



They need not that their names should be 
written in any earthly roll or register. The names of 
such, we are told, are written in the Lamb's book of 
life, and if they are faithful to their covenant he will 
not blot out their names, he assures us. The seal of 
their acceptance is the holy spirit, whose leadings and 
instructions and marks of character become more and 
more discernible to them and to others daily, as they 
thereafter seek to walk in the footsteps of Jesus. 
But still they will need instruction: in fact, all 
that has gone before in their Christian experience has 
merely prepared them to receive instruction; and when 
they have reached the condition of justification by 
faith, and then of sanctification (consecration to the 
Lord, baptism), they have merely become "babes in 
Christ." As such they are ready for spiritual food, 
and should first be fed with the sincere milk of the 
Word, that they may grow thereby, and as they make 
progress the Lord himself stands pledged to it that 
they shall have "meat in due season," and as they are 
able to bear it the "strong meat" which belongs to 
them that are developed, strong in the Lord and in 



*See our issue of June 15, 1893, "Baptism and Its Import," 
a sample copy of which will be loaned free upon request with 
promise to return it. 

R2810 :page 155 

the power of his might, "overcomers," soldiers of 
Christ, having on his armor and fighting a good fight, 
lifting high the royal banner, and active in helping 
others to attain the same conditions. 

To Satan, our wily foe, we must credit the perversion 
of this great commission, so explicitly stated; 
making it meaningless as we have seen: first by making 
it mean the conversion of the world; second, by 
destroying the real idea of baptism; third, by confusing 
the Lord's people as to the matter of discipling, 
and to make them think that it is gathering membership 
into sectarian bundles; fourth, to make them 
think that this is all that is necessary, and that teaching 
in the Church is a waste of time, which should be 
devoted to what the Adversary calls "saving souls," 
but what in reality is an endeavor to gather unregenerate 
people into sectarian systems and to delude 
them into thinking that they are in any sense of the 
word members of the true Church of Christ, and saved; 
fifth, by misleading those whom he cannot thus delude, 
but who realize that there is to be a growth in grace 
and in knowledge, into a misunderstanding of the 
Apostle's statement (mistranslated in our Common 
Version), "The anointing which ye have received of 
him abideth in you, and ye need not that any man 



teach you."— 1 John 2:20,27. 

Under this last delusion many are turned aside 
from the instruction which the Lord designs should be 
given through teachers whom he would raise up- 
turned aside to vagaries, to dreams and imaginations 
and misinterpretations of Scripture which they fancy 
are whispered to them by the holy spirit, but which 
frequently give evidence of being the suggestions either 
of their own minds or of the fallen angels. 

Let us, as the Lord's people, seeking for the old 
paths, note well the Master's instruction in this connection, 
and let each one of us who seeks to serve his 
cause labor exactly along the lines here marked out— 
not thinking that his own imperfect judgment or that 
of fellow-mortals is superior to the Lord's, but to the 
contrary, that the Lord, the Head of the Church, alone 
was competent to give the proper commission which 
must be followed implicitly. 

That our Lord gave this commission, not merely 
to the apostles but to all who should believe on him 
through their word, is clearly shown by the words 
with which he closed the commission,— "Lo, I am 
with you alway, even unto the end of the age." The 
apostles did not live to the end of the age, and hence 
the Lord's words signify that he will be with all of his 
followers who avail themselves of his commission, and 
who endeavor to present his message to those who have 
ears to hear out of all nations. He of course did not 
mean that he would be personally present with them, 
for he had already told them that personally he would 
go away, and that personally he would come again at 
the end of the age (John 14:2), and his words are not 
to be understood as contradictory. His meaning in 

R2811 :page 155 

the present instance evidently was that he would 
supervise their work, he would be the real head of the 
Church, he would oversee all of their affairs, he would 
be with them in the sense of supporting and guiding 
and counselling those who would walk in his way and 
proclaim his message— and in proportion as they were 
faithful to the charge. This assurance of the Lord's 
presence was intended to give the apostles courage for 
the work he was committing to them. While he was 
with them in the flesh they merely followed his direction, 
and as soon as he was smitten they felt as sheep 
having no shepherd, and now he was going away, but 
he wished them to realize that his power would be 
with them and his supervising guidance of their affairs 
would be granted them, as surely as while he was 
with them in the flesh— tho apparent only to the eye 
of faith. According to their faith it should be unto 
them a strength, a power. 

And all the way down through the age the Lord's 
people have similarly been required to walk by faith 



and not by sight, and the lesson no doubt has been 
valuable to them in spiritual upbuilding, much more 
so than had he remained in the flesh with us. And if 
the thought of the Lord's spiritual supervision of his 
work was to be a source of encouragement and strength 
to those who would attempt to teach in his name all 
through the age, much more may we of the present 
time realize his actual presence in the harvest of this 
Gospel age, altho we see him with no other than the 
eye of faith, yet, believing, we have joy unspeakable 
and strength and courage for the work. He is with us 
in the harvest work as he was with the apostles in the 
sowing of the seed. 

Surely he who was careful to supervise the sowing 
work is not less interested and careful in respect to 
the reaping. Let us then thrust in the sickle of truth 
with energy and courage, remembering that we serve 
the Lord Christ, remembering that we are not responsible 
for the harvest but merely for our energy in gathering 
what ripe "wheat" we can find. If the labor be 
great for the finding of few grains of ripe wheat we are 
to rejoice the more in those we do find, and learn to 
love and appreciate the more that which is scarce and 
precious. Let us remember, too, while using all the 
wisdom we can in this service, that the Lord's object 
in giving us a share in his work is not so much what 
we can accomplish as in the blessing that the labor will 
bring upon us. This will be an encouraging thought 
to the dear ones who are engaged in the "Volunteer" 
work; and if they find many discouragements and but 

R2811 :page 156 

small results the reflection that the Master knoweth 
them that are his, and that he appreciates every 
sincere effort made to serve his cause and to lay down 
our lives on behalf of the brethren, will give courage 
and strength to those who otherwise might faint by 
the way. 



R2811 :page 156 

INTERESTING QUERIES ANSWERED. 
IS FAITH THE GIFT OF GOD? 



Question.— I have always considered that faith is 
what each individual must personally exercise and develop, 
but according to Romans 12:3 it would seem 
that this is something we get in a measure at least from 
God. Can God impart what he himself does not possess? 
In what way, then, does God give us a measure of 



faith? God having told us a truth in his Word, is it 
not entirely a matter resting with us as to whether or 
not we have confidence in it— have faith in it? "Faith 
cometh by hearing of the Word." 

Answer.— The word here rendered "faith" (Rom. 12:3) 
is from the Greek pistis, otherwise translated fidelity, 
assurance. As you say, we have much to do with our 
own faith and assurance and exercise a certain amount 
of it before we are begotten of the spirit at all, else we 
could not be justified by faith, for justification precedes 
our presenting of ourselves living sacrifices and 
our acceptance and begetting of the holy spirit. This 
much of faith is our own evidently, but after we have 
received of the Lord's spirit our faith may grow exceedingly, 
so that we will be able to walk by faith 
and not by sight— to accept the things that are not 
seen, and to sacrifice for them things that are seen 
and temporal. It may be said with propriety that the 
attitude which permits us to receive God's message 
of grace unto justification is all of God, in the sense 
that all of our blessings are from above— "every good 
and perfect gift." But it is especially true that faith 
in spiritual things which we develop after we are begotten 
of the holy spirit is the result of divine instruction; 
as it is written, "They shall be all taught 
of God," and the faith which will enable the consecrated 
ones to come off victors is not merely the natural 
faith with which they started, and with which they 
laid hold upon the Lord and justification, but a higher 
attainment of faith, the result of being taught of God 
through his Word and by his providence. 

In the text under consideration our sober thinking 
must depend upon the time we have been under 
the Lord's instruction, and the degree of attention 
we have given to learning the lessons intended for the 
increase of our faith. This development is in the Scriptures 
spoken of as a "gift," also as a "fruit" of the 
spirit of God in us, and again as God's "workmanship," 
for by his truth and by his providences he is 
working in his children, not only to will but also to 
do his good pleasure— he is working in us faith, hope, 
joy, peace, love and all the graces which he approves; 
and if we will be obedient to his teaching and leading 
he will complete the work eventually and we shall 
be copies of his dear Son our Lord, and joint-inheritors 
with him. 

WHO WERE THOSE SAINTS? 



Question.— Who were those "saints," mentioned 
in Matt. 27:52,53, who arose and came into the holy 
city after the Lord's resurrection? 

Answer.— (1) The persons mentioned could not 
have been the ancient worthies, perfected; because of 



those the Apostle declares that "they without us [the 
Gospel Church] shall not be made perfect." In other 
words, their resurrection will not be due to take place 
until after the first resurrection of the Church has 
been completed.— Heb. 11:39,40. 

(2) The class mentioned cannot have been saints 
of the Gospel Church, because the Church had not 
been selected— even the beginning of its acceptance 
with God had not yet taken place, and did not occur 
until the day of Pentecost, nearly fifty days later. 

(3) The record seems to imply that the earthquake 
which occurred at the time of our Lord's death 

opened these graves— produced the awakening mentioned; 
but that the awakened ones tarried and did 
not manifest themselves in the city of Jerusalem until 
after our Lord's resurrection. 

At very most it was an awakening similar to that 
which Lazarus experienced, and the daughter of 
Jairus, and the son of the widow of Nain, to die again, 
later on. We may be sure of this because the express 
declaration of 1 Cor. 15:20 is: "Christ is the first-fruits 
of them that slept"— the first one resurrected 
to perfection of being— the first one lifted completely out 
of death to perfection of life. The persons mentioned 
could have been no more than merely aroused from 
the slumber of death temporarily, and for some purpose 
of which we have no knowledge. We were at 
first inclined to doubt the genuineness of the passage, 
but find that a portion of it at least appears in the 
oldest Greek MSS. yet discovered. 

SEVEN, SIXTY-TWO AND ONE EQUAL SEVENTY. 



Question.— In Dan. 9:25,26 we have different 
periods given— seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks: 
some things are said to happen after the sixty-two 

R2811 :page 157 

weeks, and again something is said about one week, 
and altogether the matter seems to be confused. 
Please give us the harmonizing view. 

Answer.— We must take into consideration the 
statement of vs. 24; viz., that the entire period under 
discussion is seventy weeks (symbolical). This is 
divided into three parts; viz., seven weeks, sixty-two 
weeks and one week— total, seventy. The first seven 
weeks marked specially events connected with the 
Temple; the end of the sixty-two weeks were to mark 
Messiah's appearance. But we are to remember that 
the sixty-two followed the seven, hence the end of 
the sixty-two weeks would be the end of the sixty-nine 
weeks as respects the whole, and the one week 
following would be the seventieth week. It was this 



last, or seventieth week of years, that constituted the 
Jewish time of favor. It (seven years) began with 
our Lord's baptism, was marked in its middle with 
our Lord's crucifixion, and ended three and a half 
years later, after the ripe "wheat" of the Jewish age 
had been gathered into the Gospel age; and immediately 
at its close the Gospel message began to be sent 
to the Gentiles upon equal terms with the Jews,— 
Cornelius being the first Gentile convert. 



R2812:page 157 

MEMORIAL CELEBRATION REPORTS. 



FROM every direction come reports of interesting 

and profitable commemorations of our dear Redeemer's 

death, on the anniversary of his "Last 

Supper," April 2nd. Our hearts have been greatly 

refreshed by these letters, and we doubt if the space 

of our columns could be better used than in holding of 

a "testimony meeting" and hearing from representatives 

of all classes of "brethren." We can, of course, 

only publish a small sample lot of letters— being 

forced to omit some of the very choicest. Up to time 

of going to press we have received 171 reports of meetings, 

the average attendance being twelve. Last year 

the average reported was ten. 

Beginning at home: the Church at Allegheny 
(Pittsburg, across the river, included) had a most delightful 
season of fellowship and communion with the 
Lord and each other. The attendance was about 325, 
of whom about 310 partook of the elements representing 
our Lord's broken body and shed blood. The 
meeting opened at 7:30 p.m., with appropriate hymns, 
and prayers by various brethren, after which a short 
discourse was preached, setting forth prominent 
features of Israel's passover and showing that these 
were typical of Christ our Passover, slain for "the 
Church of the first-born whose names are written in 
heaven;" whose deliverance now means ultimately the 
deliverance of all who, when brought to a knowledge 
of the truth, shall demonstrate that they are God's 
people, "Israelites indeed," glad to escape the bondage 
of sin and Satan, typified by the Pharaoh of 
Egyptian taskmasters, etc. 

We rejoiced together in the death of Jesus, the 
Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world, 
while deeply sympathizing with his sufferings on our 
behalf. We discussed the necessity of the "blood of 
sprinkling" upon the door-posts of our faith structure, 
and that none of the "first-born" could be safe from 
the "destroying angel"— the Second Death— except as 



the saving blood was thus publicly confessed. We 
saw, too, that only by eating the lamb— appropriating 
the merits of Christ, feeding upon him in their hearts, 
can any have the strength needful for the journey out 
of Egypt, the world. 

Then followed a reminder of how our Lord instituted 
the memorial of unleavened bread and fruit of 
the vine, to take the place of the literal lamb and to 
represent the antitype; and that only those who 
partake of the realities which these symbolize have 
part or lot with the Lord in the elect first-born class, 
now being sought. The secondary feature was also 
set forth;— that, as the Apostle explains, the one loaf 
represents the complete Church which must be broken, 
and the cup symbolizes the covenant of the Lord's 
people to share his sorrows and sufferings— death— 
with their Lord.- 1 Cor. 10:15-17. 

Then asking blessings of God upon the bread 
and the cup, as did our Lord, we partook of the emblems 
with reverent and grateful hearts and sang a 
hymn and went out— avoiding unnecessary conversation, 
and seeking to meditate upon the incidents 
connected with our Lord's betrayal and death; remembering 
his words to his faithful eleven, "Watch and 
pray lest ye enter into temptation," and applying the 
lesson to ourselves, remembering that this is always 
a time of special temptation and testing and for remembering 
our Lord's words to Peter: "Satan hath desired 
to have thee that he might sift thee as wheat;— 
but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." 
The same Lord is interested in each of us, and we, as 
members of his body, also pray one for another, and 
seek to assist one another in the narrow way. The 
Lord's scattered sheep everywhere were remembered 
in our petitions to the throne of grace, as we are sure 
we at Allegheny were remembered by you all. 

The emblems were sent to 21 who were unable to 
be with us. 

R2812:page 158 

"THIS DO IN REMEMBRANCE OF ME." 



page 158 

DEAR BROTHER:— The Memorial supper was partaken 
of by 18 of the Wheeling Church. It was a 
very solemn occasion to each one, as we all realized 
its import. Yours in Christian love, 

C. H. MURRIN,-West Virginia. 



R2812:page 158 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-About fourteen of 
the friends met at my house last night to celebrate 
the Memorial Supper. We felt our Lord's presence 
and received a great spiritual uplifting. Brother 
Smith, formerly a Baptist clergyman, was with us, as 
was also his wife, two daughters and one son. They 
were very much impressed and said they had never 
understood it in the light in which it was presented 
to them last night. This same brother with his wife 
and two sons symbolized their consecration last Sunday, 
in Boston, by immersion. Altogether, from 
Lynn we had six immersed. The Church at Lynn is 
prospering wonderfully, and never since I have been 
here has the spiritual condition seemed so good. Tho 
in time past our work did not seem to bear much 
fruit, we have kept on, and now we can see the results. 
I had the pleasure of meeting a sister who came out 
of Babylon into the truth through a WATCH TOWER 
that I gave her while serving one of the out-of-town 
churches in the Volunteer service. The interest here 
seems to be increased and we have a good attendance 
at our services. 

We received a great spiritual blessing during 
and since our dear Brother Samson's visit. I praise 
God for such men as he. Oh! it is blessed this 
fellowship with the saints and I can never thank our 
Father enough for it and for his wonderful goodness 
in bringing me into the light. I am enjoying the 
walk with my blessed Savior each day, and tho some 
times I pass through shadows I am striving to say 
"Thy will be done." We desire your prayers, dear 
Brother, that we may learn more perfectly the lesson 
our Heavenly Father would teach us. 

The article in April 1. TOWER on "Patience" was 
just what I needed. May God bless and keep you in 
his love is the prayer of your brother in Christ, 
C. P. BRIDGES, -Massachusetts. 



page 158 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The friends of Truth 
here observed the Lord's Memorial supper. We were 
blessed spiritually; and I think all felt the importance 
of the occasion, and that it was good to be there. 
There should have been 20 there, but on account of 
bad weather only 14 were present, 12 of them partaking 
of the supper. 

Yours in the cause of our Master, 

L. B. PETTIBONE, -Michigan. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-On Tuesday night 



twenty-six of the brothers and sisters here met and 
commemorated the Last Supper of our Lord Jesus. All 
present seemed to realize more clearly than ever before 
the significance of this supper. We praise our dear Redeemer 
with all our hearts. First, for what that drinking 
of the cup (death) by our Lord accomplished for 
fallen man; and second, for his wondrous condescension 
in inviting those who believe on him unto justification 
of life, to partake with him in his sufferings. We look 
forward to the time when the loaf shall have been entirely 
broken, and when, if faithful, we shall have the 
great joy promised with our Lord in our Father's 
Kingdom. We praise our Heavenly Father for his 
guidance and grace during the past year, and with 
our sacrifices bound afresh to the altar we shall, by 
his grace, make greater efforts than ever before to serve 
him during the present year. 
With much Christian love, yours in the Anointed, 
ASA WALMSLEY,-Ontario. 



R2812:page 158 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The Churches of 
Bethlehem and Allentown, Pa., joined in "remembrance" 
of Him last evening (12 being present), and 
renewed their consecration to our blessed Lord. It 
was a profitable occasion to us all. 

Your Brother in the glorious hope, 

E. C. REMMELL,-Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to inform you 
that the memorial last evening was a very impressive 
one, and one long to be remembered. There were 25 
present, willing to accept and share our Redeemer's 
death and sufferings. With love in Christ, 
S. J. ARNOLD,-Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I just wanted to write 
you a few lines concerning the good meeting we had 
on the evening of April 2nd. We surely enjoyed a 
blessed season of commemoration of our Dear Savior's 
suffering and death. There were eleven present this 
year, about double what we have ever had before. 
We opened our meeting with hymns 23 and 13. Then 
we all knelt in prayer led by Bro. Towne. And tho 
we were saddened in recalling the scenes of Gethsemane, 
were rejoiced that we were ransomed and that 
Jesus was exalted to such a glorious position, "with 
all power in heaven and in earth." As some were 
present who had not met with us before on a like 



occasion, a few words were said in explanation of the 
occasion of our meeting, why meet tonight, and what 
it takes the place of. Then concerning the emblematical 
bread and juice of the vine, and the real, we 
read from pages 69, 70 and 71, TOWER 1898. Then 
followed testimonies in which all took part, expressing 
our deep appreciation of what our dear Savior 
accomplished for us. After offering prayer for the 
blessed "bread from heaven" that was broken for us, 
the emblem was served. And after a few moments 
meditation and communion with the Master, and 
prayer for the precious blood represented by the cup, 
it was passed. In closing we sang hymn 276. 

We seemed to realize more than ever what a 
great work the Lord did for us, our unworthiness 
without His merits, and the opportunity of ourselves 
now becoming a part of the great Sin-offering, laying 
down our lives jointly with Him, being broken with 
Him, that we might also have a part in His resurrection, 
and jointly reign with Him, in blessing all the 
families of the earth. We remembered you all at 
Allegheny and were very thankful for the "meat in 
due season" which the Lord has so graciously 
provided through you. We prayed the Lord's blessing 
might be with all the little companies through-out 

R2812:page 159 

the world, met in memory of His broken body and 
spilt blood. 

Praying the Lord's choicest blessing upon you 
and His harvest work, in which all the brethren and 
sisters here join. 

Yours in His service, JOHN HOSKINS,-Illinois. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We met last night to 
memorialize the sacrifice of our dear Redeemer. Six 
of the dear friends partook of the emblems. (Sister 
Herr met with the friends at Scranton.) It was a 
blessed meeting and a season of great refreshment to 
all. Yours in His love and service. 

M. L. HERR,-Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-On Tuesday evening 
of this week the Church at Buffalo celebrated the 
Lord's Supper at the home of Sister Eckhardt. The 
participants were only twelve, but, counting Christ's 
presence with us, of which we all felt assured, it made 
up the same number comprised in the little company 

R2813 :page 159 



who were present on that memorable occasion centuries 
ago, when our Saviour as a man celebrated the 
Passover with his disciples. We trust, however, that 
Judas was not represented. 

Although few in number, each one seemed animated 
by the same Spirit, and I think all felt like 
saying with Paul,— "God forbid that I should glory, 
save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom 
the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world." 
I believe each one present was strengthened by that 
true Bread from Heaven, and that all departed with 
a stronger determination, if possible, to "run with 
patience the race which is set before us," and to 
"press toward the mark for the prize of the high 
calling." 

The Church here unite in expressing their 
Christian love to you. We all pray that the Father 
may strengthen and keep you, enabling you to give 
to his loved ones the "meat in due season." 

With best wishes, I am your brother in Christ, 
E. F. CRIST,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Sister Black and I partook of 
the emblems with Sister Hasson, at her home. We 
had a blessed season, entering into fellowship, in our 
thoughts and prayers, with the different groups and 
single celebrants all over the field. As a result we 
hope to take up our work with added zeal and courage. 

Your brother in the blessed hope, 

W. W. BLACK,-Massachusetts. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Have just concluded 
Memorial service this evening. Myself and wife only. 
We have had a profitable hour and have been greatly 
blessed, as I hope many of the little circles of the 
household have been this evening. We purposed going 
to Clifton to meet the friends there for this occasion, 
but snow storm and muddy roads rendered it out of the 
question. Please accept our very kind regards and 
believe us to be yours in Christ, 

F. J. & E. CHAPMAN,-Kansas. 



page 159 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Our celebration of 
the Memorial in Adrian, Mich., was an occasion of 
much, and we think, deep and lasting blessing. As 
we strove to appreciate more fully the significance of 
the celebration, the depth and breadth of the great 
At-one-ment sacrifice by our dear Redeemer, and the 



fulness of the "common union" of the saints in "his 
sacrifice," we felt that the participation in "this" 
needed nothing short of self surrender, self abnegation, 
that our "heads" may be completely cut off,— "Beheaded! 
Beheaded! no will of my own." There were 
eight of us who thus participated. The dear brethren 
send their sincerest regards, and wish to express their 
deep interest in "the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ," 
and their earnest desires to serve the truth under all 
circumstances and at every opportunity. 

Your brother in the love and service of our dear 
Redeemer, J. W. WATTS, -Michigan. 



DEAR BRETHREN: -The Memorial of our dear 
Redeemer's death was observed in this city last evening. 
Seventeen were present and partook of the emblems. 
It was a simple and impressive service, and 
the brethren and sisters present seemed to well appreciate 
the import of the emblems. A beautiful spirit 
of joy and thankfulness was shown, and the value of 
the precious blood and broken body of our Lord, and 
what these make possible for us, was gladly confessed. 
Our Father is indeed kind to his children. 

Truly yours, C. E. SCHILLER, -Iowa. 



R2813 :page 159 

DEAR BROTHER:-The Church at Portsmouth 
celebrated the Memorial supper last night. There 
were present 8 brethren and 1 sister, besides another 
lady who does not hold with us. Great solemnity and 
profound joy pervaded every heart. All agreed in 
saying it was "good to be there." Yours in Him, 
WM. W. MURRAY-Virginia. 



page 159 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I just want to say a 
word about our meeting last night. There were 
present 16 persons. The meeting was lead by 
Brother Pritchett; he gave us a very good discourse on 
the Memorial Supper; one point that he made prominent 
was "Love," the bond of perfectness, which 
should bind the members of the body of Christ 
together. 

We think that this anniversary of our Lord's 
death has been the most precious of any that we have 
yet observed, because the spirit of Love has been growing 
among us this last year. It seems that all of the 
little company here have been drawn closer together 



lately than ever before. One matter that rejoices my 
own heart is, after so long a time (nearly 10 years) 
my dear wife is taking a lively interest in our meetings. 
I wish to thank you at this time, for the 
TOWER of '95 which you sent me in answer to my 
question about the "Resurrection." It was very 
satisfactory. 
With love to all the Church at Allegheny, 
G. SMITH,--Indiana. 



DEAR FRIENDS: -Memorial service was held last 
evening at 7:30. Brothers Barton and Walker were 
in charge, with 72 present. Eight were immersed, 
and quite a number of friends from outside of the city 
were with us. We had an unusually precious and 

page 160 

profitable season, the Lord being with us in the power 
of his spirit, and blessing us. With love to all, 

HOMER J. PATTERSON, -Philadelphia. 



R2813 :page 160 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I write also to tell you 
of the great blessing which all received in the celebration 
of the Lord's Memorial Supper last night. 
We met in a parlor and had the comfort of having 
with us many who live too far to attend our regular 
meetings. There were probably twenty-five in all 
present. All seemed fully consecrated to the Lord, 
and many were the moistened eyes as all whom the 
time would permit gave testimony of their gratitude 
to the Master for his great gift of himself for us. Our 
thoughts were especially prepared for the Memorial 
by a good sized meeting Sunday morning, when 
Brother Wyndeltz, in a marvelously clear manner, 
brought out the subject of the ransom, the 
Passover; and how it is our blessed privilege to be 
joint participators in that one Loaf. We had you 
and the Allegheny work in memory to the Lord in 
prayer that he may graciously guide and preserve 
you, and continue the blessings you have heretofore 
bestowed. 

All join me in love to you and the dear brethren 
at Allegheny. Yours in our dear Redeemer, 
S. H. HUSTON-Texas. 



page 160 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-There were 26 of us 
assembled to partake of the emblems of sacrifice, and 
the occasion was one of solemnity and blessedness. 
Brother Thompson gave us a very good talk and we 
feel strengthened to run the race more zealously and 
gain the promised possessions of the faithful few. 

With love and prayers, I remain yours in Christ, 
J. A. BOHNET,-Washington, D.C. 



DEAR BRETHREN: --Am pleased to be able to say 
that at the Memorial services 29 partook of the emblems. 
A deep interest was manifested, and our leader 
spoke quite pointedly, emphasizing self-examination 
and discerning the body of Christ. The sacredness of 
the occasion also was commendably observable; would 
that such sacredness could at all times be realized. 

Yours in the service of our High Priest, 
T. B. HEWITT,-Ohio. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In behalf of the 
Church in and near Boston, Greetings! 

Our eyes have beheld with wonder marvelous 
doings of the Father in the past few days; our ears 
have listened with rapture to the new song, and this 
evening our hearts have swelled with gratitude and 
emotion, as we have commemorated the death of his 
dear Son, our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. 

Have we not just witnessed flocking to the baptismal 
waters twenty-eight dear brothers and sisters upon 
whom God has poured out his Holy Spirit, seeking to 
symbolize their real baptism by immersion in water? 
Have we not heard for the past two weeks the dear 
Pilgrim, our brother sent out from your office, as he has 
sweetly and harmoniously sung for us the new song, 
which at present not many know, and so few can sing? 
And, beside two smaller companies of four or five each, 
led by brethren who generously absented themselves 
from the main gathering in order that aged and infirm 
ones, living at a distance, might not be deprived of 
the same blessed privilege,— has not a company of 
ninety-six (the largest number we have ever had) 
partaken of the bread and the wine, during what was 
perhaps the most impressive Memorial service we 
have ever had? Our dear brother, the leader, pictured 
to us, as he read from the Scriptures, the events leading 
up to that hour; and called our attention to the 
appropriateness of the symbols of unleavened bread 
and wine, to represent the body and blood of the sinless, 
undefiled One, and the inappropriateness of using 
leavened bread for the purpose,— leaven being the type 
of sin. And after our leader had inquired if we should 
not remember the drops of blood, the cruel thorns, the 



taunts and insults, His sinking under the cross and 
His suffering and death for us, we, like the disciples, 
sang a hymn and went out, to follow in our thoughts 
the events that followed the departure of the disciples 
from the upper room on that night. 

And how they have followed in my own case! 
After going six miles out of the city to my own home, 
the chill in the air makes me think of the cold chill 
of that night in Jerusalem, as some of them were 
gathered about a fire warming themselves; but 
stranger and more worthy of mention than the chill 
air is the fact that, while writing the foregoing 
thoughts between midnight and one A.M., I have 
been permitted to hear (12:40 A.M.), four or five 
times, the distinct crowing of a cock in the neighborhood! 
Thinking that sleep, which seemed far 
from me at midnight, may more readily come now, 
I will close. With much Christian love, 

H. L. ALBEE,-Massachusetts. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Here at St. Paul twenty-seven 
partook of the symbols, the meeting being conducted 
as nearly in the prescribed order as we were able. 
May God so bless this feast for us that we may be 
strengthened in the great race. I feel special need, 
having a hand to hand conflict with the Adversary, 
especially the last few days; but I trust that he shall 
be crushed under our feet shortly. Pray for me and 
us all that we may be able to overcome by the blood 
of his cross and the Word of his testimony. 

Yours in the Redeemer, 

M. P. THORI,-Minnesota. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have the pleasure to 
inform you that 63 souls met in E. London, to memorialize 
with bread and wine our Lord's death for us, 
and our death with him. According to his promise 
we had a blessing. In our prayers we counted it a 
privilege to remember the join t-sacrificers scattered 
abroad who were participating in the same service. 

Besides the above number, six solitary ones, 
who would have been glad to meet with us, had they 
been able to do so, were supplied from our portions of 
bread and wine. At the same time with us, the 
brethren in North London were having their meeting 
for this purpose, and will doubtless report in due 
course. With love to all, yours faithfully, in Christ, 
E. C. HENNINGES,--England. 



page 161 



SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. MAY 15, 1901. No. 10. 
CONTENTS. 



Fresh Attacks upon the Bible 163 

Review of three Books 165 

Judge Waite's Criticism of the 

New Testament 167 

The Foundation of God Standeth 

Sure 167 

Whence the Present General 

Blindness 169 

"He Ascended up on High" 171 

Pentecost— the Day of Jubilee 174 

Items:— Swedish Teachers' Bibles, 

Convention Notice, Etc 162 

page 162 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the $1.00 packages of mottoes now. 

LEATHER BOUND DAWNS will not be ready for some weeks. 

OUR READERS SHOULD KNOW that we publish a number of 
German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian and French tracts; and 
that the WATCH TOWER in German is issued quarterly. Samples 
free. 

WE GIVE GENEROUS CREDITS on our own publications, but on 



no others. We must pay cash to secure the low rates we give 
you, and must ask that cash accompany your orders. 

YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post-paid. 

SWEDISH TEACHERS' BIBLES. 

In response to inquiries would say that we can supply the 
Bible in Swedish, with Concordance and valuable helps. 
Divinity circuit, post-paid, $2.00, regular price, $5.00. 

ONE DAY CONVENTION. 

ON SUNDAY, MAY 12, the Editor (D.V.) will address the 
friends at Altoona, Pa., at 3 P.M., at Opera House and at 7:30 
P.M., as may then be announced. 

This is merely a local convention, and friends from great 
distances are not expected, tho all coming in the name and 
spirit of our Lord will be heartily welcomed. 



R2813 :page 163 

FRESH ATTACKS UPON THE BIBLE. 



"WOUNDED in the house of its friends," is 

certainly true of the Bible today; for it 

has no outside foes one-half so antagonistic, so injurious. 

But it is not the Bible's friends who thus 

attack it— but enemies, who under guise of being its 

friends have received honored positions in the household 

of faith,— who, from the vantage point of its pulpits 

and colleges and editorial chairs, insidiously stab 

the Bible, while professing to love and reverence it. 

Three volumes have just issued from the press, 
each one calculated to undermine, shake and overthrow 
the faith of many of God's people, who could 
not be reached or shaken by the same testimony if it 
reached them from disreputable or infidel sources. 
The first of these is volume III. of the series being 
published by the higher critics. The second is by 
Rev. Lyman Abbott, D.D., successor to Henry Ward 
Beecher in Plymouth pulpit, but now editor of the 
Outlook. The third is by Judge Charles B. Waite. It 
is not for us to judge that these essayists are dishonest; 
nor that they are seeking rewards of fame as 
leaders of thought, in a direction toward which all 
but the very few will shortly follow them, "as sheep 



having no shepherd." Rather, we will suppose these 
writers to be thoroughly honest— intent upon telling 
the truth as it appears to them. Indeed, we see in 
this movement a fulfilment of the Bible's predictions 
respecting our day, the ending of the present age. 

We may not state the matter too strongly, 
when we declare that God is back of the many present-day 
movements which are ensnaring many and making 
shipwreck of their faith, in the sense that he designedly 
does not hinder such erroneous presentations, 
but, on the contrary, permits circumstances to foster 
and prosper them. Thus the Lord declares through 
the Apostle, "God shall send them strong delusions 
that they may believe a lie: that they all might be 
damned [condemned, as unworthy a place in the Bride 
of Christ] who believed not the truth, but had pleasure 
in unrighteousness;— because they received not the 
love of the truth that they might be saved."— 
2 Thes. 2:10-12. 

The very men who are thus becoming blind leaders 
of the blind into the ditch of unbelief are men 
who have had first-class opportunities as respects 
education and opportunities for Bible study; men who, 
had they loved the truth and sought it, would have 
found it clear, convincing, precious; but who, rejecting 
the Lord's leading, and leaning to their own understandings, 
have become vain in their imaginations; 
have cut loose from their faith-anchorage, and are helplessly 
drifting— they know not whither. 

Does some one say,— It is strange that God should 
prosper rather than oppose these strong delusions! 
Yes, and the Lord himself calls it "his strange work," 
"his strange act." (Isa. 28:21.) Describing this 
"strange" prospering of error and unbelief the Lord 
says:— 

"Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this 
people draw near me with their mouth, and with their 
lip do honor me, but have removed their heart far 
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the 
precept of men: therefore behold, I will proceed to do 
a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous 
work and a wonder [miracle]: for the wisdom 
of their wise men shall perish and the understanding 
of their prudent men shall be hid."— Isa. 29:13,14. 

This language was applicable to typical Israel at 
the first advent, and consequently is applicable to 
nominal, spiritual Israel in the present "harvest" 
time of this Gospel age. The above is merely a rehearsal 

R2813 :page 164 

of what the Prophet explains more in detail in 
the previous chapter. (Isa. 28.) In verses 9 to 12 the 
Lord explains the preaching of his message through 
imperfect human lips, and that this message, rightly 
received, should have brought rest and refreshment 



for the weary and heavy laden: yet to the majority 
its blessed influences were lost, so that as a whole 
Christendom or churchianity is about to go backward 
and fall and be broken and snared and taken in the 
general unbelief that is even now sweeping over the 
civilized world.— Verse 13. 

The secret strength of this delusion, which has 
made the Word of God of no effect through human 
tradition, and prepares the way for this great falling 
away, is mentioned in verses 15 and 18. It is the 
covenant made by the great teachers with death, and 
their agreement with hell (sheol— the grave, the state 
of death). Under this agreement or covenant, which 
all the creeds of Christendom endorse, death, which 
God's Word styles an "enemy," is accepted as a friend; 
while the grave, the Bible teaches us, is the great 
prison-house of mankind, from which in due time the 
glorified Christ will deliver all of the prisoners who 
will accept his righteous terms— by restitution processes. 
-Luke 4:18-21; John 5:28,29; Acts 3:19-21. 

"Hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men 
[disdaining teachers] that rule this people." You have 
thought it wise to teach the people that death and the 
tomb are not enemies— that the dead are more alive 
than ever they were, either in a place of bliss or of 
torment. You feared to tell the people the truth, 
that the dead are dead, lest this should decrease your 
superstitious hold over the minds of the people. You 
said: The people will prefer to think of their friends 
going at once to glory, without waiting for the second 
coming of Christ, and a resurrection of the dead, and 

R2814:page 164 

it will heighten our influence over sinners to tell them 
an untruth— to misrepresent to them the words sheol 
and hades and to make them believe that these words 
represent a flaming torture-chamber, presided over by 
legions of furious demons, and that at any moment 
they may by accident be dropped into that eternal 
torment if they are not members of some of the sectarian 
systems, which we have organized, but none 
of which were or will ever be recognized by Jesus or 
his apostles. You have thus practically in effect said, 
"We have made lies our refuge and under falsehood 
have we hid ourselves," and are safe— no matter how 
great a storm may arise;— even tho an overflowing 
scourge of infidelity come, we are safe in the ignorance 
of our people, and in their dependence upon our dictum 
for their faith and hopes of the future: as we 
have succeeded in "bamboozling" them in the past, 
we shall continue to do in the future.— Isa. 28:15. 

But the Lord's answer is No! This very error 
shall work your ruin, and the overthrow of your system, 
and all identified therewith shall suffer loss. (Vs. 18; 
1 Cor. 3:15.) I have laid the only sure foundation, 



Christ Jesus, and he that trusteth him, and he 
alone, shall not fall, but "be able to stand" in the 
great time of testing, near at hand. For "judgment 
also will I lay to the line and righteousness to the 
plummet: and the hail [hard, cutting truth] shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters [truth] 
shall overflow the hiding place," and force you to 
show your subterfuges. (Verse 17.) The falsehood 
respecting death and the death-condition will fall 
with all that you so carefully built with this hay, 
wood and stubble of falsehood. The fire of that day 
shall test it and destroy it; and when it goes down you 
will go down with it, and will no longer have influence 
and preferment with the people.— Verse 18. 

This falsehood has been at the bottom of the 
various errors which have confused you; and because 
you had wilfulness of heart and drew near me with 
lip-service, rather than a full consecration of heart, 
ye deluded and blinded yourselves (as teachers) as 
well as those whom you "rule," so that to all of you 
my Word has become as a sealed book— understood 
and appreciated neither by the learned nor by the unlearned. 
(Isa. 29: 10-12.) Hence the fall of both 
leaders and followers into the ditch of unbelief— infidelity. 
This calamity will pursue you continually 
until you come to "understand the report [doctrine, 
truth]. "-Isa. 28:19. 

Why so? Because the creed-beds you have made 
for yourselves are too short for men to rest upon. 
They would serve the purposes of infants in thought 
and reason; but as knowledge, growth, comes, the bed 
is found too short, too uncomfortable. The covering, 
too, is insufficient for the developed mind, tho sufficient 
for the infantile. No thinking person can 
wrap himself securely in the narrow hopes of any 
"orthodox" creed: if he gets under the covers of the 
Calvinistic creed-bed and endeavors to consider himself 
one of the elect, as therein taught, he is harassed 
by the chilling air of doubt, and cries:— 
"Tis a point I long to know, 
Am I his or am I not." 

If he removes to the trundle-bed creed of Arminianism, 
and seeks to cover himself with the hope that 
there is no election— that the door is open and that 
"whosoever will" surely includes himself, he cannot 
get warm because the chilly doubt comes to him again 
with the suggestion that the Scriptures certainly do 
mention a "little flock" and an "elect" class and a 
"narrow way." And he reasons that if God deliberately 
planned and prepared an eternity of torture for 

R2814:page 165 

the vast majority of his creatures, he must be a loveless 
if not a conscienceless being— on whose mercy no 
reliance is to be placed. The larger he grows mentally 



the more uncomfortable the short beds and narrow 
creeds, until he resolves to get out of them in disgust. 
The difficulty is that it is not merely respecting human 
creeds that he loses faith; but believing that they 
represent God's Word, the thinker becomes a general 
skeptic, and viewing the Bible from the outside only, 
and in the light of the traditions of the elders, he is 
deaf to every influence and appeal for the truth during 
the present age, and until in the new dispensation 
the voice of the Son of Man shall declare the truth 
with no uncertainty— when all the deaf and dead shall 
hear and, obeying, may have "life more abundant." 

The theory, that the dead are not dead, is the 
basis for the false doctrines of Hell and Purgatory, 
and these monstrous absurdities are the rocks upon 
which the entire system of Babylon is being wrecked; 
and only those who learn in time that these are unscriptural, 
and who learn the true gospel as illustrated 
in the divine plan of the ages, will be able to stand the 
shock of skepticism, higher criticism, evolution theory, 
etc., now sweeping down upon churchianity. 

Rev. Heber Newton, D.D., of New York City, 
a leading man in "Orthodoxy," more courageous than 
some of his associates, boldly states his agreement 
with death and sheol, over his own signature, as 
follows:— 

"Death is the true resurrection. No other resurrection 
is conceivable. 

"He who dies awakens into consciousness the 
same being as of old. 

"The threads of the old existence are not cut at 
the touch of death. 

"Death ushers us into no foreign world. All that 
is essential to human life here will be found there." 

REVIEWS OF THE BOOKS MENTIONED. 



The fact that the first named is gotten out by the 
higher critics, tells in a word of its antagonism to the 
Bible as a divine revelation, and it will probably circulate 
chiefly among theologians already well saturated 
with doubts, and too conservative to circulate such 
books among their people to arouse doubts and questions 
they could never hope to answer. But the other 
two books are of a different caste— intended for the 
people, and likely to be well advertised, and "pushed" 
upon public attention by their publishers, and will 
work havoc among those resting their faith upon sects 
and creeds. We must notice these, to guard our readers 
against them. Remember, however, that we do 
not expect to be able to help any to "stand" except 
"the very elect," and them not so much by outward as 
by inward evidences of the Bible's divine authorship. 
Remember that it is our understanding, as outlined in 



these pages for the past twenty-two years, that Babylon's 
sudden fall, as a great millstone, is to result from 
such influences. 

Dr. Abbott's work is styled, The Life and Literature 
of the Ancient Hebrews; and we have come across 
what we consider an excellent and very moderate 
review of it in The North American, from which we 
make extracts, which we believe will interest our 
readers, as follows:— 

BOOK SHOULD HAVE GREAT INFLUENCE. 

"Coming at this particular point of human mental 
history, when so many of us are religiously unsettled, 
unwilling either to accept materialism, or to believe 
what never can be proved, the book may be expected to 
exercise no little influence upon our decision. ...If 
Dr. Abbott's book be the last and authoritative word 
of the Higher Criticism, then its opponents at least 
know where they stand, and where issue should be 
joined. 

"The present reviewer is bound to mention his 
profound dissent from the position which Dr. Abbott 
has taken. If what the reverend essayist pronounces 
to be the final truth about religion be so indeed, 
then it seems to me that religion is not worth attending 
to. We have practically not advanced beyond 
the religious state of the ancient Egyptians, or of 
classic paganism. Religion is morality softened a 
little by an illogical suspension of judgment regarding 
some so-called religious mysteries. Dr. Abbott 
does not state his opinion in these words; but after 
examining his argument I cannot see what else to 
make of it. He does not believe that the Bible is the 
inspired Word of God; he does not believe that Christ 
is God made flesh. 

NO SUBLIME PASSION IN IT. 

"What he does believe on these points is common-sensible, 
plausible and ingeniously argued; but it is 
poignantly disappointing to those who look for the 
glow of supersensual faith; there is in it no lift, no 
sky, no sublime passion. I do not see how such a 
creed can hold and combine men; how it can do anything 
but loose and disperse them. It makes no 
demand upon us, except to be amiable and keep the 
commandments. It makes the straight and narrow 
path only too smooth and facile. It engenders no 
misgivings as to the competence of human intellect 
to solve all important religious problems. It ventures 
to call Herbert Spencer's Unknown Energy at the 
background of phenomena by the name of Deity; but 
it supplies us with no adequate reason for loving him, 
or for a conviction that he, in any comprehensible, 
vital way, loves us. It denies that he has ever 



vouchsafed us any first-hand, incontestable revelation 
of himself. 

"According to Dr. Abbott, he (God) always 
permits himself to be colored, modified, and arranged, 
as it were, according to the limitations and bias of 
his human prophets; and we have nothing for it but 
their own personal persuasion that they were not 
wofully deceived in their assumed function. In 

R2815 :page 166 

short, the Bible is a remarkable and superior kind of 
literature; and God is an august and lovely possibility. 
Christ is, or was, a man in whom the divine Spirit 
was powerfully and perhaps uniquely manifested. 
But nothing has really happened in religious history 
which could not be paralleled in kind, if not in degree, 
with what happens in the experience of any one of 
us. And yet Dr. Abbott states everything so softly 
and sweetly that we hardly feel, at the time we read 
him, that he is depriving us of religious essentials. It 
is only when we think him over afterwards that we 
perceive that we have nothing but husks to eat, and 
that the immortal springs have run dry. 

HERE IS THE KEYNOTE OF IT. 

"The keynote of his attitude is in a chance 
sentence in the preface: 'What will the New Criticism 
do with the Bible?' Why shall we not rather ask, 
What will the Bible do with the New Criticism? As 
a matter of fact, it turns out that the New Criticism 
does not and cannot touch the Bible, in its Divine 
essence, at all. It is occupied entirely with a minute 
and learned examination of the outside or shell of the 
Bible— with its letter, as we say. It makes certain 
discoveries, or arrives at certain theories, with regard 
to this letter; and then proceeds to judge of the Word 
of God upon the basis of these external discoveries 
and deductions. 

"The conclusion reached is that the Bible is not 
divinely— that is, directly— inspired; is not the authentic 
and eternal Word of God; and, since no other 
book claims to be that, it follows that there is no 
such thing extant as a full divine revelation. Now, 
obviously, God can never be found out by man, working 
with his finite human faculties; if he do not reveal 
himself, he will never be revealed, and must always 
remain a mere surmise or plausible deduction from 
facts which man is capable of discerning. There is 
nothing— absolutely nothing— divinely authoritative 
upon which we can take our stand. 

AUTHORSHIP OF THE BIBLE DISCUSSED. 

"The Bible is nothing more than an adventitious 



collocation of writings, composed by Hebrews of salient 
intellectual, moral and emotional gifts, who lived 
some thousands of years ago. We are to take it for 
what it seems to us to be worth, and for nothing more. 
It is full of errors, chronological, geographical, scientific; 
it is full of fairy tales, lyrics, imaginative stuff 
of all kinds, which, however, possess the common 
peculiarity that they do contain constant references 
to the Hebrew Jehovah. If there do not live among 
us today poets, story-writers and 'prophets' just as 
remarkable as these old Hebrew ones, that is only because 
it happens so; and on the other hand, our historians 
and scientific writers are far more trustworthy. 

"As regards the prophets, we are to understand 
that they were not prophets in the sense that they 
foretold things to come; if Isaiah or somebody else 
used a form of words which might be regarded as a 
foretelling of the coming of Christ, that is a mere coincidence, 
nothing of the kind was in the prophet's 
thoughts. Upon the whole, were a number of devout, 
pure-minded, highly gifted men to get together 
today, they might turn out a very respectable Bible of 
their own, entitled to just as much respect as this 
ancient volume or library, which has been so painfully 
handed down to us from antiquity. 

"I say, they might; no doubt, on the other hand, 
they might not; but at any rate, there is no apparent 
reason in the nature of things why they should not. 

WONDERS AT DR. ABBOTT'S CONCLUSIONS. 

"Now, I do not suppose there are many to question 
that the Bible has all the imperfections that Dr. Abbott 
finds in it. But many must be at a loss to discover 
why, admitting the imperfections, and conceding 
that the Bible is nothing else at most than an attempt 
to show that God is reckoned with in human 
history, Dr. Abbott should regard the Bible as in any 
sense a divine book. 

"If the Bible be not something infinitely deeper 
and more vital to mankind than this, it is practically 
nothing; and that it should have survived all these 
years, and have so powerfully influenced mankind, is 
extraordinary, to say the best of it. It leaves us destitute 
of any certain knowledge of God, and entirely 
free to deny that any Supreme Being exists. 

"In truth, unless we are prepared to make 
assumptions, at the outset, far outstripping any 
possible conclusions or discoveries of human knowledge 
or science, we cannot hope to have any God or 
Bible whatever. If we are to credit a divine Providence 
at all, we must credit it without any reservations 
whatever. 

"If I could prove my belief in God by any process 
of logical demonstration, I should cease to believe 
in him. It is a certainty miraculously implanted in 



the soul, or it is nothing. 

"I believe that the Bible is the inspired Word of 
God. I do so in virtue of reading the Bible, and 
being convinced by a spiritual and mystical process 
that it is the divine revelation. I then perceive that 
the trivial and often revolting historical details of a 
depraved and infidel people which it recounts; the 
songs which it sings, the apostrophes which it records, 
the allegories, the stories which it narrates, have not, 
in their literal significance, any divine or external 
meaning whatever. 

"But all these are a mask, cover or body, under 
or within which is a soul or spirit, answering part to 
part to its material envelope or instrument, and conveying 
the spiritual truths concerning the Creator 
and the human being which he has created, which 
are essential to that creature's integrity and salvation. 

"Though its compilation seems to have been 
governed by chance, it was not so, but it was divinely 
ordained from the beginning. And whether or not 
the writers thought they were inspired, every word 
which they set down had already existed in the divine 
mind, and their hands were divinely guided so to 
write it and not otherwise. 

"The true alternatives between which we must 
make our choice are the view stated by Dr. Abbott, 
which gives up religion; and this, which demands the 
surrender of the judgment of the human senses. His 
book may precipitate this choice, and thus do a good 
beyond what he had himself foreseen." 

R2815 :page 167 

JUDGE WAITE'S CRITICISM OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. 



This book is ably reviewed by the New York 
Tribune, from which we give the following extracts: 

"Of the numerous gospels in use in the 
church in the second century, the author says that 
only three were probably apostolic, namely, the gospel 
of St. Paul, the Gospel or Recollections of Peter, 
and the Oracles or Sayings of Christ, attributed to 
Matthew. These, as well as numerous other sacred 
writings now unknown, were reserved as sacred scriptures 
in the early church, until they were suppressed 
in the interest of the present four gospels. I found 
myself,' says Theodoret (A.D. 430), 'upward of two 
hundred such books held in honor among your 
churches, and, collecting them all together, I had 
them put aside and instead introduced the gospels of 
the four Evangelists.' Many of the early Fathers refer 
plainly to these suppressed writings, and some of 
these references indicate that writings now unknown 
to the church were regarded as authoritative. The 



three writings mentioned above probably did not teach 
the miraculous conception of Jesus or his physical 
resurrection. But it is the contention of the author 
that these and other beliefs gradually grew into shape 
in the church, and that then the present gospels were 
written, many of the materials in the older writings 
being used, the Gospel of Paul was thus the germ of 
the Gospel of Luke; the Gospel of Peter of the Gospel 
of Mark, and the Oracles of the Gospel of Matthew. 

"Holding thus as to their origin, the author naturally 
rejects the gospels as unhistorical. Undoubtedly, 
he says, there was a moral and religious teacher 
that came to be known as Christ. This teacher, who 
had devoted followers and disciples, was put to death 
in the reign of Tiberius, and after his death Paul, the 
chief of his disciples, founded a new religion on his 
doctrines and precepts and on the belief in his resurrection. 
Both Peter and Paul, in the opinion of the 
author, were responsible for much of the cruelty, 
bigotry and fanaticism which came later to characterize 
Christianity. The apostolic fathers emphasized 
most the supernatural elements in Christianity, and 
in a credulous age new supernatural additions could 
easily be made without exciting any protest." 

THE FOUNDATION OF GOD STANDETH SURE. 



Replying to the Judge's arguments, we notice 
first, that their weight depends greatly upon the attitude 
of the mind receiving them. If we will imagine 
a mind (and they are legion) already disgusted with 
the din of the jarring and contradictory creeds of 
Christendom's sects, numbering more than a hundred; 
and if, additionally, we will imagine that mind awakened, 
in part at least, to a realization of the injustice, 
unmercifulness, lovelessness, pitilessness, heartlessness, 
of the doctrine of eternal torment of all except 
a "little flock" of "saved" ones; and if we will remember 
that this awakened and disgusted mind has 
from infancy been taught that the Bible is the foundation 
for that slander upon the divine Creator, then we 
can easily see that to such a mind the weight of 
Judge Waite's book would be immense. Such an 
one is prepared and waiting for an excuse for utterly 
repudiating the Bible, and getting rid once and forever 
of harassing fears respecting the future of himself 
and millions of others, which as a nightmare had 
haunted his soul since infancy. 

To the mind thus prepared and fertilized with the 
rich compost of the errors of centuries, including the 
"dark ages," every argument of this book will doubtless 

R2816 :page 167 



bring conviction and seem utterly unanswerable. 

The seeds of doubt, once sprouted, will make reverence 

give place to contempt, and every item that is 

obscure is classed as an inconsistency and contradiction, 

and speedily faith's anchorage is wholly lost. 

And in the case of the majority there is no real faith, 

but merely credulity, which vanishes still more rapidly. 

But, on the other hand, note the position of those 
who approach these questions and suggestions of 
doubt from the opposite standpoint;— like those mentioned 
by the Prophet, saying, "The people that do 
know their God shall be strong and succeed." Suppose 
this one to have "tasted that the Lord is gracious," 
in realizing the forgiveness of his sins, and 
that being thus justified he has made a full consecration 
of himself to the Lord— even unto death; and 
that thus he was begotten of the holy spirit and realized 
the new life begun in his heart, and making 
progress in all the fruits of the spirit;— one in whom 
old things had passed away and all things become 
new. 

Suppose, additionally, that this one was living 
today, and consequently privileged to partake of the 
"meat in due season" provided for those of the household 
of faith who are Israelites indeed, and in a proper 
attitude of heart to receive it. Suppose that he had 
been a faithful student in the School of Christ and 
learned of him, being "taught of God." Suppose 
that now he saw clearly the divine plan of the ages; 
—the fall of our first parents, the promises through 
the patriarchs and the prophets of a great Redeemer 
out of Israel, who, dying, should thus redeem or 
purchase all men, not from torment, but from death, 
and who, since his resurrection, has waited with the 
work of restitution (resurrection) for the world until, 
as appointed by the Father, he shall have first selected 
his "elect" Church, his Bride and joint-heir in the 
Kingdom, which is to bless and restore all the willing 
of the purchased race. 

Suppose this one, who has seen with the eyes of 
his understanding, the Wisdom, Justice, Love and 
Power of God portrayed in God's Word in respect to 
the divine plan, as it shall ultimately shine forth as 
the sun,— would it be easy to convince such an one 

R2816 :page 168 

that he had followed cunningly devised fables? Nay, 
verily; he would say with one of old, "I know in 
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I have committed unto him." 
-2 Tim. 1:12. 

Ask such an one what he thinks of the fact that 
the New Testament was not handed down from heaven 
in book form, but grew, as one after another added 
his testimony, and he would answer, Why yes! How 



else could it come to us and yet have us "walk by 
faith and not by sight"? Inquire what he thinks of 
the fact cited above, that Theodoret declared that in 
the churches of one province he found over a hundred 
different manuscripts, by various authors, dealing with 
the events of our Lord's ministry; and that he, Theodoret, 
persuaded them to accept as authoritative the 
four gospels we now use,— relegating the remainder 
to less prominence, as unauthoritative. Ask if this 
would shake his faith in the narratives of the four 
gospels, accepted now as well as then? 

His answer would be, No; this does not shake 
my faith. I know very well that none of the Gospels 
were written until after Pentecost; and that later on 
there were numerous presentations of the matter by 
more and less competent writers. I know that of the 
four accounts so long canonically recognized by the 
Lord's people two (Mark and Luke) make no claim 
to having been written by apostles. I can well surmise 
that all accounts in that day of scarcity of books 
would be costly, as to time of preparation; and on this 
account, as well because of their sacred theme, all 
such would be kept in more or less honor, by the 
Lord's people. I can readily see the wisdom of deciding 
which of these versions were the more accurate 
in detail and desirable in style of diction: and I agree 
that a council of believers would be a desirable way 
of reaching a conclusion on this subject that would be 
beneficial to all. And I fully endorse the selection 
made, and conclude that in this, as in all of his people's 
affairs, our Lord supervised. Furthermore I am the 
more convinced of the honesty of the records, as well 
as of those who decided upon them, by the fact that 
two of them do not claim to have been made by eye 
witnesses, nor by apostolic writing, but were by St. 
Paul's contemporaries and assistants; and one of those 
says most modestly:— 

"Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set 
forth in order a declaration of those things which are 
most surely believed among us [primitive Christians], 
even as they [apostles, etc.] delivered them unto us 
—[they] who from the beginning were eye-witnesses 
and ministers of the Word; it seemed good to me also, 
having had perfect understanding of these things from 
the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent 
Theophilus."— Luke 1:1-3. 

Could there be anything less like deception than 
this? Would it not have been easy for dishonest 
men to have omitted the introductory words of 
Luke's Gospel, and to have given it the name of 
James, or Paul, or Andrew, or Peter, or Nathaniel? 
And could they not have done similarly with the 
Gospel by Mark? Moreover it is evident from the 
above words of Theodoret, as well as from other records, 
that the general recognition of the four Gospels we 
now recognize took place long before Theodoret's 



writings. He mentions the matter in a manner that 
implies that the province thus instructed and advised 
was an exception to the rule— different from the 
churches of other provinces. And this, and the evidences 
against the rejected ("apocryphal") books, 
and the evidences in favor of the four Gospels we still 
recognize, were so weighty with the churches that 
Theodoret evidently had no difficulty in convincing 
them of the propriety of the course he advised. 

No secret has been made of the fact that certain 
records respecting that time were rejected, and some 
Bibles, especially old Family Bibles, contained numerous 
of those rejected books, separated from the accepted 
ones, and styled as a whole The Apocrypha. 
And we have no hesitation in saying that the difference 
between these rejected records and those accepted 
and kept are so great that not one of our readers 
would be unable to quickly detect the wide differences 
between the style and general presentations of these 
and the simple, grand, unostentatious presentations of 
our four Gospels. 

But, some one may ask, If these Gospels were not 
selected in the apostle's day, but long afterward, how 
do we know that they were inspired? We answer, 
that in the apostles' days most of the evangelizing 
was done by word of mouth, few people knew how to 
read, even if they had books; and the Lord evidently 
did not intend to fix matters so that there should be 
no room for doubts and doubters, and no room for 
exercise of faith in his supervision of his own cause. 
He undoubtedly did supervise the matter, so that we 
have in the four Gospels a very full record of the 
facts. Nor are we to think that inspiration is requisite 
to the telling of the truth; and these Gospels 
make no claim to having been inspired or needing inspiration; 
—they are histories. We read Macaulay's 
history of England and believe its records without 
thinking of asking whether Macaulay was inspired 
to write it. We trust it even tho we have no reason 
to assume that God supervised its statements, as we 
have good reason to expect he did with the Gospel 
records. 

As for the Epistles, their case is different,— they 
are not merely historical records; they are doctrinal 

R2816 :page 169 

treatises; respecting the authority, the inspiration, of 
their writers we have good reason to inquire. And 
whoever will examine the rejected or Apocryphal 
epistles will find that they are wholly inferior to those 
retained, and in addition, that no apostolic epistle was 
rejected and no unapostolic epistle retained. The conclusion 
of the early Church was the same that ours 
now would be. (1) That Paul was the Apostle chosen 
of God to fill Judas' place (the uninspired and undirected 



action of the eleven in choosing Matthias, 
previous to Pentecost, being entirely ignored by the 
Lord). (2) That all of the apostles were specially 
selected and specially inspired and directed of the 
Lord for the work given them to do; and that they 
have no successors in office and authority;— even tho 
Papacy has since claimed, to the contrary, the same 
inspiration and authority for its popes. The last book 
of the Bible sets its seal to the thought that the twelve 
were special representatives of God, and that the number 
could not be added to,— by showing the glorified 
Church of the future, under the symbol of a city— 
whose twelve foundations had in them written the 
names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. 

It is objected further, that some of the books now 
recognized as parts of the New Testament were regarded 
with suspicion by some of the churches for quite 
a while, and openly rejected by some for a season;— 
among others the Second Epistle of Peter, and Revelation. 
We answer, that this is not surprising; and 
so far from being an unfavorable item it is favorable; 
—showing clearly that whatever indifference might 
have been manifest in some congregations at first, 
some were very critical, very exacting as to the proofs 
of genuineness of what they received. And as for the 
Book of Revelation, it belonged less to that day, anyway. 
It is specially ours of to-day, and contains 
abundant internal evidence of its one-ness with the 
remainder of God's Book. 

However, as at first stated, all these things, 
while clear as crystal to those possessed of and taught 
by God's spirit, are obscure to all others who will find 
abundant opportunity for "stumbling at the Word, 
being disobedient." It is still as true as when our Master 

R2817 :page 169 

said it, that— "If any man will do my Father's will, 
he shall know of my doctrine." Whoever will not do 
this, whatever else that is good he may do, will not 
know,— not being of the kind "to whom it is given to 
know the mysteries of the Kingdom." (Matt. 13:11.) 
To all others the matter may be foggy, at best; even 
as the Prophet declared, "None of the wicked [unfaithful 
to their covenant] shall understand." The 
Scriptures are for and addressed to the Church— the 
saints and the household of faith; and their evidences 
are internal, not external; just as the symbolic vessels 
and furniture, etc., of the Tabernacle and of the Temple 
were completely hidden from outsiders, and could be 
fully seen only by the typical priesthood, in the light 
of the typical oil and lamp. 

Does some one ask, What can we do for friends 
whom we may expect more and more to see drifting 
off into skepticism? Must we let them go without 
endeavoring to help them? 



We answer, No; we should do all we can for each 
one, even tho we know that it will avail nothing for 
the vast majority. Give them the following treatment, 
asking divine wisdom to know how to approach 
them wisely. (1) Let them read this paper, and (2) 
loan them MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., the first four 
chapters of which were specially written for the assistance 
of truth-seekers, who need first of all to have 
faith established in the Bible as a whole. If they are 
in the proper condition of heart, that is to say, if they 
have the "hearing ear," they will get a start at least 
in that volume, which perhaps has converted more infidels 
than any other book in print today. If they 
love the truth and appreciate the divine character as 
set forth in the Plan of the Ages, they will want to go 
on and on in the green pastures of truth, and by the 
still waters they will be refreshed, and doubtless the 
great Shepherd will by his rod and staff guide them 
to the Kingdom. But the record is that a thousand 
to one shall fall.-Psa. 91:7. 

WHENCE THE PRESENT GENERAL BLINDNESS? 



Prevalent blindness and loss of faith in the Bible 
are attributable to the various so-called Orthodox 
creeds of Christendom; formed during the "dark 
ages," these are full of superstitions and falsehoods, 
and vain attempts to reconcile these with the holy 
Scriptures. Now that reason is awakened it does 
not occur to the devoted sectarian that the fault is 
wholly with his creed, and that it really is in violent 
conflict with God's Word as reverently and reasonably 
interpreted. On the contrary, he loses faith in 
his Bible in proportion as he loses faith in his creed; 
because he considers them to be in harmony— identical 
in their teachings. 

He has a reverence for his Bible as an antique, as 
a remembrancer of the past,— intimately associated 
with his earliest experience at a pious parent's knee; 
and he has a similar reverence for the creed and denomination 
to which his parents and himself have 
long been attached. But he has lost faith in both. He 
can see at a glance the inconsistency of the teachings 
of the various creeds, that God is either incapable of 
extending the knowledge of Christ to all mankind, 
and giving all a fair opportunity for believing and 
obeying the gospel, or else that he is unwilling to do 

R2817 :page 170 

so to any but an elect few; and that the vast remainder 

are to be tormented to all eternity;— which, if 

God knew the end from the beginning, implies that 

he provided them with eternal life with the foreknowledge 



and intention that they should thus suffer. 

Men could stifle reason in this manner once, but 
they can do so no longer. It is to their credit as 
reasoners, and to their credit as men and women of 
heart and sympathy, that they reject such theories as 
impossible of belief, and declare that such testimony 
bears on its face the evidence that it is untrue; that it 
is a blasphemy against the true God and a dishonor 
to the conscience and reasoning powers of every one 
who so professes; and that they had rather trust to a 
theory of their own construction, built on love and 
reason, than stultify themselves longer by such 
professions. 

And not seeing that their creeds malign the Bible 
as much as they do the Creator, they reverently lay 
aside Bible and catechism as relics of their thought-infancy. 
Nominally they still adhere to their denomination 
as being "as good as any, and as correct as 
any;" and the denomination still adheres, nominally, 
to the creed and the Bible and the accustomed forms 
and ceremonies: believing them to have a salutary 
effect upon the young and a restraining influence upon 
the immorally inclined. 

However it may be kept secret, the "broad-minded" 
and "intelligent," "up-to-date" ministers 
and members of the various denominations have taken, 
or are rapidly taking, the view advanced by Dr. 
Abbott, set forth foregoing: that morality, and not 
faith in Christ, is the divine test. The tendency of 
many is to universalism; but the majority, having lost 
faith in the Bible, have no guide whatever except 
their own or other men's reasons, and are full of 
doubts. They have lost their anchor and are being 
driven to shipwreck on the rocks of infidelity by the 
increasing winds of reason. 

These all need help; but there are none who can 
render aid except such as by the grace of God have 
gotten their own eyes open to see that the Bible has 
been unintentionally traduced in the house of its 
friends— that it is loyal to God, and most beautifully 
grand and self-consistent to the sanctified reason, and 
able to stand the test today and to come off victor, as 
much as in the past; while, on the contrary, the sectarian 
creeds can find no defenders among reasonable 
men. 

The bolder infidels tell us that the Bible was made 
up by priests and knaves. We inquire, which priests 
and knaves?— of which denomination? 

Was it made by Methodist priests and knaves? 

If so, why did they not add a dozen or so more 
texts to support their special tenet— that divine grace 
is free during this Gospel age? And why did they 
not omit those texts which mention "election" and 
the "elect"? 

Was it the Presbyterians who made the Bible? 

If so, why did they not add more texts on election, 



and omit the three or four which appear to be contrary 
to the doctrine of election, and which they cannot 
explain away? 

Was it Lutheran priests, Episcopal priests, or 
Baptists? No! for similar reasons. 

Oh! Finally they conclude that it must have been 
made by the priests and knaves of the church of 
Rome! Well, let us see whether its internal evidences 
favor that view. What object did they serve by such 
a fraud? 

If the Roman Catholics made the New Testament, 
and pretended that they gave the words of Jesus and 
the apostles, so as to furnish a foundation for their 
teachings, how comes it that they are and have long 
been the bitter foes of the Bible— Bible readings, Bible 
Societies, etc? And how comes it that they did not 
make a Bible which would support their theories? 
Why did they not put into it clear statements to the 
effect that Peter was the first pope; that our Lord's 
mother was the "Mother of God," and that she should 
be prayed to; that saints are to be prayed to; that images, 
crucifixes and pictures are to be adored? Why did 
they omit mention of "holy water," "holy candles," 
"extreme unction," consecrated cemeteries, and the 
invalidity of any but priestly marriages? Why did 
they not insert commands respecting the wearing of 
"scalpels," the necessity of masses for the dead, to 
get them out of purgatory? Why did they not insert 
instructions to all to apply to the priests for indulgences, 
and fix liberal prices at which they should be 
supplied? Why was Purgatory left unmentioned 
when it is the mainstay of their church treasury? 
Why did they not throw in at least a dozen or so texts 
amongst the epistles of Paul, Peter, James and John 
describing hell and purgatory in vivid colors, instead 
of omitting a single mention of either? Why did they 
not insert a dozen texts or so on the doctrine of Trinity, 
instead of leaving the entire Bible without such a 
text, until the seventh century, when one text was 
corrupted, so as to indirectly imply something of the 
kind? (1 John 5:7— admitted by all trinitarians to 
be corrupted, and omitted from the Revised Version). 
Why did they not insert a passage to show that the 
"clergy" are separate and distinct from the "laity"? 

Why, on the contrary, did they insert passages 
which say that there is no such class distinction as 
"clergy" or "laity" in God's Church, but that— "Ye 
are all one in Christ Jesus"? Why did they permit 

R2817 :page 171 

that their favorite, the Apostle Peter, should be made 
to contradict their theory and practice, by saying, not 
of the "clergy," but of the whole Church, "Ye are a 
royal priesthood"? (1 Pet. 2:9.) Why did they permit 
the oft repeated statements that the end of the 



wicked would be "destruction"— "second death," 
etc., which would be wholly contradictory to their 
theory of "eternal torment"? 

We answer, that the evidence is conclusive that 
the Bible was not made by any of the sects, and is in 
antagonism to them all, and that injustice it should 
be judged by itself— by its own internal evidences. 
And all who have seen its beauty from this standpoint, 
praise God for the light:— for his wonderful plan of 
the ages, of which the ransom at Calvary, once for all, 
is the center, the election of the Gospel Church a 
grand incidental, and the blessings of the Millennial 
age, bringing opportunities for obedience unto eternal 
life to all the redeemed, is the grand outcome. 

Whoever knows this gospel and does not desire 
and endeavor to spread it to others about him who 
are blind to it, but hungry for it, surely lacks the 
spirit of Christ, whatever may be his profession. How 
dwelleth the love of God in him? 



R2818 :page 171 

"HE ASCENDED UP ON HIGH." 

-ACTS 1:1-11.-MAY 19.- 

"While he blessed them he was parted from them 
and carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 

LUKE, the writer of the Acts of the Apostles, in 

its introduction refers to his Gospel narrative 

of the life of Jesus— respecting "all that Jesus 

began both to do and to teach until the day in which 

he was taken up." It was no doubt of divine intention 

that he should express this matter in this particular 

form, and refer to the personal work of Jesus 

as merely the beginning of his work. Only those 

who grasp this thought; viz., that the body of the 

Church, "the body of Christ," in the flesh, is a continuation 

of the work of Jesus, the Head of that body, 

in the flesh— only such can grasp with clearness the 

divine plan. We are to consider the name, Jesus, as 

the personal name of our Lord and Head, and the 

name Christ, or Anointed, as the official name, applicable 

to him as the head, and to the whole Church as 

his body. From this statement the two advents of 

Christ are brought close together, for the work of the 

first advent, the sacrifice of Christ in the flesh, will be 

little more than completed, until the work of the 

second advent begins, the blessing of all the families 

of the earth with restitution privileges and mercies, 

at the hands of the glorified Christ, Head and body. 

Indeed the preparation for the new age and its work 

laps upon this Gospel age and its work. 



It was in harmony with this thought (that the 
work which he had begun his apostles, and all his 
footstep-followers, were to carry on) that the Master 
so particularly instructed them during the forty days 
after his resurrection. We have already noticed that 
he appeared to them in all some six or eight times, 
and now in the present lesson we have an account of 
his seventh (or ninth) appearance, at the end of the 
forty days. It was probably at least a week after he 
had seen seven brethren in Galilee that he appeared to 
them again at Jerusalem, where he evidently had appointed 
the apostles to assemble. Here he met with 
them and gave them his final parting instructions, 
which were perfectly in harmony with his previous 
teachings, that their mission was to continue to be a 
spiritual one, to feed his sheep and to feed his lambs 
—to continue the work which he had begun, and to 
follow in his footsteps. But he impresses upon their 
minds the fact that they are incompetent for this work 
until first they shall have received of the Father 
through him a special power from on high, for which 
he bade them wait at Jerusalem. He reminded them 
that this blessing for which they were to wait was the 
same that he already had mentioned before his crucifixion, 
—telling them that the Father would send the 
holy spirit in his name, that it would bring to their 
remembrance all things that he had spoken unto them, 
and guide them into all truth, etc.— John 14:16,26; 
15:26. 

He would impress his disciples with the importance 
of the blessing for which they were to wait, and 
with the fact that it meant to them a new era, a new 
dispensation: as they knew of the reformation movement 
instituted by John the Baptizer, and that the repentant 
sinners were immersed in water, he would 
have them know that now he was instituting a Church 
on a much higher plane, and that all who would be received 
into it would be immersed in holy spirit,* holy 
power— come under an influence of power from on 
high. His declaration that this would be not many 
days hence, was indefinite purposely; first, that they 
should expect it soon, and not be disheartened or discouraged, 
and yet he left the exact number of days 



*"Ghost" is old English for "spirit"— the word is really 
obsolete, and had the American Revision Committee had its 
way it would never have appeared in the Revised Version, we 
are told. It is not used in the American Committee's Version; 
it is misleading. 

R2818 :page 172 

unstated, so that they might be continually watching 
for it. This left the apostles in a waiting attitude, 



and, as Luke informs us, in an attitude of prayer and 
expectancy, very profitable to them at this juncture. 

Slowly, during the forty days, the disciples were 
learning to expect very different things from what 
they had in mind at the beginning and throughout 
the Lord's ministry: they were learning that the 
Kingdom glories and honors were not to be distributed 
immediately; but that a new dispensation, and a new 
kind of work in harmony with it, was set before them 
to be done; and gradually their minds reverted to the 
prophecies in which the blessings of the Lord upon 
the nation of Israel are set forth, and the intimation 
given that the blessings upon the whole world are to 
flow through the children of Abraham in some national 
capacity. They had confidence in these prophecies, 
and now they would ask the Lord respecting 
them. How could these prophecies be fulfilled under 
the new arrangement, which seemed to ignore the 
nation and to merely use themselves, the Lord's followers, 
a mere fragment of the nation. Hence their 
inquiry of the Master whether now or soon or when 
the prophecies would be fulfilled, which promised the 
restoration of Israel to divine favor as God's Kingdom, 
thus implying its release from the power of 
Rome and all other dominions. 

Our Lord's answer was not to the effect that they 
had misunderstood these prophecies, and that they 
would all have some kind of spiritual fulfilment; on 
the contrary, by his answer he implied that their conception 
of the prophecies was quite proper, but that 
the time for their fulfilment had not yet come, and 
that they must not press the question as to the times 
and seasons; they must trust to God, who has these 
in his own keeping, and who will abundantly fulfil 
every promise he had ever made in its due time. 

Our Lord, then, drew the minds of his disciples 
back to their own work, to which he had called them 
—to the work which they were to accomplish as members 
of his body in the flesh. He informs them that 
they shall be specially empowered through the holy 
spirit, which the Father would send in his name; and 
that using this power, this influence, they would be 
privileged to be his witnesses— his representatives- 
representatives of his character, his teachings and his 
work, not only in Jerusalem and throughout Judea 
and Samaria, but also eventually to the utmost parts 
of the earth. He would have them see that a great 
work was being committed to their care. God would 
attend to all of his promises in due time; now they, 
to be his co-laborers and witnesses, must be attentive 
to the work to which they had consecrated themselves, 
and for which they now were to be thoroughly 
empowered and quickened through the holy spirit. 
With this parting lesson, while he was walking with 
them and talking to them on the Mount of Olives, 
going in the direction of Bethany, he began gradually 



to ascend from them, a cloud receiving him out of 
their sight. 

One error leads to another; and the failure to 
note that our Lord's change of nature from human to 
spiritual took place in his resurrection, and that his 
presence during the forty days was that of a spirit 
being, unseen except when he for a few times very 
briefly appeared to his disciples for the purpose of instructing 
them, and these different appearances in 
different forms, in different kind of clothing, etc.— 
has led some to very peculiar ideas respecting our 
Lord's ascension. Thus we find one Doctor of Divinity 
saying on the subject: "The ascension was a 
noble and fitting close of the earthly career of Jesus; 
far better than to die again, as Lazarus died, or to remain 
always on earth in his body— the only alternatives!" 
Poor man! How tightly error has blindfolded 
the eyes of his understanding, that he should 
think thus. 

From the Scriptural standpoint, that our Lord 
was raised "a quickening spirit," invisible to mankind, 
and that he merely "appeared" in forms of flesh, 
the matter has an entirely different aspect. From this 
standpoint we see that this last appearance of our 
Lord to the disciples, like the other appearances, was 
intended for their instruction, and to help natural 
men, not yet begotten of the holy spirit, to understand 
deep things, which otherwise they could not so 
well have comprehended. Our Lord's ascension was 
simply another way of disappearing. When he appeared 
to them in the upper room, the door being shut, 
and talked to them and convinced them, having finished 
his lesson he "vanished" as suddenly as he had 
"appeared." The body of flesh and its clothing, which, 
by miraculous power, he had organized within the 
room, he could and did disorganize again by a power 
beyond our comprehension— the same power which 
turned the water at Cana into wine; by the same 
power by which angels had frequently appeared as 
men for a purpose,— disappearing when the purpose 
had been accomplished. Indeed, in one of these instances 
narrated in the Scriptures, an angel accomplished 
his disappearance in very much the same 
manner in which our Lord disappeared on this last occasion 
of his ascension.— Judges 13:19-21. 

The propriety of thus terminating his intercourse 
with the disciples is evident: they would have no further 
expectation of his appearing to them again as a 
man, in different forms, after such a farewell: they 
would understand that he was gone from them now as 

R2819 :page 173 

a spirit being, as he had previously said: "It is expedient 
for you that I go away, for if I go not away the 
Comforter will not come." The confusion of the D.D. 



from whom we quote foregoing, is the more manifest 
from the fact that in further writing upon this subject 
he recognized the "two men" of vs. 10 as being 
angels who, for the time being, had assumed human 
form for the purpose of communicating with the disciples, 
and impressing upon them a certain valuable 
lesson. Why could not the gentleman see that our 
Lord, having finished the work which the Father had 
given him to do (viz., the laying down of his life as 
the man Christ Jesus) was no longer a little lower 
than the angels, a fleshly being, but was now 
"changed," and as he was, previous to coming into 
the world, a spirit being of the highest order, so now, 
as the Apostle declares in his resurrection, he was a 
life-giving spirit? (1 Cor. 15:45.) And if the angels 
had power to appear as men, and did so appear, why 
should not their chief and Lord have power so to appear 
to his disciples in various forms, for the purpose 
of convincing them that he was no longer dead, but 
risen,— no longer a man, but "changed"? 

Our Lord's words, "It is expedient for you that 
I go away," lead us to inquire, Why was his ascension 
expedient? Let us consider the matter. Had he remained 
with the disciples, present but invisible, and 
appearing to them and to all of his followers occasionally 
throughout this Gospel age, of what special advantage 
would it have been? What could he do for 
us in this manner that could not as well be done for 
us from his high station in the heavens with the 
Father? And again, had he remained with the Church 
it would have seemed all the more inexplicable that 
he should have permitted his representatives to be 
misused, slandered, abused in various ways, and that 
he should seem to take no part in the management of 
the affairs of the world, while claiming the legal right 
through purchase, by his own blood, to be its prince 
and Savior from the power of sin and Satan. For all 
these reasons it was appropriate that he should not be 
with us, but that we should know that he was with 
the Father, and should wait for him until the time appointed 
of the Father— until all of his faithful disciples 
had been called and proven acceptable, and the 
foreordained number of the elect fulfilled;— and that 
he should then come to receive them to himself, and 
to establish them as his joint-heirs in the Kingdom; 
and to assume the rulership of the world, to bind the 
Adversary, to overthrow his dominion, and to establish 
truth and righteousness on a permanent basis by 
the divine authority and power which he possesses. 

But there was another and all-important reason 
why he should ascend to the Father, and it is that which 
our Lord mentions, "Except I go away the Comforter 
will not come." (John 16:7.) Why not? We answer, 
that the whole world being under divine condemnation, 
none could be recognized by the Father 
and adopted into his family, begotten of the holy 



spirit as his sons, so long as they were sinners. And 

the death of our Lord Jesus, while it was the ransom-price, 

had not as yet affected any of those for whom 

it was intended. Before it could benefit them he must 

ascend to the Father and must present that sacrifice 

or price as on behalf of those to whom it would be applicable: 

that they, being justified by faith and sanctification 

or setting apart to holiness and divine service, 

even unto death, might receive the spirit of adoption 

into the family of God's spiritual sons. 

This was the reason, and it is in full harmony 
with the Apostle John's statement: "The holy spirit 
was not yet given because Jesus was not yet glorified." 
(John 7:30.) He had received his glorious body in 
the resurrection, as the Apostle shows us in 1 Cor. 15:43,44; 
but it remained for him to be glorified 
(honored) after he would appear in the presence of 
the Father and present before him his complete work, 
and officially receive divine approval; then he was 
honored, glorified, with a name that is above every 
name, "that at the name of Jesus every knee should 
bow and every tongue confess, to the glory of God 
the Father."-Phil. 2:10. 

We can imagine the eleven apostles (all Galileans) 
standing looking after the disappearing Master, 
and endeavoring to peer into the cloud that had received 
him from their sight, and endeavoring to 
comprehend the meaning of the various lessons of 
experience through which they had recently passed; 
and their perplexed thoughts respecting the promised 
coming of Christ again, and the interim of loneliness 
which he had promised should be compensated for by 
the promised holy spirit which should comfort them. 
Then appropriately, at the needed moment, under the 
divine providence, two beings stood by them, "men" 
in appearance, but in garments which indicated that 
they had only assumed the form of men for the occasion, 
and which told the apostles that these were 
really angels. These in cheerful tone and impressive 
manner assured them that they need not continue to 
look into the sky, but to remember that he would so 
come again in like manner as they had seen him go. 

How strange that so many of the Lord's people, 
even amongst those who fully believe in, and with 
deep interest long for his second coming, should 
overlook the particular features of this angelic 
testimony! First, that it was the same Jesus that 
should come again— not the former Jesus, whom they 
knew in the flesh, but the same Jesus, who was taken 
up from them, and whom they recognized as so 
thoroughly "changed" from the time of his resurrection 
—the spirit Jesus, "a quickening spirit." This 
is the one promised to come again, not in weakness, 
as "in the days of his flesh," but a spirit being, 
clothed with full plenitude of divine power to establish 
them as his Kingdom, and through them to bless all 



the families of the earth. 
How strange, too, that the other important fact 

R2819 :page 174 

which the angel noted, viz., the "manner," is so often 
overlooked by the same class ! What was the manner 
of our Lord's going? Was it with great ostentation, 
with the sound of a literal trumpet calling the attention 
of the whole world? Was it in a manner known 
to the whole world? Or was the manner of his going 
an extremely quiet one, known only to his most faithful 
followers? His second coming is to be "in like 
manner!" Those who give to the words of the angels 
their true weight and force, laying the emphasis upon 
the right words, will receive a blessing in so doing, 
and be the better prepared to understand the character 
of our Lord's parousia. They will be less surprised 
to know that it fulfils all these conditions; that 
he is now seen only with the eye of faith, and only by 
the most consecrated of his people. It will be after 
his second coming, that he (unknown to the world) 
will reckon with his own servants, his saints, exalting 
the worthy, faithful over a few things, to be rulers 
over many things. (Matt. 25:14-30.) It will be still 
later on that he will restore the Kingdom again to 
Israel— to the worthy ones of that people, through 
whom, as the earthly agents of the spiritual Kingdom, 
the blessing of divine grace and truth shall flow to all 
the families of the earth. And in connection with 
the giving of the Kingdom to the elect the great time 
of trouble will reveal the new ruler to all the families 
of the earth in the fiery judgments upon all iniquity, 
until every eye (of understanding) shall see him— revealed 
as King of kings and Lord of lords. 



R2819 :page 174 

PENTECOST-THE DAY OF JUBILEE. 

-ACTS 2:1-1 l.-MAY 26.- 

"When he, the spirit of truth, is come, he 
will guide you into all truth."— John 16:13. 

PENTECOST signifies fiftieth, and was used 
amongst the Jews as the name of one of 
their most important feasts or religious celebrations. 
As their fiftieth "Jubilee" year followed a cycle of 
seven times seven years, so Pentecost, as a jubilee 
day, followed a cycle of seven times seven days, from 
the time of the gathering of the sheaf of first-fruits, 
which was presented before the Lord as a "wave-offering 
This sheaf of the first-fruits evidently 



typified our Lord in his resurrection on the sixteenth 
of Nisan— he having been slain as the Passover 
Lamb on the fourteenth of Nisan. — 
Lev. 33:5,6,15,16. 

In our last lesson we noted the fact that it was 
the eleven apostles that were witnesses of our Lord's 
ascension, "men of Galilee;" and it was these, who 
were to be his special representatives, and through 
whose word others were to believe, that he instructed 
to tarry at Jerusalem until endued with power from 
on high. The present lesson shows us the same 
eleven apostles in the upper room complying with 
our Lord's injunction, waiting in an attitude of 
prayer and expectancy, and in readiness to begin 
their mission of feeding his sheep and lambs. In 
harmony with this view is the statement, a little later 
on, when the preaching began, that "all these are 
Galileans." And again, "Peter standing up with the 
eleven." (Acts 2:7,14.) We are not positively informed 
that any others were present at this time, but 
from previous statements, to the effect that others (to 
a total of one hundred and twenty) met with the 
apostles, "continuing with one accord in prayer and 
supplication," we may reasonably infer that they 
were present at the time of the pentecostal outpouring 
of the holy spirit, and that the whole company 
was thus baptized, immersed in the holy spirit, which 
filled the place where they were assembled. There is 
no good reason, however, for questioning respecting 
the cloven tongues of fire— that these sat upon any 
but the apostles. The statement is that "It sat upon 
each of them, and they were all filled with the holy 
spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, as the 
spirit gave them utterance." The subsequent statement 
is that all those who spoke, all to whom the 
spirit gave utterance or tongues, were Galileans; but 
whether or not the apostles were thus specially recognized 
at this time, we are assured, not only from 
our Lord's words, but also from his subsequent revelation, 
that the apostles occupied a special place in 

R2820 : page 174 

connection with his Kingdom, his Church, assigned 
to no others.— John 6:70; Rev. 21:14. 

The Pentecostal blessing signified divine acceptance 
of the sin-offering which, finished at Calvary, our 
Lord at this time had presented before the Father. 
The outpouring of the holy spirit upon the consecrated 
believers constituted their begetting of the 
spirit to the new nature, and implied thus, that the 
condemnation upon them as the children of Adam 
and under the Law Covenant was cancelled, and that 
now they were accepted in the Beloved, counted as 
children of God, and if children then heirs of God, 
joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that 



they would suffer with him, that they might also be 
glorified together— Rom. 8:16,17. 

As is implied in our Lord's statement and in his 
promise, this was a new thing. No such outpouring 
of the divine spirit had ever occurred before as respected 
the children of Adam. Indeed, no such 
acceptance and new begetting on God's part was 
possible until first the sin-offering had been made and 
accepted. The only thing corresponding to it was 
the descent of the holy spirit upon our Lord at the 
time of his consecration at baptism in Jordan. He 
there received the holy spirit of adoption in the same 
sense, but "without measure," he being perfect; 
those who received this holy spirit at Pentecost received 
it by measure, that is, in limited degree. 
(John 3:34.) Altho they were all "filled" with the 
spirit, yet, because of weakness and imperfections of 
their organisms, they could only receive limited measures, 
—these differing one from the other according to 
natural temperaments, etc. 

God's holy spirit had indeed been manifested in 
various ways previously, but all of them differed from 
this manifestation. For instance, it was the holy 
power of God which moved upon the waters in connection 
with the world's creation. (Gen. 1:2.) 
Again, as the Apostle Peter declares, "Holy men of 

R2820 : page 175 

old spake and wrote as they were moved by the holy 
spirit"— mechanically. (2 Pet. 1:21.) He further 
explains that what they spake and wrote they did not 
comprehend; because their utterances and writings 
were not for themselves, but for us of the Gospel age. 
We are, therefore, to recognize the fact that the spirit 
dispensation had its beginning in Jesus, when he was 
thirty years of age; but so far as others were concerned 
its beginning was in the sanctified ones at Pentecost, 
as recorded in this lesson. Neither are we to think 
that these Pentecostal outpourings and baptisms require 
a repetition, for the holy spirit thus once poured 
upon the Church was to abide, to continue, with the 
Church, not to be withdrawn and poured out afresh 
repeatedly. Some have concluded that there were 
times when the holy spirit was not in the world at all; 
but this was because they were looking for it in a 
wrong direction or under wrong conditions. At times 
the nominal church of outward professors has been so 
overgrown with the "tare" element that the true 
"wheat" could not so readily be discerned, yet we 
are confident that the Lord never left himself without 
a witness, and that even in the darkest hour of the 
dark ages there were some of God's true people in the 
world; some representatives of the body of Christ; 
some, therefore, possessing the holy spirit; some who 
therefore constituted the salt of the earth and the 



lights of the world, even tho the darkness was great 
around them and its influence so powerful that no 
record of the true Church is to be found, but only the 
records of the apostacy. 

The holy spirit, in harmony with our Lord's 
promise, was sent only to the consecrated class, and 
was to abide in the true Church class, "the body of 
Christ;" and we, and all others who since have come 
into fellowship and union with our Lord, "the head 
of the body which is his Church," have thus come 
into and under the influence of the holy spirit, our 
rightful portion and privilege. By this spirit we 
were begotten to the spiritual nature, and became 
heirs of all the exceeding great and precious promises 
which belong to "the body of Christ." 

It was appropriate that the giving of the holy 
spirit should be with certain outward demonstration 
and manifestation; not merely to impress and convince 
the apostles and the early Church, but also for the 
benefit of those who should subsequently come into 
relationship with the Church. Faith must have a 
ground to rest upon; an assurance that there was at 
the beginning such a direct recognition of the Savior's 
sacrifice and of the divine acceptance of the consecrated 
ones who trusted in him. The rushing wind 
fitly represented this holy spirit; indeed the words 
"spirit" and "wind" are both from the same 
Greek word; a wind is the best illustration of God's 
spirit, because it is powerful, and yet it is invisible. 
The cloven or split tongues "like as of fire" or light, 
was also fit symbols by which to teach the Church 
something respecting the divine power that had come 
upon her. 

As a tongue it represented the influence which 
God would use during this Gospel age as the agency 
of his spirit in accomplishing the work he now 
designs to do; for "it pleased God by the foolishness 
of preaching to save them that believe." (1 Cor. 1:21.) 
This way of preaching is not a foolish way, since it is 
God's way; but it is so different a way of effecting a 
work from what the natural man would have chosen 
that it seems to him to be an unwise way. True, at 
the beginning of this age the tongues, the preaching, 
was supplemented by miraculous "gifts" among the 
Lord's people, but these were not designed to be permanent, 
as the Apostle explains (1 Cor. 13:8); and after the 
apostles who alone had the power to confer these 
gifts had died, the gifts themselves of necessity 
gradually vanished; since which time the preaching 
tongue has been practically the only instrument which 
the Lord has used in connection with his great work 
of calling out and sanctifying the peculiar people to 
be the Bride, the Royal Priesthood, the Body of 
Christ. 

Some have incorrectly identified the fire-likeness 
of these tongues with the prophecy of John the 



Baptist, respecting Christ, saying, "He shall baptize 
you with holy spirit and with fire." (Matt. 3:11,12.) 
John's words were not addressed to the disciples, 
but to the promiscuous company of his hearers, 
some of whom were Israelites indeed, and some, as he 
declared, a generation of vipers. The Pentecostal blessing 
was indeed the fulfilment of a part of John's prediction; 
viz., the baptism of the holy spirit (Acts 1:5); 
but this was not the fulfilment of the latter part of 
John's prophecy respecting the baptism of fire. The 
room wherein the disciples were assembled was not 
filled with fire, and they were not immersed in it, 
either literally or figuratively. The cloven tongues 
which appeared upon their heads were not fire, but 
light, a fitting symbol of the holy spirit, and the 
message of light and truth and blessing which the 
apostles were proclaiming. The baptism of fire, 
which John predicted, came later, not upon the faithful 
of Israel, but upon the class whom John designated, 
a "generation of vipers"— upon the class of 
whom the Apostle Paul says, "Wrath is come upon 
this people to the uttermost." The trouble, the 
destructive trouble, the fiery trouble, in which that 
whole nation was figuratively engulfed and baptized, 
and which ended in A.D. 70, after witnessing the 
destruction of millions of lives, millions of property, 
and the complete overthrow of Israel's national polity, 
was the worthy fulfilment of John's prediction of a 
baptism of fire. 

The fact that the holy spirit upon the apostles 
was accompanied by miraculous manifestations or 
gifts, tongues, etc., does not imply any greater favor 
of God toward the primitive Church, which had those 
gifts, than toward the Lord's people of a later day, 
after those gifts had ceased; for, as the Apostle points 
out, it was possible for some to have those gifts 
without having much of the real spirit of the Lord. 
He says, "Tho I speak with the tongues of men and 
of angels, and have not love, I am become as sounding 
brass or a tinkling cymbal. Tho I have the gift of 
prophecy, and understand all mysteries and all knowledge, 
and tho I have all faith, so that I could remove 
mountains, and have not love, I am nothing." (1 Cor. 13:1,2.) 
We are, therefore, to esteem love for the 
Lord and for the brethren and for the neighbor- 
active love, which does as well as wishes and says— 
to be the best evidence of an acceptable condition 

R2820 : page 176 

with the Lord, the best evidence of a filling with 
his holy spirit— a far better evidence than the possession 
of the "gifts" described. Far greater, far more 
precious gifts of the spirit, then, are the gifts which 
the spirit develops in us— the fruits of the spirit— joy, 
peace, faith, love, etc. 



The news respecting the miraculous manifestation 
of divine power spread rapidly through the city 
of Jerusalem, which, in addition to its general population, 
had at this season of the year visitors from all 
the neighboring countries, speaking various languages 
and dialects. And this furnished the opportunity 
for the Lord's humble disciples, "unlearned 
men," to begin their great work for which now they 
were fully commissioned and empowered. Quite 
possibly by this gift of tongues the Lord made up to 
his disciples the lack of larger education and fitted 
them for the work; at all events, not only on this 
occasion do we find that they were able to discourse 
in all the various languages, but subsequently, when 
traveling in various quarters, we have no mention of 
any difficulty encountered in respect to the languages 
or dialects, tho these were many amongst the different 
classes and nationalities. 

The concourse of the people at Jerusalem attending 
this feast was of a religious kind— the most 
religious Jews from all the surrounding countries and 
nations (where more Jews resided than in Palestine), 
gathered on such occasions to do homage to the Lord, 
to render thanks and to pray for the promised blessings 

R2821 : page 176 

and Kingdom. In addition to this it was the 
custom for many of the most religious to permanently 
remove to Jerusalem in their old age, that they might 
die there; and thus we see that the Lord's arrangements, 
and the human arrangements which his 
providence had favored, all cooperated at this time 
for the favorable presentation of the good tidings that 
Messiah had come, and that he had redeemed Israel 
and the world, according to the prophets and the 
types; that he had ascended to the Father as the great 
High Priest for his people; and that this Pentecostal 
blessing represented the divine favor bestowed 
through him, and open to as many as would really 
receive him and become his followers— disciples. 
When we consider the class of hearers, and the miraculous 
power resting upon the speakers, it need not 
surprise us that so many were converted in so short a 
time— three thousand.— Acts 2:41. 

We are given but a meagre account of the preaching; 
viz., an extract from Peter's discourse; but from 
the number of converts it is evident that all of the 
apostles engaged in the service. A summary of 
their preaching is given in vs. 11, where the hearers 
are represented as saying, "We do hear them speak in 
our tongues the wonderful works of God." These 
wonderful works we have already referred to as relating 
to our Lord's death and resurrection, and his 
commission to his apostles, which they were now 
carrying out. True, it is said that the apostles used 



other words, amongst them, "Save yourselves from 
this untoward generation"— thus intimating the 
condemnation of the Jewish Church and polity, and 
the fire of divine wrath, the trouble, shortly to come 
upon them. 

But the main part of their discourses was not a 
tirade against the Jews, but rather a showing forth of 
the wonderful features of the divine plan; and even in 
the charge against the rulers and the people for the 
great crime they had committed in crucifying Jesus, 
the Apostle puts the matter as kindly as possible, 
saying, "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers." Herein we have a valuable lesson for 
all the followers of Christ who preach in his name 
and who would win souls from the darkness of error 
to harmony with God. The proper, the effective 
preaching, today and then, is that which tells of the 
wonderful works of God in man's redemption, and 
not that which tirades against the nominal church- 
even tho it be necessary occasionally to point out the 
errors of Babylon, as the apostles pointed out the 
errors of Judaism. Our course, like theirs, should be 
one of great moderation and kindness, as well as 
plainness of speech, "speaking the truth in love." 

The harvest work of the present time reminds us 
much of this gathering of the harvest in Israel. Now, 
as then, those who are addressed by the holy spirit 
are the Israelites indeed— "devout men out of every 
nation under heaven." And so prominently is this 
the direction in which the holy spirit is guiding in 
this harvest work that one of the charges against the 
work is, that we are not going after the drunkards 
and harlots and gamblers and thieves and vagabonds, 
but are seeking to feed the Lord's sheep and lambs,— 
seeking to present present truth, meat in due season, 
to the devout of every nation. And such, we believe, 
is the will of God concerning us; and so we advise 
that all of the Lord's people, as they seek to proclaim 
the grace of God, remember the words of the Lord, 
that we are to feed his sheep and his lambs, and not 
spend unnecessary time with the goats and the 
wolves, as soon as we recognize their kind, except it 
be to drive them off or to expose their true character 
to the sheep. 

Our commission is to "preach the Gospel to the 
meek," not to the froward and the vile; to bind up 
the broken-hearted, not to seek to break the hard 
hearts. The Lord has his own plan for dealing with 
the stony hearts in the time of trouble which is near, 
and during the Millennial age, in which the necessary 
force will be used to restrain the evil and to open 
their eyes and ears of understanding. Now our commission 
is to go to those who have an ear. "He that 
hath an ear let him hear." Those who have not the 
ears to hear the message, and who have not the 
hearts to appreciate its beauty, should not be argued 



with or wrangled with, but wisely left as quietly as 
possible in their ignorance and blindness until the 
Lord's due time for scattering the pall of darkness, 
the gross darkness which Satan has brought upon the 
people. We had rather leave in ignorance and under 
the bonds of superstition those who manifest no 
appreciation of the grace of God; for doubtless, if 
their superstitions were loosed in the present time, it 
would be nothing to their advantage; perhaps to the 
disadvantage of others. Let us remember that the 
Gospel message is to gather out the Lord's peculiar 
people, a little flock, and that so far as the world is 
concerned the Gospel is only a "witness" now. 



page 177 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JUNE 1, 1901. No. 11. 
CONTENTS. 



A High Priest of Coming Good 

Things 179 

To Whom was the Ransom Paid? 180 

Paul's Heavenly Vision 182 

Jesus Revealed to John in Vision 187 

Discouragements and 

Encouragements 189 

Bible Markings Commended 191 

Special Wide-Margin Bibles 191 

Public Ministries of the Truth 192 

Items:— About Teachers' Bibles, Etc 178 

page 178 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the $1.00 packages of mottoes now. 

LEATHER BOUND DAWNS will not be ready for some weeks. 

OUR READERS SHOULD KNOW that we publish a number of 
German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian and French tracts; and 
that the WATCH TOWER in German is issued quarterly. Samples 
free. 

WE GIVE GENEROUS CREDITS on our own publications, but on 



no others. We must pay cash to secure the low rates we give 
you, and must ask that cash accompany your orders. 

YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post paid. 

"SILENT SERMONS," delayed, are now in good supply, and 
orders are being filled. 

ABOUT TEACHERS' BIBLES. 



We no longer have Bagster Bible No. 8706. We commend 
instead the Holman edition, which contains not only excellent 
Bible Study helps, but also eighty (80) photo-engravings, illustrating 
Palestine and the Orient in a most truthful manner- 
enabling accurate conceptions. These pictures are well worth 
one dollar. The type is Bourgeois of good size. Price in French 
seal, divinity circuit, $1.35; in Persian morocco, silk sewed, 
$2.35. Postage 25 cents extra. 

However, before deciding about this, or any other Bible, 
see our remarks respecting wide-margin Bibles, under the head 
of "Bible Markings Commended," this issue. 



R2821 : page 179 

A HIGH PRIEST OF COMING GOOD THINGS. 

-HEB. 9:ll-14;24-28.-JUNE 2.- 

Golden Text:— "He ever liveth to make intercession."— Heb. 7:25. 

NO SIGNATURE is attached to the Book of Hebrews, 
nor does the writer of it in any way 
identify himself, except as we see in its style, close 
reasoning, deep penetration and wide knowledge of the 
divine plan, strong evidence that it was written by the 
Apostle Paul. Who but he could have written it? It 
is not addressed to Jews, as if with the intention of 
converting those who did not believe in Christ— but to 
the Hebrews— to those who were the children of 
Abraham according to the flesh, but who had accepted 
Christ* The Apostle would strengthen and establish 
the faith of these (and indirectly of all others who 
would come to a similar knowledge of God's dealings 
with Israel). In this epistle he seeks to show that, so 
far from the new dispensation repudiating the old one, 
it was merely an advance step which was being taken 
because its due time had come. The Jewish system 



was not being repudiated as a divine institution, but 
was being established as such, everything in the new 
dispensation having an analogy to the things in the old 
one, but on a higher plane. 

Thus all the Mosaic arrangements were honored, 
and shown to be of divine institution, good for the time, 
and serving a noble purpose as types and lessons of 
instruction and preparations for the Gospel. The 
time had now come for the establishment of the antitype 
—the antitypical Covenant through the antitypical 
Mediator, sealed with the antitypical blood of the 
Covenant, and to be followed by the antitypical Day of 
Atonement, preceding the antitypical blessing of the 
people and their full and permanent release from sin 
and condemnation. 

In line with the foregoing, the Apostle, in the lesson 
before us, is pointing to Jesus, ascended and in the 
heavens, as the antitype of the earthly high priests 
when they went into the "Most Holy" on the Day of 
Atonement to sprinkle the blood of the atonement upon 
the Mercy Seat. It will be remembered+ that on 
the Day of Atonement the high priest put on his linen 
garments (not his glorious garments) and with the 
blood of the sacrifice went into the Most Holy to present 
it as the ransom price— the atonement. While he 
was within the people had no evidence of divine favor 
resulting from his sacrifice, but waited on their faces in 
the dust, representing the prostrate and helpless condition 
of mankind in degradation, needing and waiting 
for the divine blessing. So, now, our High Priest is in 
the heavens, and we must not look for the blessings of 
restitution until all the work of atonement be accomplished, 
and until all the members of his body shall, 
with their Head, have put on the garments of glory 
and beauty, typifying honor, majesty and authority. 
Then the blessing will quickly follow, from the uplifted 
hands (manifested power), of our great High Priest; 



*Nevertheless, we believe the Book of Hebrews to be a 
presentation of the Gospel specially suitable as a message to 
unbelieving Jews— superior in its influence to anything which 
we or others could present. Accordingly, we are preparing a 
booklet giving this Epistle in the Hebrew-Jargon, familiar to 
Jews of all nationalities, for use among them,— hoping that 
through the assistance of our readers in all lands it may be 
the means under divine providence of blessing and enlightening 
some, and preparing them for the mercy future, mentioned 
by the Apostle in Romans 11:31. We will send a copy of this 
brochure when issued to each WATCH TOWER subscriber, and 
trust that few if any will be wasted;— the stewardship then will 
be yours. 

+See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices— this office. 



R2822 : page 180 

then, indeed, restitution blessings will prevail toward 
the whole creation now groaning and travailing in pain 
together.— Rom. 8:22. 

It is in respect to this coming blessing that the 
Apostle declares our Lord to be a High Priest of coming 
good things— coming blessings— obtained of God 
in a higher tabernacle or temple than the Jewish 
earthly one— a tabernacle, the Holy of Holies of which 
is heaven itself, from which in due time our great 
High Priest comes forth with the promised blessings of 
restitution, etc. 

In order to appreciate this matter we must see that 
not only was the High Priest superior to the high 
priests of the Aaronic order— their antitype— but also 
that the sacrifices which he presents are of a superior 
character— his own blood, his own life: having sacrificed 
it on our behalf he entered into heaven itself, the 
holy place— "having found [procured] lasting ransom-deliverance 
[for those whom he as high priest represented]." 
—Verse 12. 

The Apostle urges that these conclusions are logical 
and reasonable, they recognized the fact that the typical 
sacrifices had served in a measure for purification, 
and made the creatures represented thereby typically 
acceptable with God for a time, and this, which was all 
that the most zealous Jew could claim for the Law, 
being accepted as true, how much greater must be the 
blessing which the greater, the antitypical, High 
Priest would bring, would secure, as the result of his 
better, more precious and wholly acceptable sacrifice. 
Our Lord Jesus offered up himself; the offering took 
place at his consecration, which was symbolized by his 
baptism at Jordan; his dying, his sacrifice, began 
there, tho it was not "finished" until he breathed his 
last at Calvary. His flesh which he offered was "holy, 
harmless, undefiled," an acceptable offering, a full offset 
or ransom-price for father Adam, through whose 
disobedience the condemnation of death came, not only 
upon himself, but also upon all his posterity. The man 
Christ Jesus was begotten again, begotten to the spiritual, 
the divine nature, through the holy spirit which 
there came upon him, and which constituted him the 
Anointed— the Christ, the Messiah. From that moment 
onward this Anointed One, Messiah, the new creature, 
was the anointed high priest, whose business for the 
time was that of offering up himself— offering up or 
sacrificing himself as the man Jesus, even unto death. 
Meanwhile, as a "new creature," he was growing in 
grace and gaining all the experiences necessary to fit 
him for his office as man's High Priest in all things 
pertaining to God. Jesus, from the time of his anointing 
of the holy spirit, was reckoned as having begun 
the new life, as having been begotten of the Spirit to 
be a spirit being (which was perfected in the resurrection, 



when he arose from the dead a quickening spirit) 
—it is to this spirit begotten High Priest that the Apostle 
refers, saying that our Lord (the new creature) offered 
himself (the man) without blemish unto God through, 
or by, the eternal spirit by which he had been begotten. 
—Verse 14. 

TO WHOM WAS THE RANSOM PAID? 



Some have inquired sarcastically, "To whom was 
the ransom paid?" asserting that if paid at all it must 
have been paid to Satan. Our answer to this question 
is found in the Apostle's words in vs. 14 of this lesson; 
—that our Lord Jesus offered himself to God in sacrifice; 
that the ransom price was paid to Justice, that it 
was not Satan who gave the law under which Adam 
was tried, and under which, on his failure, he was condemned 
to death; but as that was God's law and God's 
condemnation, so the ransom price which God provided 
for in Jesus must be paid to God— to divine Justice— 
"that he might be just and yet be the justifier of him 
that believeth in Jesus."— Rom. 3:26. 

The Apostle urges that this clear view of how 
"Jesus died and paid it all," how he bought us with 
his own precious blood, giving the exact sacrifice which 
was necessary, according to the divine law, should 
purge or free our consciences from a sense of guilt, and 
that forever. We should see that if God, who counted 
us justly condemned, has provided now in this sacrifice 
a ransom price acceptable to himself, "He is just to 
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. 
(1 John 1:9.) And since this is a matter 
of faith, our blessing and good conscience toward God, 
and realization of the full reconciliation through the 
precious blood, will be in proportion as we exercise faith 
in this great fact which God has revealed in his Word. 
According to our faith it will be unto us; he who exercises 
the faith may go on realizing his acceptance with 
God; but he who fails to exercise faith will be hindered 
from approaching God, and using the blessed opportunities 
put before us in the Gospel, as truly as those 
who know not of the ransom. 

The Jewish Covenant was one which required 
perfect works, and not merely a perfect heart or will; 
and since, as fallen men, the Israelites could not perform 
perfect works, even their best endeavors must be 
works which could only result in death. Now, however, 
realizing the better sacrifices which Christ had accomplished, 
and realizing that a new order or dispensation 
had come in, based upon a new covenant, of 
which Christ is the Mediator, they were to realize that 
he, having paid the ransom-price for the "sins of the 
whole world," could accept their will, their intentions, 
their righteous endeavors, as fulfilling their Law Covenant, 



and thus they might thereafter enjoy a living 
R2822:page 181 

faith, instead of sorrowing for works that were dead. 

To impress the foregoing lessons, the Apostle, in 
vss. 24-28, contrasts the work of Christ in the true 
tabernacle or "Holies" with the work of the typical 
high priest of the Aaronic order in the typical Tabernacle 
or Temple. Jesus could not have been an earthly 
High Priest, because, according to the Law, the priests 
could only be of the tribe of Levi, whereas our Lord 
sprang from Judah. Thus he could not, and did not 
enter into "holy places" made with hands, the typical; 
but his is a higher priesthood, after the order of Melchisedec, 
as the Apostle elsewhere explains, and the 
Temple in which he offers is the antitypical one, and 
hence it is that in entering the "Holy of Holies" he 
entered heaven itself, there to appear in the actual 
presence of God on our behalf, as the earthly priests 
once every year, on the Day of Atonement, went into 
the typical presence of God, into the typical "Most 
Holy," appearing before the Shekinah glory (representing 
God) over the Mercy Seat. 

For the same reason, the Apostle explains, it is not 
necessary that Christ should repeat his sacrifice every 
year, because his is the antitypical one and prevails 
everlastingly. The typical priests needed to repeat their 
typical offerings "year by year continually," because 
they were merely types, and could never cancel sin, 
but merely, by divine arrangement, covered it for a 
year. The Apostle reasons that if Christ's sacrifice had 
been no better than these it would mean repeated sufferings 
on our behalf, but, on the contrary, all the 
facts agree that his sacrifice was once and forever; because 
it was a complete, a perfect sacrifice, which the 
divine law demanded. This is in direct conflict with 
the teachings of the Church of Rome, which claims 
that our Lord's sacrifice needs to be repeated (in the 
"sacrifice of the Mass") in order to the forgiveness of 
each particular sin for which it is applied; hence the 
claim of Romanism that her priests have power to transmute 
the elements of bread and wine into the actual 
body and actual blood of Christ; to recreate Christ for 
the very purpose of sacrificing him afresh— and this 
sacrilegious, blasphemous misrepresentation of the divine 
arrangement is repeated, not only yearly, but 
daily, in all parts of the world where Romanism has a 
foothold. 

And so far has Protestantism lost sight of the real 
character of Papacy, and the original grounds for protest 
which separated their fathers from Papacy, that 
they are now generally ignorant of this her claim, and 
ready to consider the Mass as merely a symbol of our 
Lord's sacrifice, of the same meaning as their own 
Eucharist or "Communion" service. The coronation 



oath of the British kings was so formulated as, if possible, 
to hinder any but a Protestant from ever coming 
to the throne; hence on this subject the oath declares: 
—"I do believe that in the sacrament of the Lord's 
Supper there is not any transubstantiation; and that 
the invocation or adoration of the Virgin Mary or any 
other saint, and the sacrifice of the Mass, as they are 
now used in the Church of Rome, are superstitious and 
idolatrous." 

The Romanists of Great Britain are complaining 
against this form of oath as being a reflection against 
their religious doctrines; and Protestants have so generally 
lost sight of the real meaning of the Mass that 
they are inclined to agree with the Romanists that the 
oath has become obsolete and might properly be 
changed. Their forefathers evidently knew much more 
about the real meaning of the Papal doctrine respecting 
the Mass, that it is blasphemous and sacrilegious, 
and particularly emphasized in the Scriptures as "the 
desolating abomination." (Dan. 11:31; 12:11.) The 
Scriptural proposition is that our Lord's sacrifice was 
once for all, and that Christ dieth no more, death hath 
no dominion over him (Rom. 6:9), and the Apostle 
in our lesson shows that there could be no need of a 
further atonement sacrifice than that which God has already 
provided. It is able to make perfect and that 
"unto the uttermost" those who would approach to 
God. 

Perhaps no statement of the Scripture is more 
thoroughly misunderstood than the 27th verse of this 
lesson, "And as it is appointed unto men once to die, 
but after this the judgment." It is unreasonable to 
suppose that the Apostle has suddenly dropped the 
topic of his discourse respecting Christ as the antitypical 
High Priest, in contrast with earthly priests, 
and to suppose that here he refers to mankind in general, 
out of all relationship to his subject. Indeed, as 
respects mankind in general, the verse would not be 
true; it is not true that God appointed man to die and 
after that a judgment. On the contrary, Adam, the 
one perfect man, was appointed to life, and it was 
while thus appointed to life that he had his judgment 
or trial; and it was his failure in that trial which 
brought the sentence, death. Death is the penalty, 
and must follow the judgment, not precede it. True, 
the Scriptures teach us that there is to be another judgment 
or trial for all mankind (and that with some, believers, 
this trial has already begun), but it is not because 
matters were so "appointed," but because Christ 
has redeemed us from the original sentence of death, 
paying it once for all. And in the new trial or judgment, 
thus secured, the same principle as in Adam's 
case will hold true again;— the redeemed are appointed 
to life if they will obey the great Law-giver— they are 
not "appointed" to die, and none will die except as 
wilful sinners in the Second Death. The world of mankind, 



R2823 : page 182 

as a result of the redemption, will be awakened 
from the tomb, that they may have their judgment or 
trial (John 5:28,29),— such a judgment or trial must 
precede the Second Death sentence in any event. 

What the Apostle does mean by this statement may 
perhaps be more clearly shown by a paraphrase, as 
follows: We have just seen how the Jewish priests, 
and their service in the earthly holy places, typified 
Christ Jesus and his service in the heavenly holies,— 
now notice that, "As it is appointed unto men[-priests] 
once to die [typically, as represented in the animals 
which they slew, as their representatives] and after this 
the judgment [passing in beyond the second vail into 
the presence of the Shekinah glory, to offer the blood 
of sacrifice and to receive divine judgment in the matter, 
it implied that if everything had been properly 
done by the priest he would live, and be judged worthy 
to be the Priest for the people, and to go forth again as 
the bearer of divine favor,— to bless them, forgiving 
their iniquities and releasing them from all condemnation 
thereunder,— but if anything on his part had been 
improperly done, in a manner unacceptable to the 
Lord, his judgment would have been unfavorable; he 
would have perished, died, in passing under the second 
vail; for this was the law on the subject— Lev. 16:2]." 

This interpretation not only connects with the preceding 
verse, but also with the succeeding one, for the 
Apostle says, "So [in like manner] Christ was once 
offered [died] to bear the sins of many [and we have 
evidence, in the giving of the holy spirit at Pentecost, 
that his sacrifice was acceptable to the Lord, and that 
he liveth, and that divine judgment has been rendered, 
accepting his sacrifice, and therefore favorable to us, 
for whom the sacrifice was made] and unto them that 
look for him shall he appear the second time without 
sin [not as a sin offering, nor as a sacrificing priest, 
but in the glory and majesty of his exalted office, symbolized 
by the robes of glory and beauty, worn by the 
Aaronic high priests] unto salvation [to accomplish for 
mankind the deliverance from sin, death and all the 
concomitants of death, sickness, pain, sorrow]." 

Meantime, throughout the Gospel age, the Lord's 
people by the eye of faith beheld the great High Priest 
as their Mediator, "who ever liveth to make intercession 
for us," while he awaited the Father's time for his coming 
forth a second time to make good his exceeding 
great and precious spiritual promises and blessings upon 
his Church, and to grant the promised restitution 
blessings to the world, foretold "by all the holy prophets 
since the world began." 

But in advance of the actual blessings, by faith, 
all who are his brethren, his disciples, walking in his 
footsteps, seeking to fulfil their sacrifice as he fulfilled 



his, and under his assistance and direction, may realize 
that they are not aliens and strangers and foreigners 
from God, but that they are accepted with the Father 
—not directly but indirectly, "accepted in the Beloved," 
who is our Intercessor, our Mediator, and in 
whom alone we have a standing before the Father and 
may ask or expect any favors.— Eph. 1:6; Rom. 5:1,2. 



R2823 : page 182 

PAUL'S HEAVENLY VISION. 

-ACTS 22:6-16.-JUNE 9.- 

"I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision."— Acts 26:19. 

WHILE waiting at Jerusalem for the Pentecostal 
blessing promised, the eleven apostles 
overlooked the fact that they were not to begin their 
work, nor to consider that they had the proper endowment 
of wisdom or authority from on high for any 
part of it, until they should receive the promised 
blessing. Their selection of Matthias to fill the place 
of Judas, as the twelfth apostle was, therefore, a blunder; 
for altho they cast lots, to give the Lord a choice, 
and the lot fell on one of the two they had decided 
upon, they were in this doing something beyond their 
authority. The Lord had his own choice for the one 
who would take the place of Judas, and this one already 
had been undergoing special training and discipline 
"from his mother's womb."— Gal. 1:15; Acts 9:15; 
Rom. 1:1; 11:13; 1 Cor. 1:1; 9:1. 

The name of the Lord's choice for the twelfth 
apostle was, in the Hebrew language, Saul, and in the 
Greek, Paul. Under divine supervision, and with a 
view to his future work, without, however, interfering 
with his will, the Lord had carefully guided, in respect 
to the birthplace, opportunities, education, etc., 
of this one whom he foresaw to be his chosen vessel 
to bear his message to the Gentiles. He was well-born, 
well educated, inheriting the valuable right of 
a Roman citizen; was of a very religious cast of mind, 
a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee. 

Paul, like others of his countrymen, was zealous 
for the Law, and for the promises made to Israel. He 
was not a wicked man in any sense of the word, but, 
on the contrary, was moral, upright, religious, having a 
religious zeal which led him to persecute Christ and 
his followers as heretics against the Mosaic institutions. 
He himself tells us that he persecuted the 
Church "in all good conscience," and yet he freely 
admits that in his language respecting Christians he 
blasphemed the holy name, and was an injurer of the 
saints and a persecutor. In his religious zeal, he tells 



R2823 : page 183 

us, he was "exceeding mad against" the Christians, 
and "delivered into prisons both men and women."— 
Acts 22:4; 26:11; 1 Tim 1:13; Phil. 3:5,6. 

It was because Paul of Tarsus was not a bad man, 
but a good man, laboring under blindness and misapprehension, 
"an Israelite indeed," fighting the truth 
ignorantly, that our Lord favored him in the miraculous 
manner related in this lesson. Indeed, we may 
suppose that the Lord in some manner favored all 
"Israelites indeed," as we note, for instance, that he 
favored Nathanael, who at first was skeptical respecting 
his Messiahship, but was granted convincing evidence 
because of his sincerity. Similarly we may suppose 
that some of those who were converted by the 
miraculous manifestations of the day of Pentecost 
and shortly afterward (numbering thousands), may 
have been amongst the very ones who, but a few days 
previously, had thought of and perhaps had spoken of 
Jesus as an impostor, and his disciples as shallow-minded 
dupes. The Lord had mercy upon Nathanael, 
and assisted him in one way, while he assisted others, 
at Pentecost, in another way, through manifestation 
of the spirit; and now in a still different manner he 
arrested the attention of Saul, convincing him speedily 
that he was doing the very opposite thing from 
what he intended to do. 

The heart of Paul being in a right attitude,— of 
loyalty toward God, of zeal for God, he merely needed 
to be set right; and we see that immediately the same 
zeal and fervency of spirit which once persecuted the 
Church was enlisted on behalf of the Church;— that 
he gladly forsook all to follow Christ, as soon as he 
recognized his true character. These things being 
true, those who refer to the Apostle Paul's "conversion," 
and who compare it to the conversion of an ordinary 
evil-doer, show that they are laboring under a 
serious misapprehension of the facts. Had Saul of 
Tarsus been a wicked man we could not suppose that 
the Lord would have been interested in him in any 
such manner, nor that any such miraculous means 
would have been used to bring his attention to his 
wrong course of action. 

God's time for dealing with the unbelieving world 
is not in this age— that work is left for the Millennial 
age. He is dealing now only with those who are 
"Israelites indeed," honest at heart; and it is for this 
class, and this class only, that the Lord's providence 
and drawing and convincing power is exercised. In 
other words, God never proposes to change a man's 
will, but where his will is right and his ideas, his 
conceptions of proprieties, are wrong, it is in accord 
with every principle of righteousness for the Lord to 
favor such, and to open the eyes of their understanding: 



and this same rule holds good now, as the Prophet 
has declared: "None of the wicked shall understand- 
but the wise shall understand"— the truly wise. If 
any of the wicked gain a partial knowledge of the 
truth we may be sure that they will lose it, for, as the 
Scriptures again declare, "Light is sown for the righteous: 
truth for the upright in heart." (Psa. 97:1 1.) 
God has abundant provisions for dealing with other 
classes in the future, "in due time"— such as will be 
best suited to their cases. 

Our lesson shows us Saul on his way to Damascus, 
armed with authority for the apprehension of the 
Lord's followers, accompanied by others who seemingly 

R2824 : page 183 

were under his command as a police force. All who 
know anything respecting the exceeding clearness and 
brightness of the noonday sun in Palestine, glaringly 
brilliant, will note the force of the statement respecting 
the great light which suddenly shone upon Saul 
from heaven about noonday. It must have been an 
exceedingly bright light; but apparently it affected 
Saul alone, and not those that were with him, tho 
they saw it and noted its effect upon Paul, who was 
blinded by it, as he fell to the ground. If he were 
afoot this might mean that he immediately prostrated 
himself, as one would be said to fall down before a 
king; if he were on horseback it might mean that he 
dismounted and prostrated himself;— but we do not 
incline to the thought which seems to be the common 
one, that he fell from his horse as in a faint. Rather, 
instead of being stunned or in a faint condition, Saul 
seems to have been fully possessed of his senses, and 
to have realized that he was the subject of a miracle. 
The voice which he heard was one, not of approval, 
as he might have expected, since he was supposedly 
in the divine service, but one of reproof: "Saul, Saul, 
why persecutest thou me?" Paul's clearness of mind 
is manifest in his inquiry, "Who art thou, Lord?" 
He recognized at once that the one who had thus 
power to arrest him in his journey was a lordly one, 
a powerful one, yet he wished to make no mistake, 
he wished to know who it was who thus reproved him, 
that he might benefit the more. The answer must 
have been a surprise to him, almost a shock: "I am 
Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest." 

Our Lord's answer shows us how intimately he 
stands related with all those who are truly his; those 
who touch his saints touch him, for are they not, as 
the Apostle declares, "members in particular of the 
body of Christ?" He is indeed, "the Head of the 
Church, which is his body," and the ascended Head 
feels for and cares for and is interested in even the 
weakest and humblest of those whom he recognizes 
as truly his. If we remember this it will be a great 



help to us in the midst of trials and persecutions— the 
thought that we are "filling up that which is behind 

R2824 : page 184 

of the afflictions of Christ," that "as he was, so are we 
in this world," and that while we are in the flesh, 
Christ is in the flesh, and that this will continue until 
the last members, even the feet members of the body, 
shall have suffered and have entered into glory. Let 
us remember this also, and specially, if at any time 
we are tempted to deal harshly or speak rudely or 
think unkindly of any of the "brethren." Let us 
consider that as we, with all our weaknesses and unwilling 
imperfections, are the Lord's members and 
subjects of his interest and care, so also are all of the 
brethren; and that inasmuch as we do, or do not do, 
to one of the least of his brethren, we do, or do not do, 
to him. If this thought of the intimate relationship 
between the head and the members could be always 
fresh before our minds, how favorable would be the 
influence; how often we would improve the opportunity, 
not only of suffering, as the body of Christ, but 
of suffering with the fellow members, and assisting in 
bearing their burdens. "We ought also to lay down 
our lives for the brethren."— 1 John 3:16; Heb. 2:11; 
Col. 1:24. 

We are told that Paul's companions also saw the 
light, but heard not the voice. Elsewhere it is stated 
that they heard the voice, but saw no man. The statements 
are not to be supposed to be contradictory, but 
can be understood to be harmonious by remembering 
that the expression "hearing the voice" is sometimes 
used in two different ways. We may say to a friend, 
"I did not hear what you said." And again, speaking 
of the same matter, we might say, "I heard a 
voice or sound, but did not distinguish the words." 
The two statements might seem to be contradictory, 
but are really quite in harmony; and so with these 
two records of the Apostle's words. The voice was 
heard by all, but the message by Saul only. 

Paul was an intensely practical man, and as soon 
as he understood who it was that had thus arrested 
him in his course of error he immediately inquired, 
"Lord, what shall I do?" This meant a great deal; 
it meant: I am anxious now to undo what I have been 
heretofore mistakenly doing; I am anxious to be your 
servant; I appeal to you for orders; I am ready to 
obey. "He, trembling and astonished, said, Lord, 
what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts 9:6.) This, the 
language and the attitude of all sincere souls, meant 
full surrender. It meant, I am not more sincere now 
than I was a moment ago, but the eyes of my understanding 
have been opened, tho it has cost me the loss 
of my natural sight. Let me demonstrate, O Lord, 
that my crime against thee was not of heart, but 



merely of misapprehension of head; let me lay down 
my life in thy service. 

And similar seems to be the attitude of the Lord's 
true people today: those who have been blinded for 
years with misconceptions of the divine character and 
plan, and who have blasphemed God's holy name ignorantly, 
in misrepresenting him and his plan; and 
who have persecuted Jesus by opposing his truth, and 
those supporting it— these, when now the eyes of their 
understanding are opened, feel as did Saul, that the 
remainder of life is only too little and too short to show 
forth the praises of him who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light;— of him who had mercy 
upon us, and who graciously shined into our hearts 
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, 
as it shines in the face of Jesus Christ our Lord. 
(2 Cor. 4:4.) Those who do not feel their hearts burn, 
and who feel no desire to pledge themselves to the service 
of the Lord and his truth, have not the spirit of 
the Apostle,— have not the spirit which is best pleasing 
to the Lord and most esteemed amongst those 
who have the mind of the Lord. And if we have this 
spirit or disposition in any measure let us cultivate it, 
by thinking what great things the Lord has done for 
us, and by considering how little we are able to do in 
return to manifest the appreciation which we feel and 
ought to feel. 

The Lord's answer, sending Paul to Damascus, 
and informing him that "there it shall be told thee of 
all things which are appointed for thee to do," shows 
us that Paul was in the divine mind and plan beforehand. 
The Lord knew that he was honest, and one 
who, when the truth would shine into his heart, 
would not be disobedient to the heavenly vision, but 
would be prompt to consecrate his life, his all, in the 
service of the Lord and of the brethren. Verily, 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his." The same 
thought is brought to us in noting the Lord's answer 
to Ananias, when the latter was fearful to go to Saul. 
The Lord said, "Go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel 
unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles and 
kings, and the children of Israel; for I will show him 
how great things he must suffer for my name's sake." 
Such language could not be used by the Lord in connection 
with one whose heart was not already fully 
consecrated to the divine will and service, however 
ignorantly it had been misused. So today we may 
have more hope of some who are outspoken in their 
opposition and enmity to the truth and its servants 
than for some who are its very cold and indifferent 
friends. The former may be truly consecrated, but 
blind, and if so the Lord's due time will come for 
their mental eyes to be open, and then we may be 
sure that they will be amongst his most faithful 
followers. 

The wonderful light which flashed upon his eyes 



destroyed his sight. "Saul arose from the earth, and 

R2824 : page 185 

when his eyes were open he saw no man, but they led 

him by the hand and led him into Damascus, and he 

was three days without sight, neither did he eat or 

drink." We may be sure, however, that during those 

three days he did a great amount of thinking,— endeavoring 

to grasp, so far as possible, the lessons of 

his wonderful experiences. He tells us that he realized 

his experience to be nothing else than his seeing of 

Jesus. We need not suppose that he saw our Lord's 

spiritual body in its wonderful glory, for we are to remember 

the Scriptural statement that our Lord now 

is the express image of the Father's person; and we remember, 

too, that it is declared that no man can see God 

and live; that he dwells in a light no man can approach 

unto. And since our Lord Jesus is his express image 

and likeness, the same thing must now be true of him. 

Saul was but a man, and could not, therefore, have 

seen that which no man could see, and live. What, 

then, did he see? We answer, that he saw a representation 

of Jesus' glory. Since he could not see the fulness 

of that glory and live, he was permitted only to 

see a part of it, and that part destroyed his eyesight. 

This demonstrates to us the truth of the statement 

that the divine glory, if fully revealed to man, would 

cause death. Nevertheless, such an appearance of 

the Lord's glory to Paul made him as really a witness 

of Jesus' resurrection as were the other eleven apostles, 

for neither did they see Jesus, in reality, in his 

glorious spirit person; they saw him as he appeared in 

bodies of flesh, assumed for the very purpose of appearing 

and instructing; Paul saw him partially; that 

is to say, he saw some of the light from his glorious 

presence, sufficient to give him absolute assurance that 

Jesus was no longer, as he had supposed, the dead 

Nazarene, but the resurrected, glorified, heavenly 

Lord, a quickening spirit. 

Let us note how the Lord chose a devout man 
amongst the disciples, when he would send a message 
to Paul, the record being that Ananias was esteemed 
amongst the Jews as a good man; and so we should 
always expect that those whom the Lord would choose 
as his special messengers would be good men, devout 
men, pious men,— not frivolous, not worldly, not immoral. 

R2825 :page 185 

And should we ever find any, claiming to be 

the ministers of the truth, of immoral character, we 

would have good reason to doubt them; or to suppose 

that if the Lord even had used them once, he would 

no longer use such after they had departed from the 

ways of righteousness. Nevertheless, we are to remember 



that we must not judge any hastily upon the 
testimony of the worldly, and especially not according 
to the witness of enemies of the truth, however religious 
those enemies may claim to be, but should remember 
our Lord's word, "They shall say all manner 
of evil against you falsely for my sake." 

Altho the Lord, at the hands of Ananias, performed 
a miracle on the eyes of Saul, so that scales fell from 
them, and he was able to look upon Ananias, nevertheless, 
we have every reason to believe that his eyes 
were never restored to their former strength, and that 
it was for this reason that the Christian brethren 
would have gladly plucked out their own eyes for him 
(Gal. 4:15); for this reason, also, that, altho a learned 
man, he wrote very few of his own epistles, and was 
largely dependent upon his companions, tho himself 
invariably the chief speaker and writer. This was 
the "thorn in the flesh," which the Lord was not 
pleased to remove entirely, and which the Apostle 
learned to rejoice in ultimately, when he came to 
know that through this God's mercy and grace would 
abound toward him the more.— Gal. 6:11; 
2 Cor. 12:7-9. 

And so with us: we might be inclined to think 
that if we had greater talents and abilities, or we were 
relieved of certain weaknesses of the flesh, it would 
be better for us and for the Lord's cause; yet we are 
to remember the Master's words again, that we are to 
"seek first the Kingdom of heaven," and that all 
things needful of an earthly kind will be added to us. 
Our desires and prayers are not to be for the earthly 
things after which the Gentiles seek, but are to be 
chiefly for the spiritual things. We are to remember 
that as respects our earthly interests they have all 
been committed to the Lord, and that he knoweth 
what things we have need of before we ask him, and 
that he has promised to do for us in every matter exceeding 
abundantly better things than we could ask 
or think, as viewed from the standpoint of our spiritual 
and eternal interests. We surely would not want 
temporal blessings which would in any degree hinder 
our attainment to the exceeding great and precious 
promises— the spiritual things which God hath in 
reservation for them that love him. 

Let us note carefully the message God sent to 
Paul through Ananias. "The God of our fathers 
hath chosen thee, that thou shouldst know his will, and 
see that just one, and shouldst hear the voice of his 
mouth." Ah! how few indeed realize the truth of 
the Master's statement, "No man can come to me except 
the Father which sent me draw him." How few 
realize that God, during this present time, is not attempting 
to gather the world into his arms, but merely, 
as the Scriptures abundantly declare, is taking out 
from amongst the people a peculiar people, a little 
flock, to constitute the Bride, the Lamb's wife and 



joint-heir. If all who have heard the voice of Jesus 
speaking to them through his Word, and who, with 
the eye of faith, have seen him, and into whose hearts 
the light of the glory of God, above the brightness of 

R2825 : page 186 

all earthly light, has shined, could but realize how 
great a favor has come upon them, it would indeed be 
a great stimulus to their appreciation of the privileges 
thus put within their grasp. They would see that all 
this signifies that we are called to be coworkers together 
with God, to be fellow-sufferers with Jesus in 
this Gospel age of sacrifice for righteousness' sake, 
and to be fellow-heirs with him in the coming age, in 
which the reign of righteousness shall prevail to the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, and the subjugation 
of Satan and sin. 

This was the thought conveyed to Paul: that the 
meaning of the experience which had come to him 
was, that he had been found of such condition of heart 
as to be worthy to be a witness for God and for Jesus 
respecting the things he had seen and heard. And so 
with each of us; we are not to attempt to tell to others 
things which we have not seen and have not heard 
ourselves; but first of all the eye of appreciation and 
faith must be opened, and the ear of understanding 
unstopped, and then out of that which we ourselves 
hear from the Lord, through his appointed agencies 
and ministers, we are in turn to repeat to others- 
dispensing the divine favor according to our capacity 
for appreciation and for utterance. 

The Lord's declaration to Ananias respecting 
Paul was, "He is a chosen vessel unto me. ..I will 
shew him how great things he must suffer for my 
name's sake." (Acts 9:15,16.) Thus it is with all 
of the Lord's chosen ones, like the Captain of our 
salvation, Jesus, each and all must learn and prove 
their obedience and loyalty to the divine plan by suffering 
in this present time, that they may be thus 
fitted and prepared for the glory, honor and immortality 
of the Kingdom. And to be chosen to suffer 
much implies qualification for the higher glory hereafter. 
Thus it was with our Lord and with the apostles: 
and thus it is written, for our encouragement, 
that the sufferings of this present time work out "for 
us a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of 
glory. "-2 Cor. 4:17. 

Let us also note and apply the words of Ananias, 
"And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be baptized, 
and wash away thy sins, calling upon the name of 
the Lord." There is a directness in this address that 
is worthy of being copied by all who have an influence 
upon others, and who are seeking to bring them along 
in the right way. Urge them to promptness, to full 
and complete obedience, to a full confession of the 



Lord and the truth. If they are not inclined to 

promptly obey after their eyes of faith have seen the 

Lord, and after their ears have heard his voice, they 

will be much less likely to be ready to make a consecration 

after a while, when the world and the flesh 

and the devil will say to them, Do not be an extremist, 

now; be moderate; do not make a full consecration 

of yourself to the Lord. Your neighbors and 

friends will think you beside yourself, and it will interfere 

with your hopes and prospects, and turn your 

friends into enemies. It will cost you too much; go 

slowly. The right course for every one who would 

give instruction is that of Ananias, to favor prompt 

obedience. "The time past of our lives sufficeth us" 

to have misrepresented the Lord, his character and 

his plan to any extent. The remainder of life is far too 

short to show forth the praise of him whom we now 

see to be the glorious one, the author and finisher of 

our faith. 

The baptism of John, which was instituted for 
Jews, was a baptism unto repentance and remission of 
sins— not original sin, but sins against the Jewish 
covenant, and sins against Jesus, the Messiah who 
fulfilled that Covenant. This was John's baptism, 
the one that was appropriate to the Jews; for every 
Jew who was in harmony with his God and with his 
covenant had his original sin covered under the arrangement 
of the Mosaic Law, in the sacrifices which 
took place year by year continually, until the great 
sacrifice came, the antitypical one, which superseded 
all others. Every true Israelite, therefore, who was 
in Moses under the Jewish Law Covenant, by 
virtue of Christ's work in taking the place of Moses, 
and in substituting the New Covenant for the Law 
Covenant, was, so to speak, transferred from the Old 
to the New; from Moses into Christ; and the typical 
covering of original sin became actual in Christ. 
Therefore the Jews were everywhere called upon to 
repent and to be baptized for the remission of their sins 
against their covenant; that thus they might be in full 
accord with the Lord. This baptism for the remission 
of sins, John's baptism, was for the Jews only, and not 
for the Gentiles, who were not under the Mosaic covenant 
nor in Moses (baptized into Moses— 1 Cor. 10:2), 
and hence in the transfer of the Mosaic institution into 
the Christian we were not transferred into Christ. 
Baptism to the Gentiles means an admission into 
Christ— into the body or Church of Christ, as the 
Apostle explains.— Rom. 6:3-5. 

Noting that the Apostle Paul was so faithful 
a follower of the Lord Jesus, and that his enlightenment 
in many respects so clearly illustrates 
our own spiritual enlightenment in this harvest-time, 
let us lay well to heart the Golden Text, the Apostle's 
words, "I was not disobedient unto the heavenly vision." 
Let us, dear brethren and sisters, who have 



seen in the light of this harvest-time the light of the 
Lord's presence (parousia), shining above the brightness 
of all earthly light, giving a light of the knowledge 

R2825 : page 187 

of the glory of God, showing us something of 
the divine character and plan— let us not be disobedient 
unto the heavenly vision, but faithful to our 
privileges and opportunities in letting the light that 
has shined into our hearts and minds so shine out to 
others in our words, and in the living epistles of our 
lives, that men may glorify our Father which is in 
heaven. 



R2826 :page 187 

JESUS REVEALED TO JOHN IN VISION. 

-REV. 1:9-20. -JUNE 16.- 

"Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, 
today and forever."— Heb. 13:8. 

VISIONS are not realities, tho they symbolically 

represent them. This is true, whether the vision 

come, as Daniel describes his, as "visions of my head 

upon my bed," or whether they come in broad daylight, 

as with the transfiguration scene, which our Lord 

declared was a vision. (Matt. 17:9.) The visions 

granted to John, recorded in the Book of Revelation, 

are in no sense and in no part to be understood as realities, 

and this is the significance of John's statement 

in our lesson, "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day" 

—in a trance. 

Altho the words, "on the Lord's day," might not 
unreasonably be understood to signify that John in 
vision was carried down the stream of time to the great 
Millennial Day, the Day of Christ, the Lord's Day, 
nevertheless, we think it reasonable to understand him 
to mean also that he saw this vision on the first day of 
the week. And how appropriate it was that our Lord, 
who arose on the first day of the week, and who most 
frequently manifested his resurrection powers on that 
day, should on the same day reveal himself and certain 
great instructions to the Church through John, honoring 
the same day of the week. It is no wonder, therefore, 
that Christian people from the very earliest times 
have held the first day of the week in special reverence 
as the symbol of the fulfilment of all our hopes, 
whereof God gave us assurance in the resurrection of 
our Lord Jesus on this day. Besides, to confine the 
meaning of the expression to the Millennial Day exclusively, 
would be to ignore the fact that the larger 



proportion of John's vision related not to the Millennial 
Day, but to the intervening time. 

Note the simplicity of the Apostle's introduction 
to this most wonderful book. He did not write the 
title of the book as it appears in our Bibles— "The 
Revelation of St. John the Divine"— that is to say, 
the Revelation of St. John, Doctor of Divinity, Doctor 
of Theology. On the contrary, John claims no credit 
for the revelation; it was not his, but, as he distinctly 
explains, it was from our Lord Jesus Christ,— and to him 
from God the Father. Nor was it even to John in any 
special sense, but, as he again declares, unto God's "servants," 
sent by his "servant John." This simplicity, 
common to all the apostles, commends them to us as 
men of humble minds,— the very kind we should expect 
our Lord to use as special servants and messengers 
to his people. The apostolic simplicity is in striking 
contrast with the pomposity of the majority of those 
who claim to be their pupils and fellow servants, and 
who delight in the titles of "Reverend," "Right Reverend," 
"Very Reverend," "His Holiness," "Doctor 
of Divinity," etc. And in proportion as the spirit of 
the world is quenched by the spirit of Christ— and in 
proportion as the Lord's people are zealous in seeking 
and finding "the old paths" (Jer. 6:16), in that same 
proportion do these human titles which seem so much 
to the world and to Babylon come to appear vain, inappropriate, 
deceitful. 

Instead of adding loud and boastful titles to his 
name, as Reverend, Bishop, Overseer of all the Churches 
in Asia Minor, we find John introducing himself as 
"Your Brother," as the companion of all saints in 
tribulation and in the Kingdom, and in the patient endurance 
of Jesus Christ. He was sharer with Christ, 
as a member of his body in his afflictions, in his endurance, 
and prospectively a joint-heir in his Kingdom, 
and in all this he was the brother of all fellow-disciples, 
sharers of the same sufferings, and prospectively of the 
same glory. It is generally understood that John had 
already been severely persecuted, and that at the time 
of this vision he was in banishment on the little island 
in the Mediterranean Sea called Patmos— a penal island 
where convicts were worked in the quarrying of marble, 
etc. Yet John himself, with remarkable modesty, 
passes over not only his previous service for the truth, 
which had brought him his persecution, but also 
lightly passes over the persecution itself, merely noting 
that he was in the island of Patmos because of his 
fidelity to the word of God and the testimony that 
Jesus was the Christ. 

This simplicity, this absence of boastfulness so 
noticeable in the writings of all the apostles, commends 
them and their words to our attention, and marks them 
as being in the ministry not for the gratification of 
vanity, or seeking earthly rewards of any kind; but 
simply as the servants of God, who delighted to do his 



will, and to tell the good tidings, to the utter ignoring 

of themselves, excepting in so far as mention of themselves 

and their affairs might be necessary and helpful 

to the Church. All of the Lord's followers do well to 

R2826 : page 188 

note this characteristic of the Master, and of those 
whom he specially chose to be his followers and our 
exemplars. In proportion as we attain to the Lord's 
spirit it will similarly manifest itself in our sentiments 
and conduct. 

John's attention was first attracted by the trumpet-like 
voice of Christ from behind him. The fact that 
the location is mentioned at all implies that it has a 
special symbolic meaning. It signifies that the beginning 
of this message was not in John's day, nor 
from some future time, but that the things to be revealed 
had already commenced, and were already to 
some extent in the past;— the voice from behind going 
clear back, as some of the features of the book show, 
to the time of our Lord's earthly ministry. The 
trumpet voice directed that its message should be written 
and sent to the seven churches named. Ancient MSS. 
omit the words, "saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the 
first and the last, and," and also the words, "churches 
which are in Asia." There were seven churches in Asia 
Minor corresponding to those mentioned by name in 
this connection; but while this revelation may have 
been applicable to them in some manner or degree it 
was evidently in but a small measure. Those seven 
churches of Asia Minor we understand were chosen of 
the Lord as symbols representing seven different epochs 
in the history of the one true Church of Christ, from 
Pentecost day until the gathering to the Lord of the 
last grain of wheat in the end of this Gospel harvest. 

Turning to see the one who addressed him John 
beheld seven golden candlesticks (lamp-stands), and 
standing in the midst of these one having the resemblance 
to a son of man— not the Son of man. It is to 
this particular point that the Committee which selected 
this as the International Lesson for this date sought to 
draw attention— the revelation of Jesus to John, it to 
some extent resembling his revelation to Paul, considered 
in our last lesson. In truth, however, there is 
considerable difference, for what John saw in the way 
of light and stars and lamps and brightness was merely 
a mental vision, while that which Paul saw while on 
the way to Damascus was a very literal light, which 
permanently injured his eyes. What John saw in 
vision was not understood by him to be the Lord's 
glorious body, nor even a representation of it, except 
in the sense that it was a symbolical representation. 

For instance, the head, with its white hair, corresponding 
to the Ancient of Days of Daniel's vision 
(Dan. 9:27), is not to teach us that our Lord in glory 



has the form of a man, and hairs that are white, but 

merely suggestive and symbolic of venerableness, of 

knowledge, experience, wisdom. The fiery or electric 

glance of the eyes should similarly be understood symbolically 

to represent penetrating intelligence, and 

ability to see and to know everything pertaining to his 

people, his Church. The mouth, from which proceeded 

the sharp two-edged sword is not to tell us that this is 

the appearance of our Lord in glory, but merely to 

symbolize to us that his words in his Church are to be 

as the sword of the spirit, which the Apostle declares 

to be sharper than any two-edged sword, discerning the 

thoughts and intents of the heart, dividing and classifying 

his people, and separating from his elect every 

impure thing and every unacceptable element. His 

voice, as the sound of many waters, might be understood 

to mean that the Lord could and did speak to his 

Church sometimes as the voice of musical rippling 

waters of the brook, and sometimes as the roaring of 

the sea; or the many waters might be understood as 

signifying peoples, nations and languages, as elsewhere 

explained in this book, and that thus our Lord, present 

with his Church, would speak to her and through her 

by many tongues, in many languages,— the latter view 

seems to us the more reasonable. 

The hand, in which were seven stars, is similarly 
to be understood as a symbolical part of the vision, 
representing the Lord's power in his Church. The stars, 
as he explains (vs. 20; chap. 2:1, 8, 12,18, etc.), are 
the angels or messengers or special servants of the 
Church in each epoch. The intimation is that the Lord 
would recognize in his Church, in each of its seven 
stages or developments, one representative to whom he 
would specially address himself, and through whom he 
would specially instruct the Church, and whom he 
would specially hold or keep as his instrument by his 
own power or hand. This would not necessarily mean 
that one individual of the Church must be used of the 
Lord, even should he become unfit for the service, but 
would imply that one servant would be recognized in 
each epoch. If that servant for any cause or in any 
manner seemed to be an unsuitable one another might 
take his place, and be the star or messenger of the 
Church of that epoch. 

The whole body was covered, hidden from sight, 
with a robe, only the head, the hand and the feet being 
exposed to view, thus agreeing with the explanation 
given us by the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 12:12-31) in 

R2827 :page 188 

which he represents the whole Church as being the 
body of Christ and members in particular, but pointing 
out that some of the members of the Church may 
occupy the position of an eye or an ear or a tongue, 
and others the position of feet. Thus the Lord would 



be present with his people by his spirit dwelling in 
them, using different members of the body to accomplish 
for his body different services. The feet, described as 
like furnace-refined copper would represent those members 
of the body of Christ who serve, in the sense of 
carrying forward, financially and otherwise, the Lord's 
work. Copper is a symbol of humanity,* and this 
copper being furnace-refined would seem to say that 
those who belong to the body of Christ, and whom the 
Lord would use in his service, "the feet" members of 
the body, must, in their contact and dealings with the 
world, be refined, purified, clean— "Be ye clean, that 
bear the vessels of the Lord's house." The feet would 
thus represent the living members of the body, all 
down through this age; and the refining process to each 
and all will be fiery trials. 



*See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 
R2827 : page 189 

Thus understood, the figure of a son of man (a 
human figure) in the midst of the seven candlesticks, 
etc., symbolically represented Christ standing criticising, 
judging, directing, in the midst of his Church, upholding 
his chosen stars or ministers, and represented 
in the various members by his people, is an impressive 
picture or symbol, full of instruction, leading us to expect 
the Lord's guidance in all the affairs of his Church, 
and to realize that things are not happening to her haphazard. 
To so recognize that the Lord's people in 
every part of this age have been "feet" members of the 
body, carrying forward his work, is not to contradict 
our previous application of Isa. 52:7, which merely 
represents the "feet" members of the present time, 
and identifies them as the ones who declare unto Zion, 
"Thy God reigneth"— in this manner distinguishing 
these from their predecessors in the pilgrim 
way. 

Seven, as a symbolic number, represents perfection 
or completeness, and thus the seven candlesticks, 
the seven churches, represent the complete Church, 
and this union of seven as one was most beautifully 
typified in the golden candlestick (lamp-stand) of the 
"*Most Holy" of the Tabernacle and subsequently of 
the Temple. That candlestick or lamp-stand was one, 
but there were seven branches or lights; while in this 
symbolical picture of the Church in Revelation each is 
represented separately, and our Lord's messages are 
directed to the seven churches of the seven epochs 
separately; nevertheless, in reality the Church is all 
one. (1 Cor. 12:12.) The union and the separateness 
are merely as we view the matter from two different 
standpoints. It is the one high priest who cares 



for all the lamps, and the one holy oil that in every stage 
of the Church has given light to all of the consecrated 
class, the "Royal Priesthood," who have access to the 
"Holy *Place" and are seated with Christ in heavenly 
places (conditions).— Eph. 2:6. 

It is not strange that John in vision fell down as 
dead at this glorious symbolical representation of 
Christ. John may be considered as a representative of 
the Lord's consecrated ones, who in his presence feel 
their own deadness. Upon all such he places his hand 
(his power), and to them gives his message, "Fear not, I 
am the first and last, I am he that liveth and was dead, 
and behold I am alive forevermore, and have the keys 
ofhellandofdeath."-Vss. 17,18. 

Not all, but only those who fall as dead before the 
Lord, who recognize their own nothingness, who, in 
the language of this symbolical book, are beheaded, or 
lose their own wills, accepting the will of the Lord instead 
(Rev. 20:4)— these alone are ever able to fully 
receive this message from the Lord appreciatively. 
From these fear is cast out; and they alone may know 
that our Lord was the first-born of all creation, and the 
last; that he was the beginning of Jehovah's work, and 
the end of it, and that all beings and things were made 
by or through him, and that "without him was not one 
thing made that was made." (John 1:3.) These also 
may know, fully appreciate, understand, that the Lord 
now liveth, and in order to appreciate this they must 
understand that he was dead for parts of three days— 
not merely apparently dead, but actually dead— his 
soul poured out unto death, made an offering for sin. 
-Isa. 53:10-12. 

For these also is the wonderful message that this 
Redeemer, now glorified, has all power in respect to 
our race— the keys, the authority, the control, not 
only of hades (the great prison house of death), but 
also the power or control over death in its every degree; 
so that it is his privilege to raise up so many as will obey 
him out of the degradation and imperfection of this dying 
condition, up, up, up, to perfection of life, where death 
will have no power. These may know, also, that the 
time for the exercise of this power by the Redeemer is 
nigh at hand, and that the privilege of deliverance from 
the tomb and from death into the full liberty of the 
sons of God, into abundance of life and freedom from 
the bondage of corruption, will be extended to every 
creature of Adam's race. 

But to others this message is dark and meaningless 
or worse. Misled by error they believe that Jesus was 
not really dead, but fully alive always; mistaught 
that death holds no one, but all are alive in either bliss 
or torment, they see no force, beauty or significance 
in the key and its power; and thinking of hell (hades) 
as a torture chamber, filled with devils and their victims, 
they feel as tho the unlocking of its portals would 
be undesirable. Surely, all of the favored ones may 



say, "Blessed are our eyes for they see, and our ears 
for they hear!" 

John was instructed to write, to make clear, to 
make plain to us and to all of God's people, the things 
already brought to his attention, and other things subsequently 
to be brought to his attention; to the intent 
that all of God's people might be enabled to comprehend 
with all saints the lengths and breadths and 
heights and depths of the love of God, which passeth 
all understanding, and which can only be received 
through revelation from God. And here let us note 
the force of John's expression (vs. 3) to the effect that 
there is a blessing upon those who read this revelation, 
even tho they do not understand, and a special blessing 
upon those who hear and understand the words of 
this prophecy, and keep or conform their lives to the 
things that are written therein. 

*See page 210 A TYPOGRAPHICAL ERROR. 



R2827 : page 189 

DISCOURAGEMENTS AND ENCOURAGEMENTS. 



NONE are so strong as not to need encouragements 

in the present time, when all who would 

be of the "Royal Priesthood" are required to "walk 

by faith, and not by sight." We feel this frequently 

in the WATCH TOWER office, and know from your inquiries 

that all laborers in the Vineyard are on the 

lookout for fruits of their labors. You as well as we 

sometimes wonder that the hundreds of tons of literature 

and other efforts on behalf of the Truth, emanating 

from this office, do not yield larger results. 

Recently, while feeling considerably discouraged 
that the "Volunteer Work" seemed to show small results, 
the Lord lifted the veil a little, and showed us 
that a greater work was in progress under the surface, 

R2827 : page 190 

than we could have surmised. And as this encouraged 
us, we now relate the same for the encouragement 
of our colaborers. First a Presbyterian minister 
called at our office and renewed his WATCH TOWER 
subscription and, expressing himself quite warmly in 
approval said: Go on, Brother Russell, a greater work 
is being done than you can possibly be aware of; I 
know it, because the ministers express themselves 
freely to me. The Truth is taking effect in every direction. 
Be of good courage. 



This did encourage us, especially when we reflected 
that this very minister has never openly confessed 
the truth, so far as we know,— "for fear of the Jews." 
Shortly afterward, when at the Toledo Convention, a 
brother from Indiana encouraged us greatly by relating 
one of his experiences. He said, "I had finished 
distributing the 'Volunteer TOWER' in my town and 
wondered that I saw no fruit of my labors, when one 
day a young man came to my bakery and asked if 
I had not distributed WATCH TOWERS at the Methodist 
Church, and if I could not let him have some more of 
them. I asked what for? He replied that at a recent 
meeting of their Epworth League their new pastor 
brought up the subject of Hell, and made some remarks 
upon it, and then threw it open for discussion. 
Thereupon one after another, some five or six of the 
Leaguers, arose and disavowed their former belief in 
hell,— denying that the Bible taught it and giving 
reasons. The pastor arose in surprise, and inquired 
where they had gotten their ideas, and was told that 
they had read them in ZION'S WATCH TOWER. Others 
who had not received them, then wanted copies of the 
TOWER. Of course I supplied the young man gladly." 

As a further encouragement for you all— as showing 
that the DAWNS and tracts are doing silent work 
—we mention that every now and then we hear from 
some who have been reading the DAWN, and studying 
the Bible with their assistance for years, yet somehow 
had never before written to us for further reading matter, 

R2828 : page 190 

nor to glorify God on behalf of the light they had received 
and were rejoicing in. We give below a letter 
just received which has greatly encouraged us along 
these lines. It shows, also, how the truth can take 
hold of the heart, at as early an age as ten years. It 
should encourage those who have charge of children to 
teach them the truth. The child mind is more logical 
often at ten, than later, when the sophistries of its elders 
confuse it, by teaching that death and destruction are 
synonymous with everlasting life in torment. Assist 
the children to a knowledge of the Lord and the truth, 
and encourage them to right views of life favorable to 
a full consecration to the Lord. The letter follows: 
DEAR SIR:— I would begin with an apology if I 
were not sure you must be used to such letters by this 
time, and perhaps expect them from all deeply interested 
in the truth which you expound. I beg pardon 
beforehand if I am too tedious and diffuse. I will try 
to be as brief as possible. I was a very small child 
(10 years) when your publications were first introduced 
into our family, through the kindness of Mr. 
Henry Weber, of Oakland, who was then my brother's 
Sunday School teacher, and whose name I cannot 
mention without the sincerest gratitude. 



I cannot say what drew my attention to your 
writings, they were never forced upon me in any way, 
but I have been an insatiable reader ever since I learned 
how, and when Food for Thinking Christians came in 
I devoured it with the avidity of a healthy, unspoiled 
appetite. I was then so little that I had never received 
any but the most general religious instruction. 
I do not remember to have read any doctrinal works 
or heard any doctrinal discussions, but since my 
earliest recollections I had been taught, and realized 
as by a natural instinct, that the first object in life is 
to be good and learn the will of God. 

I would like to describe the impression your writings 
made upon me, but it would be egotistical waste of 
space, and perhaps seem overstrained, as I was so 
young. I only want you to know that from childhood 
I have been familiar with your interpretation of the 
Scriptures, and acknowledged it as truth. The TOWER 
has been a regular visitor to our home for so long that 
I think I have seen it in all its different dresses; and 
all the volumes of DAWN I have read and re-read many 
times. Of course, as I grew older, I no longer accepted 
statements implicitly. I am naturally a student 
and I have thought and questioned and investigated 
deeply about these things, but always with the 
result of being more firmly convinced of the correctness 
of the views I criticized. 

In my tenth summer I made a voluntary dedication 
of myself to the Lord. I think it was an intelligent 
offering, certainly I have never since wished to 
recall it. The one object of my life is to make my 
calling and election sure. The only thing that seems 
of real importance to me is my success in this. Yet I 
am often very perplexed to know what is required of 
me, just now. The practice of the Christian graces, 
the necessary transformation of my own character to 
the image of the Son, is clear enough. I can work at 
that daily, with some evidence of success; for tho I am 
continually shocked at the roots of sin and folly I find 
in myself, yet for a long time I have been accustomed 
to look at all things from God's standpoint, approve 
what I think he approves, and condemn where he condemns, 
both in private affairs and in matters of the world. 

So far, then, as the discipline of my own "new 
nature" is concerned, the way is plain, tho toilsome; 
but when I begin to look about me and ask, What 
part can I take in the present harvest work? everything 
is confused and I seem tied hand and foot. I read 
in the TOWER of other workers, but none seem situated 
as I am. 

In my own circle of relatives and friends I have 
tried to be a witness for the truth, tho I am afraid a 
very feeble one. Timidity is a fatal besetment to me, 
and the reluctance to seem to think myself wiser than 
my elders and betters. 

One terribly severe trial I was enabled to undergo 



last spring. I withdrew from the denomination I had 
joined at fourteen. You may wonder why I ever did 
join it; but I was so young and ignorant, I thought 
only of acknowledging my Christianity, and really had 
no realization of binding myself to a particular sect. 
There is no word of the Confirmation service that I 
could wish to retract, but I was determined no longer 
to call myself an Episcopalian, so requested to have 
my name erased from the list of membership. 

The pastor was most kind and considerate. He 
remonstrated, but being convinced that I was acting 

R2827 :page 191 

conscientiously agreed to do as I demanded, and announced 

the withdrawal at the next meeting of the 

congregation. I scarcely know how I went through 

with that ordeal. It seemed at first as impossible 

to make myself so conspicuous and shock so many of 

my family and friends. For, of course, almost every 

body misunderstood. Except from sisters I have no 

sympathy and am quite alone. I know there are people 

in town who take the TOWER, but I do not know 

them. 

Perhaps something may come about to change 
things in this respect. Several times when you have 
been in our city I have seen and heard you, but I 
could not go forward and introduce myself. I do not 
expect any special answer to this letter. I do not know 
what particular advice you could give me. But I 
thought perhaps I had done wrong in remaining entirely 
unknown and aloof, and that I ought to have 
some personal communication with the one to whose 
ministrations I owe so much. 

Yours gratefully and respectfully, 

EDNA MARY HAMMOND,-Maryland. 



R2828 :page 191 

BIBLE MARKINGS COMMENDED. 



THOSE interested in Bible study appreciate everything 

which tends to give them a firmer hold 

upon the sword of the spirit, the Word of God. Such 

frequently wish that they could quickly find the particular 

passages desired; and many have been the devices 

for marginal marking designed to assist in this 

matter. We have a plan to suggest, as follows:— 

USE RED INK for marking all passages which relate 
to the redemptive work, letting the figure 1 represent 
the thought of man's need of redemption, or of 
divine promises thereof. Use figure 2 to represent 



references to Christ's work in our redemption, as our 
sin-offering, etc. Use figure 3 to represent references 
to redemption as an accomplished fact— "ye were 
redeemed." 

USE PURPLE INK for marking all passages relating 
to the Church as the "Royal Priesthood." Let 
figure 1 represent present sacrifices and joys of faith 
in coming glory; let figure 2 represent parables and 
promises of the Kingdom; figure 3, future glories and 
service in the Kingdom. 

USE BLUE INK for marking exhortations of the 
Church to faithfulness, using figure 1 for references 
to graces of the spirit, and figure 2 for zeal in running 
the race set before us, figure 3 for reproofs and the 
"great company." 

USE GREEN INK for representing Millennial blessings. 
Let figure 1 represent the Second Advent of the 
Great Restorer; let figure 2 represent Restitution promises, 
etc., and figure 3 the knowledge, judgments 
and instructions of the Millennium, and the restraint 
of evil then. 

USE BLACK INK for representing Death: figure 1 
for Adamic death, and figure 2 for Second Death. 



The verse, or part of a verse, referred to may be 
indicated by a neat line, like a parenthesis, or a brace 
mark [( AA ], in the appropriate color, followed by 
the proper figure. Follow, this if you please, with 
marks to indicate a treatise on this verse in any of the 
MILLENNIAL DAWN volumes, using A, B, C, D, E, 
F and G respectively, to indicate the seven volumes 
of the series (only five yet ready). Use T to represent 
Tabernacle Shadows, S for What Say the Scriptures 
About Spiritism? and H for What Say the Scriptures 
About Hell? Following the letter indicating the volume, 
put the number of the page. References 
to ZION'S WATCH TOWER can be Z, using two figures 
to represent the year, then a separating stroke followed 
by the page number. 

To illustrate:— 

In the margin alongside Acts 3:20,21 we should place 
a brace line in green ink, then the figures 1, 2; under 
these we would put A89, 149; under that B 173, 211, 
254; under that put C243, D3 1 1, 615; next E24, 
240, 418, 435; on next line Z'97-266. 

BIBLES WITH WIDE MARGINS. 



Realizing that such marking would require a 
wide margin, to do it satisfactorily, we have hesitated 
to mention it, knowing that wide-margin Bibles usually 
sell at from $4.50 upward at wholesale; because few 



are sold, and the expense of special editions, larger 
covers, etc., etc., is considerable. However, we finally 
concluded that we might get a favorable price on a large 
order, of say 2,000 copies. We have secured prices 
that astonish ourselves, and have selected what all 
will conclude is one of the finest editions of the Bible 
ever published. It is known as the "Linear Bible," because 
it shows, side by side, the variations between 
the Common and the Revised Versions. It has a very 
full analytical Concordance of 256 pages, 14 maps, and 
we will have added eighty photo-engravings, illustrating 
Palestine, etc., and a combined index of the Scriptures 
cited in the five volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN; 
another giving Scripture references in the WATCH 
TOWER from January, 1895 to July, 1901; and another 
Topical Index showing Scripture, DAWN and 
WATCH TOWER references under various heads, such 
as Ransom, Restitution, etc., etc.; and additionally 
there will be a margin of one inch blank alongside the 
Scripture text, for the markings above described. 

We can have these superb books made to order so 
as to supply them at the following prices to our subscribers 
only, so as not to conflict with the publisher's 
interests; but we are not restricted as to the number of 
copies you may buy. 

French Seal binding, linen lined, silk sewed, full 
divinity circuit, red under gold edges, etc., $1.50, 
postage 30 cents. 

Persian Levant (morocco) binding, leather lined, 
silk sewed, full divinity circuit, red under gold edges, 
etc., $2.50, postage 30 cents. 

page 191 

We can obtain these special Bibles, at these 
special prices, only by ordering two thousand copies. 
We will do this provided a sufficient number of our 
readers approve the idea and send us word to this 
effect at once— by postal card. Say which grade you 
will want, and when ready due notice will be given 
in the TOWER columns;— probably not before July or 
August. 



page 193 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JUNE 15, 1901. No. 12. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 195 

Presbyterian Creed Revision 195 

Religious Federation and Trusts 196 



What Leading Jews Say About 

Jesus 197 

In the Paradise of God 198 

The New Jerusalem and Glorified 

Temple 199 

God the Creator of all Things 203 

What Self-Styled Bible Evolutionists 

Claim 204 

Public Ministries of the Truth 208 

page 194 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WE HAVE plenty of the $1.00 packages of mottoes now. 

LEATHER BOUND DAWNS will not be ready for some weeks. 

OUR READERS SHOULD KNOW that we publish a number of 
German, Swedish, Dano-Norwegian and French tracts; and 
that the WATCH TOWER in German is issued quarterly. Samples 
free. 

WE GIVE GENEROUS CREDITS on our own publications, but on 
no others. We must pay cash to secure the low rates we give 
you, and must ask that cash accompany your orders. 

YES! THE OFFER of four six-months WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
for $1.00 is still open. When you thus send to your 
friends, write them in explanation and commendation. 

WE HAVE the "Marked New Testament" in good supply 
again. Two copies for 25 cents, post paid. 



"SILENT SERMONS," delayed, are now in good supply, and 
orders are being filled. 

ABOUT TEACHERS' BIBLES. 



We no longer have Bagster Bible No. 8706. We commend 
instead the Holman edition, which contains not only excellent 
Bible Study helps, but also eighty (80) photo-engravings, illustrating 
Palestine and the Orient in a most truthful manner- 
enabling accurate conceptions. These pictures are well worth 
one dollar. The type is Bourgeois of good size. Price in French 
seal, divinity circuit, $1.35; in Persian morocco, silk sewed, 
$2.35. Postage 25 cents extra. 

However, before deciding about this, or any other Bible, 
see our remarks respecting wide-margin Bibles, under the head 
of "Bible Markings Commended," last issue. 



R2830 : page 195 

PRESBYTERIAN CREED REVISION. 



THE General Assembly of the Church of the Presbyterians, 

whose names are written on earth, 

(compare Heb. 12:23), has again been forced to discuss 

its creed in response to the general clamor of its people, 

who want to be told whether or not they still believe 

it; or whether or not they may do just a little thinking 

for themselves. 

When the Assembly convened in Philadelphia, 
Pa., its committee reported:— a majority favoring some 
sort of an amendment or revision, and a minority 
favoring no revision, no change. The Assembly 
sided with the majority, and the discussion pro and 
con showed considerable warmth at times. 

Rev. D. S. Kennedy was the bravest of the brave 
in defending the creed which has so nauseated the 
tender-hearted, and so severely tried their faith's unreason. 
He repudiated the statement that "ministers 
of the gospel and elders in the church do not believe 
the oath of ordination they have taken." He challenged 
any man on the floor to dispute his statement! 
And, strange (?) to say, not one of the Assembly was 
willing to sacrifice himself by admitting himself to be 
a violator of his conscience and of his oath of consecration; 
—by admitting that he neither believed the 
Westminster Confession, nor taught it. 

Judge J. K. Ewing took the same stand against 
all revision, saying:— 

"I protest against changing the Confession for the 
sake of popularity; for as the church goes up in popularity, 



it usually goes down in spirituality. When the 

church flirts with this idea it falls into a ditch. You 

will never convert the world by popularizing the doctrine 

of the church. The Confession in its present 

form is popular enough for me." 

But the majority, without, perhaps, being more 
conscientious, were less brave. If their consciences 
could have a little relief they wanted it. It was at 
this time, after several days of discussion, that Rev. 
Moffat, D.D., brought order out of confusion, and a 
rainbow in the Assembly's clouds by some skilful word-strategy. 
He is reported to have said:— 

"What is this whole matter about? Is it revision? 
There is no revision before this Assembly. I don't 
know what I am, a revisionist, or an anti-revisionist, 
for revision is not before us at all. This majority report 
only asks for more time and authority. Probably 
revision will be before us next year; if it is, then the 
speech Dr. Kennedy made this morning will be right 
in place. How do these men know that a new creed 
will be the outcome of the adoption of the majority 
report? I admire their imagination, but I do not admire 
their exegetical ability. 

"I will guarantee that if there is any heresy in 
the report they bring in next year, the Assembly of 
1902 will burn the whole document. This new creed 
proposed is to sustain the same relation to the Confession 
of Faith that the Shorter Catechism sustains to 
the Larger Catechism. The Westminster divines maintained 
that the Shorter Catechism was better suited to 
the wants of the common people than the larger one, 
then why be afraid to go on with this subject? The 
whole thing is under proper ecclesiastical supervision. 
The presbyteries asked for it. The last Assembly discussed 
it and appointed the committee and they have 
done their work well. I am sorry to see men belittle 
this work. One hundred and fifty presbyteries asked 
for some change. What would be your attitude if that 
number asked for the dismissal of the whole subject? 

"I claim it is not wise for this Assembly to disregard 
the voice of the church in this matter, and we 
should hesitate long before we say to them, Be still. 
Preachers who come to the General Assembly ought 
to practice what they preach. I have sympathy with 
the common people, and they are demanding some 
changes. Theologians can get along with the creed 
as it is; but the common people cannot, and I only 

R2830 : page 196 

want our belief stated so they can understand it, and 

when it is thus stated, and not till then, will all denominations 

say: 'Why, they believe just what we do!' 

"The saddest declaration I have ever heard was: 
'We simply cannot tell the world what we believe.' 
This is not true. Adopt the majority report and we 



will then get a statement of what we believe, and all 
the world will believe it.' 

"Tremendous applause followed the address." 

The dis-ease affecting Presbyterianism, the Assembly 
would have us think a very peculiar one. They 
wish their Christian neighbors and friends to think 
that the Westminster Confession of Faith, framed 
shortly after emergence from the superstitions of the 
"dark ages," is an infallible statement of the truth, 
and therefore unalterable, unchangeable. Neither 
their own nor other hands must shatter their idol. 
Neither will they admit that it has an ugly and a repulsive 
look, and if not broken up and burned should at 
least be veiled from public view. The resolution 
which now comforts and rejoices the Assembly and 
the large and intelligent, but blindly stubborn body 
of Presbyterians, is that their idol shall not be harmed, 
nor covered nor veiled;— it will be merely set back in 
the rear, so as not to be so conspicuous to outsiders 
and new beginners, and it will be represented at the 
front door by a more lovable-looking, a more angelic 
idol. 

In other words, Doctor Moffat tells the world and 
the mass of Presbyterians and the vast majority of the 
Assembly, that the Westminster Confession is so 
"deep" that few but himself can really understand 
and interpret it. He assures them that what appears 
to them to be black is really the purest of white, and 
that men of sufficient ability to demonstrate this to 
the Christian world, have been put upon the committee 
which is to report such a modernized explanation of 
the Westminster Confession. No wonder there was 
applause at such a suggestion;— that the idol need not 
be destroyed nor even maimed. Moreover, it was not 
merely the idol that they cared for, but more especially 
themselves, the priests of that idol; for whatever 
would discredit it, would discredit them. If it were 
proven faulty, fallible, the same would be true of 
them; for had they not sworn themselves and each 
other to the reliability of this idol? And if they now 
were to admit error, falsehood, misrepresentation of 
the divine character and Word and plan, who would 
receive their testimony as infallible hereafter? Would 
there not be great danger that some of the best of the 
"sheep" would cease to follow traditions of men and 
seek instead the voice of the Good Shepherd Jesus 
and his leading into the green pastures and by the 
still waters of his Word? 

Later Dr. Moffat put his thought into the following 
words which were adopted as a part of the Assembly's 
instructions to its committee, which has a 
year in which to fix up the substitute idol and see 
how lovely it can be made, and yet bear some faint 
traces of family likeness to its still to live parent, the 
Westminster Confession, to which it will bear the relationship 
of representative, but not of substitute. The 



resolution follows:— 

"We recommend that this committee be instructed 
to prepare and submit to the next General Assembly 
for such disposition as may be judged to be wise, a 
brief statement of the reformed faith, in untechnical 
terms, the said statement to be prepared with a view 
to its being employed to give information and a better 
understanding of our doctrinal beliefs, and not with 
a view to its becoming a substitute or an alternative 
of our Confession of Faith." 

FAMISHING FOR THE BREAD OF LIFE. 

Some who are awaking are crying out for bread 
—the bread of truth, instead of the stones of error 
offered by the various creeds. The Rev. T. Chalmers 
voiced the sentiments of an increasing number, when, 
not long since, he said:— 

"We cannot resist the inevitable. The creed of 
Calvinism is like a coat which is becoming too small 
for the rapid growth of human thought. With every 
movement of the arms it will be sure to rip somewhere, 
unless we refrain from all vigorous exercise. We do 
not want any coat which binds us so tightly that we 
cannot act with freedom. It is folly to attempt to 
keep pace with the ripping of the coat by a little sewing 
here and there. It is too small, and no amount 
of sewing and patching will help it any. It may have 
a good deal of good material which may be kept and 
still used, but the system of Calvinism, as a system, 
has done its service for humanity. We don't want 
systems any more. We want liberty and truth and 
love and righteousness. We want more of Christ and 
less of creed. We want still to grow— to grow until 
we come into the unity of the faith and of the knowledge 
of the Son of God unto the perfect man, unto the 
fulness of the measure of the stature of Christ." 

RELIGIOUS FEDERATIONS AND TRUSTS. 



Long ago we pointed out that combination would 
be the order of the churches and the world for the new 
century;— that these will be the great giants of the 
end of this age, and make necessary the symbolic 
fire which will destroy present systems, corresponding 
to the giants, whose wisdom and super-ability and 
tyranny preceded the literal destruction of the first 
order of things (kosmos) by a flood of literal waters. 
The financial giants of Christendom are growing rapidly 
—beyond the wildest dream of the world's financiers 
—in every part of Christendom. It must be near 
the time for the religious combines to begin. Indeed, 
the leaders in finance are closely related to, and in 
many instances the real manipulators of, the nominal 



R2831 :page 197 

church machinery. Money moves Christendom to a 
degree that the masses are not aware of. And who 
can doubt that the spirit of federation, or "confederacy" 
as the Scriptures designate it, is growing in all 
directions; and that financial successes will encourage 
religious combines. It is not long since the Disciple 
denomination passed the following resolution:— 

"The national congress of the Disciples of Christ, 
lately held at Lexington, appointed a committee of 
seven to take charge of a movement in behalf of an 
international confederation of religious denominations. 
According to this scheme, the different religious bodies 
are to retain their own creeds, but will be auxiliary to 
an international congress and will affiliate with all 
other churches on a common platform. The ultimate 
aim is to create one international church. This movement 
is the first of its kind in America, and is in line 
with the widespread tendency to church federation and 
church unity, and with the rapidly growing spirit of 
internationalism in literature, social reform, and art." 

Now the Literary Digest has the following to say 
under the caption:— 

WILL BRITISH CONGREGATIONALISTS AND BAPTISTS 
UNITE? 

"The movement toward church union and federation, 
evident of late in nearly every part of Christendom, 
has been particularly noticeable in Great Britain 
during the past year. Closely following the organic 
union of the Free and United Presbyterian churches of 
Scotland and the proposed union of all evangelical 
bodies in that kingdom, has come the first joint assembly 
of the Congregational and Baptist churches of 
England. Both these bodies are strongly Congregational 
in church polity and Calvinistic in theology; 
and there seems to be every reason to believe that 
their corporate union is only a question of a comparatively 
short time. Indeed, Mr. Alfred Dawson, 
English editor of The Congregationalist, speaks of that 
union as a consummation 'sure to take place.' The 
rapprochement which has been going on for a long 
period, this year culminated in two joint sessions of 
these bodies, which Mr. Dawson pronounces 'the most 
wonderful series of religious gatherings' he has ever 
attended. He writes (The Congregationalist, May 1 1): 

'"There were two joint assemblies: on Tuesday, 
April 23, when Dr. Parker presided and Dr. McLaren 
delivered his address as president of the Baptist Union; 
and on the following Thursday, when the positions 
were reversed, Dr. McLaren presiding and Dr. Parker 
delivering his address as chairman of the Congregational 
Union. The experiment was in every way a 



success; perfect harmony and the warmest fraternal 
feeling prevailed throughout, and not one single jar-note 
was struck.... 

'"Reverting to the paramount question of Baptist 
and Congregational union, the committee of the 
latter body frankly remarked in their annual report: 
"Neither of the joint assemblies can meet without the 
idea occurring to many minds that a permanent 
union of Baptists and Congregationalists should not 
be an impossible dream." Certainly many of the leaders 
and rank and file on both sides do not so regard it.'" 

WHAT LEADING JEWS SAY ABOUT JESUS. 



The views of Jewish notables respecting Jesus 
have been secured, and here we give extracts from 
some of them: 

Dr. Isadore Singer, editor of the Jewish Encyclopaedia, 
says: 

"I regard Jesus of Nazareth as a Jew of the 
Jews, one whom all Jewish people are learning to 
love. His teaching has been an immense service to 
the world in bringing Israel's God to the knowledge 
of hundreds of millions of mankind. 

"The great change in Jewish thought concerning 
Jesus of Nazareth I can not better illustrate than by 
this fact: When I was a boy, had my father, who 
was a very pious man, heard the name of Jesus uttered 
from the pulpit of our synagog, he and every other 
man in the congregation would have left the building, 
and the rabbi would have been dismissed at once. Now, 
it is not strange, in many synagogs, to hear sermons 
preached eulogistic of this Jesus, and nobody thinks 
of protesting— in fact, we are all glad to claim Jesus 
as one of our people." 

Dr. Max Nordau, wrote,— 

"Jesus is soul of our soul, as he is flesh of our 
flesh. Who, then, could think of excluding him from 
the people of Israel? St. Peter will remain the only 
Jew who said of the son of David, I know not the 
man.' If the Jews up to the present time have not 
publicly rendered homage to the sublime moral beauty 
of the figure of Jesus, it is because their tormentors 
have always persecuted, tortured, assassinated them 
in his name. The Jews have drawn their conclusions 
from the disciples as to the Master, which was a wrong, 
a wrong pardonable in the eternal victims of the implacable, 
cruel hatred of those who call themselves 
Christians. Every time that a Jew mounted to the 
sources and contemplated Christ alone, without his 
pretended faithful, he cried, with tenderness and admiration: 
'Putting aside the Messianic mission, this 
man is ours. He honors our race and we claim him 
as we claim the Gospels— flowers of Jewish literature, 



and only Jewish.'" 

Prof. Emil G. Hirsch, of Chicago University: 

"The Jews of every shade of religious belief do 
not regard Jesus in the light of Paul's theology. But 
the gospel Jesus, the Jesus who teaches so superbly 
the principles of Jewish ethics, is revered by all the 
liberal expounders of Judaism. His words are studied; 
the New Testament forms a part of Jewish literature. 
Among the great preceptors that have worded the 
truths of which Judaism is the historical guardian, 
none, in our estimation and esteem, takes precedence 
of the rabbi of Nazareth. To impute to us suspicious 
sentiments concerning him does us gross injustice. We 
know him to be among our greatest and purest." 

Dr. Kaufman Kohler, a rabbi of New York City, 
says: 

"He was a bold religious and social reformer, 
eager to regenerate Judaism. True, a large number 
of sayings were attributed to the dead master by his 
disciples which had been current in the schools. Still, 

R2831 :page 198 

the charm of true originality is felt in these utterances 
of his when the great realities of life, when the idea 
of Sabbath, the principle of purity, the value of a 
human soul, of woman, even of the abject sinner, are 
touched upon. None can read these parables and verdicts 
of the Nazarene and not be thrilled with the joy 
of a truth unspelled before. There is wonderful music 
in the voice which stays an angry crowd, saying, 
'Let him that is without sin cast the first stone!'— 
that speaks the words, 'Be like children, and you are 
not far from the kingdom of God!' 

"The Jew of today beholds in Jesus an inspiring 
ideal of matchless beauty. While he lacks the element 
of stern justice expressed so forcibly in the law and 
in the Old Testament characters, the firmness of self-assertion 
so necessary to the full development of manhood, 
all those social qualities which build up the home 
and society, industry and worldly progress, he is the 
unique exponent of the principle of redeeming love. 
His name as helper of the poor, as sympathizing friend 
of the fallen, as brother of every fellow sufferer, as 
lover of man and redeemer of woman, has become the 
inspiration, the symbol, and the watchword for the 
world's greatest achievements in the field of benevolence. 
While continuing the work of the synagog, 
the Christian Church, with the larger means at her 
disposal created those institutions of charity and redeeming 
love that accomplished wondrous things. The 
very sign of the cross has lent a new meaning, a holier 
pathos to suffering, sickness and sin, so as to offer new 
practical solutions for the great problems of evil which 
fill the human heart with new joys of self-sacrificing 
love. 



"All this modern Judaism gladly acknowledges, 
reclaiming Jesus as one of its greatest sons. But it 
denies that one single man, or one church, however 
broad, holds the key to many-sided truth. It waits 
for the time when all life's deepest mysteries will have 
been spelled and to the ideals of sage and saint that of 
the seeker of all that is good, beautiful and true, will 
have been joined; when Jew and Gentile, synagog and 
church, will merge into the church universal, into the 
great city of humanity whose name is 'God is there.'" 

"THEY SHALL LOOK UPON ME WHOM THEY HAVE 
PIERCED AND THEY SHALL MOURN FOR 
HIM."-ZECH 12:10. 

Quite evidently the way is preparing for the fulfilment 
of this Scripture in the near future. If a few 
of the Jewish "common people" are already "looking 
unto Jesus," despite the opposition of their leaders 
and the violent persecution, and generally disinheritance, 
sure to follow the acknowledgement of him, what 
may we not expect soon— when the changed sentiments 
of their leaders begin to be widely understood. 

Let us not forget, however, that every such evidence 
of the return of divine favor to fleshly Israel— 
every evidence that their blindness begins to pass 
away— is an equally sure evidence and proof that the 
Gospel age is closing, and that its mission (the selection 
of spiritual Israel) is nearly accomplished, that 
the time in which we may make our calling and election 
sure is gradually closing.— Rom. 11:25. 



R2832 : page 198 

IN THE PARADISE OF GOD. 

-REV. 21:l-7,22-27.-JUNE 23.- 

"He that overcometh shall inherit all things; 
and I will be his God and he shall be my son." 

PARADISE, the garden of God, was applicable 
as a name to the Garden of Eden, in which 
our first parents resided while they were still in harmony 
with God, before their disobedience; and the 
same term is Scripturally applied as a name to the 
new earth when restitution blessings shall, during 
our Lord's second presence (the Millennium), be 
brought to perfection as the fit abode of those who, 
under divine favor, shall then prove worthy of life 
everlasting. It was to this paradise that the Apostle 
Paul was in vision "caught away" when given a 
glimpse of various features of the divine plan, not 
then due to be understood by the Church in general 



—"things not lawful to be uttered." (2 Cor. 12:4.) 

John the Revelator was similarly caught away in 

vision, and shown some of these wonders of the Paradise 

epoch; but only in symbols, which he was permitted 

to report, and which have been comparatively misapprehended 

until now, in the Lord's due time, the 

holy spirit is guiding his people into the truth on this 

subject, as well as others, because it is now nigh at 

hand, and "meat in due season" for the "household." 

Our Lord refers to this paradise in language 
which identifies it with the first paradise of Eden, 
saying, "To him that overcometh will I give to eat of 
the tree of life which is in the midst of the paradise of 
God." (Rev. 2:7.) It will be remembered that all 
the trees in Eden were trees of life, but that the one 
in the midst of the garden was then a forbidden tree, 
the disobedient eating of which brought death on 
Adam and his race. That tree in the midst of paradise 
was called the tree of knowledge, and our Lord's 
promise is that the overcomers of this present age 
shall have full liberty to partake of that tree of knowledge, 
and under most blessed and satisfactory conditions, 
when the knowledge will be of benefit to them 
under divine approval, and not bring a curse. It is 
this same paradise of the future on this earth that our 
Lord referred to when addressing the penitent thief, 
he said, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee this day, 
Thou shalt be with me in paradise." 

This Paradise, we recall, is elsewhere referred to 

R2832 : page 199 

by the Apostles as "the third heaven"— "a new 
heavens and a new earth." (2 Cor. 12:2; 2 Pet. 3:13.) 
They are not referring to new worlds, nor to heavens 
ranged one above another, as many have supposed, 
but, as already shown,* what is termed the first heavens 
and earth or order of things, passed away at the 
flood; and that the heavens and earth "which are 
now," the present order of things, are reserved of 
God to pass away with a great fire of trouble, revolution, 
etc., which shall utterly destroy them— the present 
spiritual powers and the present earthly or social 
arrangements. "Nevertheless, we according to his 
promise look for new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness." This will be the 
third heavens, and third earth, or the new heavens, 
and new earth, which will differ from the present condition 
of things in that it will be righteous, whereas 
the present is unrighteous, imperfect. The "new 
heavens" will consist of the new spiritual ruling 
powers of the future, Christ and the glorified Church, 
as the present heavens consist of the nominal religious 
systems, which, claiming Christ for their Head, in a 
very large degree bow to Antichrist, the god of this 
world, the prince of this world, "who now worketh 



in [through] the children of disobedience," and who 
is captivating and blinding the whole world with the 
exception of the few, the eyes of whose understanding 
have been opened, who are under special blessing 
and leading, and are taught of God,— the "little 
flock," "heirs of the Kingdom."— Eph. 2:2; 2 Cor. 4:4. 

It is to this new heavens and new earth condition, 
this paradise, that our lesson introduces us. As the 
"new heavens" does not mean a new place of God's 
throne, and a new throne of God, but new conditions, 
and signify the spiritual power and control of Christ 
and his Church in glory, so the "new earth" does not 
mean another planet, but a new social order on this 
planet. The declaration is that the former heavens 
and former earth (which are now) will then have 
passed away and be no more. All present institutions 
are to utterly perish in the great time of trouble with 
which this age is very shortly to end. "And there 
shall be no more sea." As we have already seen, the 
sea is a symbol for the masses of people in a restless 
and unstable anarchistic condition, just as the land 
represents the social order, and as the mountains represent 
the kingdoms of the present time. As there is 
no reference to the physical earth and physical 
heavens being destroyed, so there is no reference to 
the physical sea being obliterated. The symbol signifies 
that under the new arrangement, under the control 
of the new heavens or spiritual powers, the reconstructed 
social order will be so satisfactory, so complete, 
so thorough, that there will be no more 
sea-class, no more restless people, no more dissatisfaction, 
no more anarchists; everything will be reduced 
to law and order; and law and order will under the 
new regime secure justice to every creature, obliterating 
the differences of wealth and power as they now 
exist. 

THE NEW JERUSALEM. 



In the symbolism of Scripture a city represents a 
government; as for instance, symbolic Babylon is 
denominated "that great city [government] which 
ruleth over the kings of the earth." The New Jerusalem, 
as a symbol, represents the new spiritual government 
of the Millennial age. It is not earth-born, 
it is not reared by men, but, as here pictured, it descends 
from God out of heaven— it is spiritual in every 
sense of the word— of God and not of men. It is for 
this kingdom, this government, that our Lord taught 
us to pray, "Thy kingdom come— thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." The declaration 
that the city is adorned as a bride for her husband 
implies its grandeur and beauty and perfection, as a 
bride's adornment on such an occasion is particular 



and elaborate to the last degree. But additionally to 
this it reminds us that in the government of the future, 
the judges of the world are the saints, now being selected 
through faithfulness in trial and tribulation, and 
that these are frequently called the Bride, the Lamb's 
wife and joint-heir in the Kingdom. The Revelator 
elsewhere strikingly bring this thought to our attention: 
the angel calls to him, "Come hither, and I will 
show thee the Bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried 
me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, 
and showed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, 
descending out of heaven from God, having the glory 
of God."— Verses 9-11. 

We are not to think of this holy city as being 
composed of literal stones, coming down through the 
air; we are to remember, on the contrary, that the 
saints of this present time are "living stones," as the 
Apostle Peter explains. (1 Pet. 2:4-7.) This glorious 
city will not be visible to the natural eye— neither 
Christ nor the saints in glory can be seen of men; only 
those "changed" from human to spiritual nature see 
these matters in the full; but the whole world will be 
quickly made aware of the fact that a new government 
has been instituted,— a government of righteousness, 
and with all power, and that thereafter whosoever 
doeth righteousness shall be blessed, and whosoever 
doeth evil shall be punished. 

THE GLORIFIED TEMPLE. 



The third verse of our lesson associates this city 
with the other figure of a symbolic Temple, which the 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., pp. 66-70,318. 

R2832 : page 200 

Lord is now preparing, of which the saints will constitute 

the "living stones" and "pillars;" for it is declared 

that the tabernacle (dwelling) of God shall be 

with men in this city (government or kingdom). God 

will dwell in this glorious city or government— it will 

be his Temple, and the world of mankind will approach 

God in it to receive the divine blessings, as Israel approached 

the typical Tabernacle and the Temple in 

their typical religious services. Thus God, represented 

in his Church (the Christ, Head and body) will dwell 

with men (the world of mankind during the Millennial 

age) and they shall be his people;— all mankind will 

be treated from the standpoint of reconciliation, the 

propitiation price for the sins of the whole world 

(1 John 2:2) having been paid at Calvary, and the 



due time having then come for the manifestation of 
divine favor, all peoples shall be treated as the Lord's 
people; none of them shall be treated as aliens, strangers, 
foreigners from God and his promises and his 
blessings. 

While the Millennial Kingdom will be the Kingdom 
of God's dear Son, it will also be the Kingdom of 
God, because God's dear Son and his joint-heir, the 
Church, will be in absolute accord with the Father, and 
all that shall be done under their control will fully 
and completely represent the divine will respecting 
men. Nevertheless, it will be a separate Kingdom 
from that of the remainder of the universe, as the 
Apostle Paul indicates. (1 Cor. 15:24,25,28.) "He 
must reign until he hath put all enemies under his 
feet.. ..And when all things shall be subdued unto 
him, then shall the Son also be subject to him that did 
put all things under him. ...Then cometh the end, 
when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, 
even the Father,"— at the close of the Millennial 
reign. 

Since God is the Author of all the blessings of redemption 
and restitution, and since every good and 
every perfect gift cometh down from our Father in 
heaven, it is with appropriateness that the record declares 

R2833 : page 200 

that "God shall wipe away all tears from their 
eyes"— from the eyes of mankind. Tho it will be 
Christ and the Church who will be doing it, nevertheless, 
the Heavenly Father will be recognized as the 
first cause, the fountain of every blessing. The wiping 
away of tears implies a gradual work, such as we 
see will be the process of that glorious time. Man 
will not be exempt from every weakness and trial and 
difficulty at the beginning, but if he will conform to 
the laws of the Kingdom, all cause for distress will 
gradually pass away, as restitution blessings will lift 
him out of death into perfect life. "They that hear 
[obey] that prophet [teacher, the Christ, Head and 
body] shall live; but it shall come to pass that whosoever 
will not hear that prophet [not render hearty 
obedience to his requirements] will be cut off from 
amongst the people [in the Second Death]."— 
Acts 3:23. 

Other Scriptures show us that the work of the 
Kingdom will begin with those who remain over at 
the time of its establishment, and that these, under 
condemnation of death, will at once be blessed with 
the knowledge and opportunities provided through the 
ransom, and if they accept these they will immediately 
be released from condemnation, that they may at once 
go on and upward on the way of holiness, toward 
perfection; and subsequently those who "sleep in the 
dust of the earth" shall come forth to more or less of 



shame and lasting contempt, as they begin to realize 
their mental and physical decrepitude, the results of 
their depravity. Nevertheless, these also, under the 
blessings of the Kingdom, may make progress up to 
perfection, losing their sin-blights, and simultaneously 
losing the "shame and contempt,"— whose lasting 
will be only so long as their cause continues. Thus 
these may progress in the way of righteousness, so 
that only those who sin wilfully shall die, and then 
each for his own sins only, and not the father for the 
son's sins, nor the son for the father's sins.— Jer. 31:29,30; 
Dan. 12:2. 

The whole work of the Millennial age is summed 
up in few words, and we are brought to its culmination 
in the declaration, "There shall be no more 
death; neither sorrow nor crying; neither shall there 
be any more pain, for the former things are passed 
away." What a glorious sun-burst of blessing is in 
these words! What a grand fulfilment will be there 
of the Apostle's declaration respecting "times of restitution 
of all things which God hath spoken by the 
mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began!" 
This declaration, however, applies to the very end of 
the Millennial age, and not in full to any previous time 
in that age, for other accounts show us unmistakably 
that there will be imperfections and chastisements 
and stripes throughout the age, while mankind is being 
lifted up; or as our Lord expressed it, the raising 
up of mankind throughout the Millennial age, step by 
step, will be a "resurrection by judgment," chastisements, 
disciplines. (John 5:28,29.) And even at the 
close of that age we are shown, in another pen-picture 
of that time, that there will be a severe trial and testing 
to demonstrate to what extent the enforced obedience 
of that age shall have rightly affected the hearts 
of those who experience its blessings, so that their 
love will be for righteousness, and that they will 
hate iniquity. (Rev. 20:7,8.) All who in that final 
test shall manifest that his heart contains anything 
aside from full loyalty to the Lord and the principles 

R2833 : page 201 

of righteousness will have his part in the Second 
Death. 

"BEHOLD, I MAKE ALL THINGS NEW." 



The fifth verse of our lesson comprehensively 
grasps the entire Millennial age; our Lord Jesus, then 
in the throne of earth's dominion, declaring, "Behold, 
I make all things new." This expression does not 
relate merely to rocks and trees, etc., but to the great 
work which our Lord undertook; viz., the regeneration 



of humanity— of so many of Adam's race as 

would, under favorable conditions of knowledge, experience 

and assistance, develop characters in full accord 

with the divine will. The end of the Millennial 

age will see the work completed;— all the wicked destroyed, 

all who will not hear the voice of that prophet, 

teacher, governor, cut off from amongst the people 

in the Second Death, and all the willing and obedient 

made new, brought to the complete perfection contemplated 

in the original divine plan. 

John was to write this matter, because the testimony 
is true, is faithful, as is the one who has promised. 
This asseveration of faithfulness and truthfulness 
implies what we see to be the case; viz., that 
present conditions seem so contrary to all this grand 
restitution outcome that it cannot be fully believed 
and trusted by any except those who have learned to 
walk with the Lord, and in their weakness to lean 
upon his might,— to trust to his power to accomplish 
all the exceeding great and precious things which he 
has promised. To all others these things will appear 
untrue, and God will appear unfaithful, and the matters 
which we are here discussing will seem "idle 
tales," as fables and golden fancies: but to us who 
believe these promises are precious, and he from 
whom we receive them is precious, correspondingly as 
we know him and trust him.— 1 Pet. 2:7. 

The one enthroned (the Christ) declares at the 
conclusion of the Millennial age, "It is done;" my 
great contract is accomplished; "I am the Alpha and 
the Omega [the A and the Z], the beginning and the 
end." It was the Father's good pleasure that the 
Blessed One, the Only Begotten of the Father, should 
accomplish the entire program of redemption and restitution; 
and that incidentally, by his obedience in the 
things which he suffered that he should prove himself 
worthy to be forever the associate and representative 
of the Father, through whom and by whom all things 
should continue, as he was the one through whom all 
things were made that were made. It is this one who, 
during the Millennial age, will extend to all the willing 
and obedient the water of life, everlasting life — 
the privilege of perpetual existence. But they must 
thirst for it, must desire it; and this desire must be 
manifest in obedience to the terms, the laws, upon 
which it will be supplied freely. Our Lord declared 
to Martha, "I am the resurrection and the life," and 
that anyone believing him, trusting him, tho he were 
dead, yet should he live,— attain to perfect life, escaping 
from death conditions, until at the close of the Millennium 
he shall have life in the full, unrestricted 
sense. And he who thus liveth (attains to life) and 
still believeth, trusteth in the Life-giver, and is obedient 
to his directions, shall never die. 

Our Lord adds, "He that overcometh shall inherit 
these things, and I will be to him a God, and he 



shall be to me a son." Those addressed are not the 
Bride class, selected during the Gospel age, but the 
sheep class of Matt. 25,— such of mankind as during 
the Millennial age become the Lord's sheep and obey 
his voice. To these at the end of the Millennial age, 
in harmony with the Father's plan, he says, "Come, 
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared 
for you from the foundation of the world." They are 
not invited to inherit the Kingdom prepared for us, in 
joint-heirship with the Lord, the heavenly Kingdom. 
But they shall inherit the earth, the purchased possession 
—they shall come back into all the good estate 
of father Adam, which he lost for himself and his 
children through disobedience, but which Jesus redeemed 
with his own precious blood, and will restore 
at the close of the Millennium to all the children of 
Adam who shall have accepted his gracious favors and 
been regenerated by him, and thus become his sons, 
and he their God— their "father."— Isa. 9:6. 

THE HEAVENLY CITY RESPLENDENT. 



Here our lesson turns to a consideration of the 
city, the glorified Church, the kingdom class, who, 
during the Millennial age, will be "kings and priests 
unto God, and reign upon the earth," "a thousand 
years." (Rev. 5:10; 20:4.) This City class, the 
glorified Church, it is declared will have no need of 
the sun or the moon. Nothing in this statement indicates 
that the world will not have and need both 
sunlight and moonlight during the Millennial age, 
and subsequently, "as long as the sun and moon endure." 
(Psa. 72:5.) And while it will be true that 
the Church, as spirit beings, will not have need of literal 
sunlight and literal moonlight, nevertheless, this is 
not the thought. The sun and the moon here are symbolical, 
as in Chapter 12:1; the sun signifies the 
light of this Gospel age; the moon signifies the typically 
reflected light of the Gospel in the Law and the 
prophets of the previous dispensation. The glorified 
Church will have no need of the light which in the 
present time she so much enjoys through the Word 
and spirit, and the Law and the prophets. She will 
have, instead of these, a much more excellent glory, 

R2833 : page 202 

to which the Apostle refers when he says, "Now 
[with all the light, privileges and opportunities which 
we enjoy, both as respects the representations of God 
through the Law and the prophets, and through the 
instructions and leadings of the spirit in the present] 
we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; 
now we know in part; then we shall know even as we 



are known. "— 1 Cor. 13:12. 

The Church, the Temple of God, will be so filled 
with all the fulness of God, when made like unto the 
glorious Lord, that nothing could add to their blessing 
of knowledge and divine favor;— will be so filled with 
the glory of God that from her, as from the Sun of 
Righteousness, shall proceed the light of the glory of 
God, which shall heal and bless the world during the 
Millennial age. This is the Sun of Righteousness to 
which our Lord referred in Matt. 13:43, "Then shall 

R2834 : page 202 

the righteous shine forth as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father"— our Lord Jesus, the Head of the 
Church, of course being included. The same Sun of 
Righteousness is mentioned by the Prophet, saying, 
"The Sun of Righteousness shall arise with healing in 
his beams." (Mai. 4:2.) Nevertheless, while so 
filled with the Lord's glory we are not to lose sight of 
the fact which the Apostle impresses upon us, saying 
that Christ is the Head of the Church, even as the 
Father is the Head of Christ Jesus. Hence the Lord 
Almighty and the Lamb will always be an inner 
Temple in this great Temple, which God has provided 
for the world's blessing during restitution times.— 
Verse 22. 

When this Sun of Righteousness shall shine forth, 
its blessings of healing, refreshment and life, mental, 
moral and physical, upon the world of mankind, the 
nations shall walk in the light of it. (The words 
"of them that are saved" are not in old MSS. Indeed, 
it is because they are not saved that they need 
this special light during the Millennial age, in order 
to their enlightenment, their salvation, their restitution.) 
"And the kings of the earth do bring their 
glory into it." (The words, "and honor" are not 
found in old MSS.) The expressions "nations" and 
"kings" are not to be understood as signifying that 
the world of mankind during the Millennial age will 
be divided into nationalities and kingdoms as at present: 
the word "nations" here signifies peoples, and is 
intended to show that all peoples, and not merely the 
people of Israel, will be thus favored under God's 
Kingdom. The word "kings" represents those princes 
or chief ones of the earth who, during the Millennial 
age, will be the chief representatives of the heavenly, 
spiritual, invisible Kingdom of Christ. These princes, 
as we have already seen, will be Abraham, Isaac, 
Jacob and all the faithful prophets of the previous 
dispensation, who, loving God before the call to the 
Kingdom and to the Bride class, cannot be of it, but 
because of their faithfulness will be the princes whom 
the Lord will establish in all the earth— first making 
them perfect individuals, and qualifying them for 
their office, as a reward for their faithfulness to God 



in the dark times in which they lived— their manifestation 
of love for righteousness and trust in the Omnipotent 
One. 

The bringing of their glory into the city, the 
Kingdom, signifies their acknowledgment of this 
heavenly Kingdom, their rendering of tribute of praise, 
thanks, worship and obedience to it as God's agency. 
And this rendering of glory to the Kingdom will continue 
throughout the entire Millennial age, as the 
princes throughout the earth will make known to the 
people that not in their own names or authority do they 
rule and execute judgment and establish righteousness, 
but in the name and as the ministers and representatives 
of the glorified Christ. The result will be 
that all the people will ascribe honor and praise and 
majesty and glory to the Lord's Anointed, through 
whom their redemption and restitution was and is being 
accomplished; and this is indicated in verse 26. 

Then, in consideration of the fact that this book 
of symbols, while relating to the future, is addressed 
to God's consecrated elect Church in the present time, 
and in view of the fact that this message would be 
communicated to and more or less understood by those 
who would seek to make their calling and election 
sure to a part in the glorious city, the 27th verse is 
added, declaring that "In nowise shall there enter into 
it anything common, or he that doeth abomination 
and falsehood— but only they who are written in the 
Lamb's Book of Life." The Lamb's Book of Life we 
must understand to include those, and only those, who 
attain to position of joint-heirship with Christ, whose 
names are written in heaven during this age, and who are 
faithful to their covenant. What a glorious incentive 
we have here to faithfulness! What a warning against 
the slightest sympathy with anything unclean, untrue, 
or in anywise contrary to the divine standard of holiness! 
If we appreciate the glorious things of the divine 
provision for the Church and for the world, these 
promises and offers will have their influence upon us, 
and under their influence we are expected to keep 
our garments unspotted from the world; to be without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing; to hate every 
contamination of the flesh upon our robe of righteousness; 
and to seek immediately in prayer for the removal 
of any spot or wrinkle or any such thing from 
our wedding garment,— that thus we may abide in 
the Lord's love, and in the due time be "meet for the 
inheritance of the saints in light." 



R2834 : page 203 

GOD THE CREATOR OF ALL THINGS. 
-GEN. 1:26; 2:3. -JULY 1 .- 



"In the beginning God created the 
heavens and the earth."— Gen. 1:1. 

GENESIS, as a word, signifies creation, beginning, 
—the act, process or mode of producing or originating. 
The Bible points out Jehovah God as the 
great first cause of all things. It addresses its counsels 
and promises only to those who recognize their 
Creator with the eyes of their understanding, and declares 
that those who do not recognize this great first 
cause, God, are so degraded, have their intellects so 
perverted, that they are non compos mentis— fools. 
(Psa. 14:1.) It further declares that God will not in 
the present age deal with any who are so depraved; 
but that "He that cometh unto God [acceptably] must 
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them 
that diligently seek him."— Heb. 11:6. 

Amongst those who acknowledge a Creator there 
has come to be a wide difference of opinion respecting 
his Word and his work. Some accept the Bible testimony 
as a divine revelation, relying upon it accordingly. 
Others, with a larger amount of self-confidence, 
deny that the Bible is God-inspired, go to the rocks 
and study them,— forming their conclusions in harmony 
with their findings. Both acknowledge God and 
that his power and wisdom are manifest in his creation, 
yet the latter, leaning more and more to their own understanding 
(Prov. 3:5), tend to question the personality 
of God, and seek, if possible, to prove that there 
are what they term "Laws of Nature" in operation 
now which have been in operation from time immemorial, 
and they query whether or not these laws must 
of necessity have had an author. They see life in its 
various manifestations, and admit intelligence, but 
claim that this intelligence was attained through a 
process of evolution,— attained without a Creator, as 
evolutions from inert matter. In other words, they 
have been seeking for some time to see whether or not 
in their theory a God is absolutely necessary, with a 
view to dropping him entirely from their theories, if 
possible. 

However, the learned, worldly-wise, do not generally 
reach that "fool" condition; for the majority 
admitting that while they could reason out all manner 
of changes as respects conditions, admit that they cannot 
produce a satisfactory theory of the origin of matter, 
nor of the origin of the first spark of life, nor of 
the origin of the first gleam of intelligence. Hence 
scientists as a class still admit that there must be some 
kind of a God, but the Scriptures assure us that, looking 
in the wrong direction, they fail to see the real 
God, fail to discern his real character and plan. "The 
world by wisdom knows not God."— 1 Cor. 1:21. 

While the leaders amongst natural men are searching 
for God and for truth in the rocks and in the 



sands, the children of God, begotten by his spirit, are 

seeking the wisdom that cometh from above, and are 

finding and knowing him whom to know is life eternal. 

Yea, and more than this, the "spirit of a sound mind" 

which they receive, and the guidance of the holy 

spirit, enable them to see "the deep things of God," 

in those things which were written aforetime for their 

admonition— in the holy writings which by divine arrangement 

have been gathered and cemented together, 

and which are known to us as the Bible— the Book of 

all books. In thus doubting their own wisdom and the 

ability of themselves and others to master the deep 

subject of creation and the divine will and plan associated 

with it, these whom the world counts unwise 

are really wise, in that they look to the Lord for their 

instruction respecting these things; they manifest a 

faith which is pleasing to him, and put themselves into 

a position of heart in which they may be "all taught 

of God," and thus know things which the natural man 

cannot know— thus seeing and appreciating things 

which "eye hath not seen, neither hath ear heard, 

neither hath entered into the hearts of [natural] men, 

...but which God hath revealed unto us by 

his spirit; for the spirit searcheth all things, yea, the 

deep things of God."— 1 Cor. 2:9,10. 

"Blind unbelief is sure to err, 

And scan his work in vain; 
God is his own interpreter, 

And he will make it plain." 

R2835 : page 203 

We are not meaning to say that God has given 
great revelations respecting the earth and its creation; 
yet while admitting that the things that are revealed 
to God's people by his spirit pertain chiefly to the 
things that are to come, we hold, nevertheless, that 
in respect to the things that are past, the creation, 
etc., the Word of God is sufficient, that the man of 
God may be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
work.— 2 Tim. 3:17. 

THE ADVERSARY'S OPPORTUNITY. 



The opportunities afforded by this lesson in various 
Sunday Schools and Bible classes of the civilized 
world are sure to be taken advantage of by many 
ministers, superintendents and teachers to introduce 
the unscriptural views which they have for some time 
past been imbibing from various quarters, especially 
from the colleges and seminaries of Christendom, respecting 
what is known as the Evolution Theory of 
Creation. It is the taking theory— the theory which 



commends itself to the natural mind— the theory which 
will seem to best fit all the facts of history in the judgment 
of those who look at the question from the outside, 

R2835 : page 204 

not from the inside;— from the natural standpoint 
and not from the standpoint of the spiritual new creature, 
instructed by the inner light of the "golden candlestick." 
However, we are to remember that the light 
which the priests enjoyed in the "holy places made 
with hands" represented the enlightenment of the holy 
spirit; which is granted during this Gospel age, only 
to the consecrated "royal priesthood." And as this 
light in the "Holy," could not be seen by those outside, 
we must not be surprised that the "natural man 
receiveth not the things [the light, the instruction] 
of the spirit of God, neither can he know them, for 
they are spiritually discerned."— 1 Cor. 2:14. 

For centuries natural men have looked to the 
teachings of the Church, the Bible, for instruction; 
because in the "dark" time practically no other course 
of information was open to them. But now, in the dawn 
of the "morning," when light is becoming more general 
on every subject, the natural man is not only disposed 
to repudiate many of the teachings of priestcraft 
and superstition which he had received as truths, but 
additionally he is disposed to doubt that there is, and 
always has been, a truth-centre to Christianity;— 
around which, we admit, there were heavy incrustations 
of error and darkness which have to a very large 
degree misrepresented the truth to the world in general. 

We are now come to the time when the battle of 
books which has waged during the past half century 
amongst professors and school-men is reaching the 
masses of the people. The leaven of doubt as respects 
the whole Bible, and Genesis in particular, is gradually 
permeating the entire mass of Christendom; and 
its progress will be increasingly rapid because it is already 
accepted by the learned; and the ignorant who 
are now being approached will feel that they can safely 
follow, blindly, these blind guides who are preaching 
"another Gospel," of which the atoning sacrifice of 
Christ is not the centre. 

WHAT SELF-STYLED "BIBLE EVOLUTIONISTS" CLAIM. 



We well know that many Christian people who 
have adopted the Evolution Theory will dispute the 
foregoing statement, because of the source from which 
they have accepted it, and because of the insidious 
form in which they received it, and because they are 
not thoroughly furnished in a knowledge of the Scriptures, 
and because they have not reasoned the matter 



out— have not had their "senses exercised by reason of 

use" on this subject. (Heb. 5:14.) Their argument 

is: "We do not dispute the Scriptures, nor is it necessary 

so to do, in accepting the Evolution Theory. If 

asked to explain their position they would say: We 

still believe in God, a personal intelligent God, and 

have no sympathy with those who attempt to claim or 

to prove that life and intelligence could come spontaneously 

and without a Creator's power; we merely 

hold that our God, as Creator, produced the world gradually, 

and not in six twenty-four-hour days; we claim 

also that the creation of the fish, birds, beasts and man 

were gradual evolutions, but nevertheless under divine 

supervision, and during long periods. We claim that 

the monkey and the ape were not direct creations, but 

sharers in this evolution; and that in due time the 

evolutionary process which God started reached the 

point where a new and higher type of creature was 

evolved from the ape, a type having some degree of 

moral sense, that was man. We Bible-Evolutionists 

claim, that in this first gleam of moral sense was man's 

image or likeness to his Creator; and that during the 

past six thousand years this moral sense has been 

growing, expanding, developing, until by the grace of 

God the race has reached its present high altitudes of 

intelligence,— moral, spiritual, intellectual. 

"We claim further that under divine providence 
the reasonable thing to expect is that this evolutionary 
process will continue throughout ages to come, perhaps 
forever, etc. We do not deny the Bible nor the Lord 
nor the apostles, altho we certainly do give less weight 
to their teachings than we formerly did;— being now 
inclined to believe that Jesus and the disciples either 
withheld some of the truth in their teaching, or else that 
they shared with mankind in general the lower planes 
of thought and less intelligence of their day; that they 
are to be respected for their good intentions and valuable 
service, but not to be regarded as competent to teach 
us who live under the more favored circumstances and 
enlightenment of this twentieth century civilization, 
taught by such lights as Prof. Briggs, Mrs. Eddy, 
Prof. Haupt, Darwin, Huxley, Tyndale, Spencer, et al." 

In the foregoing we have given what we believe 
to be as fair a statement as could be made of the views 
of the great mass of intelligent people, especially of 
the educated class. And what does it mean? To us 
it means infidelity— a total denial of the divine Word 
and plan of God. And we will show why. 

"IF THEY SPEAK NOT ACCORDING TO THIS WORD IT IS 
BECAUSE THERE IS NO LIGHT IN THEM." 



If the above theory be true, the Bible theory must 
be false; but if the Bible be true, the above theory 



must be false. We hold that the Scripture teaching 
as a whole is in violent conflict with the foregoing in 
nearly every point. The Genesis account of man's 
creation, in the image and likeness of God, is quite 
distinctly different from its account of the creation of 
the lower animals, and must necessarily mean something 
much higher than evolutionists admit;— it declares 
a direct creation. The words "image" and "likeness" 

R2835 : page 205 

signify a great deal more than a mere first glimmer 

of moral sense. To us these words signify a likeness 

of mental conception, a harmony of sentiment— 

that man was, in the flesh, a copy of his Creator, who 

is a spirit— that he was not a brute with a mere glimmer 

of intelligence. Nor could we imagine how such 

a being but one remove from the brute could be justly 

placed on trial for life, eternal life, so that by one act 

of disobedience he could be justly sentenced to death; 

nor could we see how such a being could with any 

propriety be said to fall, without losing the little spark 

of intelligence possessed, and becoming again a mere 

brute. The fact that the fallen man was possessed of 

such character and qualities as possessed by various of 

the patriarchs before as well as after the flood, as described 

in this very book of Genesis, proves conclusively 

either that the monkeyman and his posterity 

fell upward at a very rapid rate indeed, and not in any 

sense of the word downward and into sin and death, 

or else it disproves totally the Evolution Theory, on 

this subject. 

On the contrary, all the Scriptures declare that man is 
fallen; that he has forfeited his Creator's favor and 
blessing, and the original grant of life everlasting; and 
teach us that this "condemnation" upon the first man 
and his posterity has been inflicted ever since; and that 
the "wrath of God" as manifested in the sentence of 
death has been upon the race as a "curse;" and that 
the only means of removing this "curse" or sentence, 
and recovering the lost man to the original position of 
harmony with God and to the right to eternal life, was 
through the redemption in Christ Jesus. The message 
of Jesus and the apostles was along this line; viz., that 
the promise of God that the race should be succored 
from its fallen condition by a Savior and a great one, 
able to save unto the uttermost— able to recover out 
of the horrible pit and out of the miry clay of sin and 
death, and that he made this recovery possible by 
giving the ransom price, his own sacrifice, and that as 
a result of the sacrifice he was to be the great King 
who, during a future age, the Millennium, would exercise 
divine power and authority, binding Satan and 
all the evil influences at present operating upon mankind 
and holding it in subjection to the curse of sin 
and death, would be removed, hindered, while the 



great King Immanuel should lift up and bless the race 
under restitution processes, bringing all the then willing 
back to the Paradise lost, and to all the favors that 
were lost,— even fellowship with God, the divine likeness 
and the everlasting life. 

These two theories are so antagonistic that there 
cannot possibly be any sympathy or cooperation between 
them. If one is true the other is false, and for 
our part we say, Let God be true, tho it prove every 
professed scientist a liar! (Rom. 3:4.) This Evolution 
Theory of science comes properly under the criticism 
of the Apostle when he speaks of "science falsely 
so-called," which contradicts the divine Word, and sets 

R2836 : page 205 

it at naught, preferring the traditions of men and the 
light of human intelligence rather than the light of 
divine revelation. Yet, as above stated, we must not be 
surprised at this great trial and testing of faith, which is 
to prove all them that dwell upon the face of the whole 
earth. (Rev. 3:10.) We must not be surprised at the 
stumbling of those who have failed to use the opportunity 
granted, of coming into a condition of heart-consecration 
to the Lord, and begetting of his spirit, 
and entrance into the "holy place,"— into the light of 
the golden candlestick: we must not be surprised if 
these now reject and repudiate the true light which 
they see not. Indeed, to our understanding we are in 
the very testing time which is to prove the saints, and 
ultimately to reprove the world and bring to naught 
its wisdom. 

Let us not be misunderstood: We agree that the 
Scriptures do not teach that the earth and all its creatures 
were created in six twenty-four hour days. There 
is nothing said in Genesis respecting the length of 
these periods called "days," but we have clearly set before 
us the fact that the term "day" is properly applied 
in Scripture to various periods. (Luke 1:80; John 8:56; 
Phil. 2:16.) Our Golden Text, rightly understood, 
indicates that the work of the six days mentioned in 
Genesis was a work of ordering and filling the earth, 
rather than a work of creating; for it plainly declares 
that the creation of the earth was "in the beginning"— 
that it "was" before the matters and affairs described 
subsequently, but in a chaotic condition. In harmony 
with this again is the statement, "Now the earth was 
without form and void." (Verse 2.) This was before 
the six creative days began, whatever their length; 
they merely set the earth in order and supplied it with 
living creatures. 

Neither do we insist that anything in the narrative 
necessarily involves the thought that the creation 
of the lower animals, fish, fowl and beasts, was in the 
same manner as the creation of man; rather, since 
their creation is merely mentioned in a general way, 



the inference might be drawn that God used certain 
(possibly evolutionary) processes in their development 
up to the point where they reached fixity of class, nature, 
genera. But we do insist that the Scriptures 
specifically mention man as a direct creation of God, 
and not as an evolution. We insist that this particularity 
of statement respecting man's creation is not 
without significance, and that the special preparation 
for his reception in a Paradise of God was in full accord 
with his high rank as an earthly human son of 

R2836 : page 206 

the Highest, an image and likeness of his heavenly 
Creator. We do insist that the story of the fall as 
told in Genesis and throughout the prophets and 
psalms, and as particularly enunciated in the New 
Testament, must be held to implicitly by those who 
hold to the Word of God at all. We must insist that 
unless there was a fall, Christ died in vain, for if the 
Evolution Theory be true then there were no sinners 
to be redeemed and restored.— Acts 3:19-23. 

We stand, on the contrary, with those who have, 
by the grace of God, attained a knowledge of God's 
Word, and who see in it Christ the Savior of mankind, 
and his cross the centre, the fulcrum upon which the 
entire work of salvation moves, by which alone the 
race can be lifted out of its present degraded condition, 
and brought back through divine processes of redemption 
and restitution to the glorious condition of God-likeness 
in a new Paradise of God, a new heavens and 
a new earth, from which sin shall eventually be blotted 
out, and in which righteousness shall prevail. 
These Scriptural presentations are the best possible 
answer to the doubts and queries of the scientists. 
But these clear views of the divine plan can be had 
only by those whose eyes of understanding have been 
opened, and into whose hearts the light of the knowledge 
of the glory of God shining in the face of Jesus 
Christ our Lord has shined. As respects all others, 
moral and immoral, good and bad, we must surely expect 
that they will fall away in this time of sifting. 
"Who shall be able to stand?" Only those who have 
availed themselves of the mercy of God and who have 
come into covenant relationship with him;— and they 
only as they maintain the spirit of their consecration, 
and grow in grace, knowledge and love toward God 
and men. 

"MALE AND FEMALE CREATED HE THEM." 



Our lesson specially deals with the creation of 
man. Verse 26 tells us of the purpose of God in advance, 
and we would render it, "Let us make mankind 



in our image, and after our likeness let them have 
dominion over the fish of the sea," etc., making the 
word "image" to apply to the character-likeness of 
God, in which man was created, and the word "likeness" 
to refer to the dominion;— that mankind should 
have dominion over the creatures of earth, even as 
God has dominion over all things. In a word, man 
was intended to be the king of the earth, the lord of 
the earth; and it was to this end that he was crowned 
with the glory and honor and majesty of the divine 
image,— in the moral and intellectual features of his 
being, a flesh image of his invisible spirit Creator. It 
is to this high exaltation of man, as God's representative 
in the earth, that the Prophet speaks, saying, 
"What is man that thou art mindful of him, or the 
son of man, that thou visitest him? Thou madest him 
a little lower than the angels; thou crownedst him with 
glory and honor, and didst set him over the works of 
thy hands." (Psa. 8:4-8.) So far from being only a 
little removed above the beast, this scripture declares 
that man was created in the very highest position of 
earthly creatures, but a little removed in intelligence, 
etc., from the angelic hosts. What we shall subsequently 
see respecting the fall of man from this grand 
position and the necessity of his redemption before he 
could be restored to it, is in perfect accord with the 
declarations respecting the glory and honor of the 
image in which he was created. 

Verse 27 declares that that which God purposed 
was accomplished, and that this glory and honor in its 
full, complete sense, was not represented by one of the 
sexes alone, but by them both unitedly. This holy, 
happy pair had the blessing, the favor of God, and, 
contrary to the views of many, their fruitfulness was 
not the result of sin and the fall, but, as here distinctly 
declared, was in the intention of the Almighty respecting 
them before their disobedience and condemnation 
to death. The fact that God said to them, "Be fruitful 
and multiply, and fill the earth," contradicts the 
unscriptural thought that the propagation of children 
was in any sense or degree a transgression, or the transgression 
on account of which the "curse" came upon 
our first parents, and upon all through them. The 
Lord's people are not to be wise above what is written, 
nor to permit idle speculations to twist and warp their 
minds; but, on the contrary, are to rightly divide the 
word of truth. 

The word "replenish" in our common version, is 
manifestly incorrect, as the word implies that the earth 
had once been filled, and was now, for some reason, 
empty and to be replenished or refilled. A more correct 
rendering would be, "Fill the earth." It is in 
harmony with this original instruction, we understand, 
that when the earth has been filled with a population, 
the procreative powers will be eliminated, and eventually 
the race be composed of perfect units, such as 



Adam was originally, before being divided into two 
persons for the purpose of companionship, procreation, 
and the preservation of the race as one, and under one 
headship. As we have already shown, it is our thought 
that in that perfecting or unifying process every male 
being will take on the elements and qualities of the 
mind and of the heart now peculiarly emphasized in 
the female; and every female will take on those elements 
of mind and heart now peculiarly manifest in 
the male; and yet we should here guard ourselves lest 
we should think of either the coarseness or the frailties 
of the fallen race (male and female) being in any 

R2836 : page 207 

sense of the word a part or feature of the perfect 
earthly creatures of the future. We should also bear 
in mind that the Church, now being selected from the 
world, will have no part in this restitution process, 
but will become, as the Scriptures declare, members 
of a new creation, a new order of beings— spiritual— 
not only superhuman, but also "far above angels, 
principalities and powers." 

The vegetarian idea respecting what would constitute 
the proper food for the perfect man is clearly 
set forth in verse 29, the Lord declaring that he had 
given his creatures the herbage and fruitage of the 
earth for their meat— their food. It was not until 
after the flood, and the peculiar changes of conditions 
resulting therefrom (which we cannot here take time 
and space to discuss) that the Lord specially sanctioned 
the eating of animal food. (Gen. 9:1-4.) We understand 
the reason to have been that the conditions 
were so changed as not only to shorten human longevity 
but to greatly impair human strength, making 
necessary the nerve strength obtainable from animal 
food. Since animal food was thus sanctioned by the 
Lord it behooves the Lord's people not to become erratic 
and dictatorial upon this question of vegetarianism, 
nor to condemn those who find, or think they find, that 
animal food is necessary to the maintenance of their 
physical strength: on the other hand, let them remember 
that whatever was originally intended, and 
whatever may be the order of things in the Millennial 
age, there is no Scriptural sanction for condemning 
the eating of animal food in the present time. Whoever, 
therefore, advocates it, let him take heed that 
he does not make another gospel of it, and permit time 
and thought and voice and energy to be thus estranged 
from the service of the gospel truths committed to us 

R2837 : page 207 

by our Lord; let such, on the contrary, remember that 
our Lord ate meat and fish, both before and after his 
crucifixion, and that the apostles ate meat, and that 



in no sense of the word was the eating of it condemned 
or evil spoken of; and that none of the Lord's people 
today have any higher authorities or examples than 
these. And let those who eat meat not mock those 
who eat "vegetable only," believing this course to be 
more healthful for them. 

The fact that for beast and for fowl the Lord 
originally provided the same vegetarian diet, is in perfect 
accord with some of the prophetic statements which 
seem to imply that under the new conditions of the 
Kingdom even the lower animals will return to vegetable 
diet, when "The lion shall eat grass like the ox," 
and when "Nothing shall hurt or destroy in all God's 
holy mountain [kingdom]." (Isa. 11:6,7; 65:25.) 
Thus we learn that the animals which at present are 
carnivorous (flesh-eaters) are not now in their original 
condition, but have been sharers with mankind in the 
results of the catastrophe which came upon our earth in 
the flood; likewise that they will be sharers with man, 
their king, in the great uplift which will come to him 
and to all nature when God's Kingdom, in the hands 
of the Sons of God, shall be established, and shall 
bless the groaning creation.— Rom. 8:19-22. 

All that God did was in full accord with what he 
had purposed, and in his sight was very good; but we 
cannot think that man and the general conditions of 
the world today are in God's sight "very good," but, 
according to his own declaration, very bad— sin has 
marred all; and, as the Apostle expresses it, nothing is 
very good in God's sight now. "There is none righteous, 
no, not one." This is another testimony, therefore, 
to the effect that the fall of man was decidedly 
downward, and that the Evolution Theory of a gradual 
and persistent rise is a fallacy.* 

The creation of man was just in the close of the sixth 
day or epoch. It was the crowning feature of creation, 
and finished it. Having finished his creative work 
God blessed the seventh day (or epoch) and set it 
apart, and rested therein from any further creative 
work— foreknowing, however, that during this seventh 
day, which has lasted from then until now (and will 
last yet another thousand years), sin would enter 
through disobedience, and his sentence of death be 
executed against Adam and his race, and the whole 
creation be caused to groan; knowing also that while 
he would thenceforth withhold his creative power, he 
would provide for the necessities of the fallen race, in 
the person of Jesus, "a Savior and a great one," who, 
by giving the ransom-price for man's sin, would become 
his Redeemer, his Lord, and thus obtain the 
right and the power to rescue him from death, and to 
lift up all the willing and obedient by restitution processes 
to all that was lost in Eden. 

This seventh day, in which God has rested, to 
the intent that Christ may accomplish the great work 
of redemption, reconciliation and restitution has already 



lasted six thousand years, and altho this time 
has been an evil time under the reign of sin and death, 
the Redeemer is, according to the divine program, 
shortly to take unto himself his great power and reign 
for a thousand years, until he shall complete the work 
of restitution of the willing and obedient, and finally 
shall deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, 
that God may be the all-in-all throughout eternity. +— 
Heb. 4:4-10. 

QUARTERLY REVIEW. -JUNE 30. 



Golden Text— "God hath both raised up the Lord, 
and will also raise up us by his own power."— 
1 Cor. 6:14. 



*See The Bible versus the Evolution Theory, price 5c. Sample 
copy free on application at this office. 

+Further reading matter upon the subject of the Sabbath 
free to the interested. 



page 209 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JULY 1, 1901. No. 13. 
CONTENTS. 



Views From the Watch Tower 211 

"Rev. John Alex. "Dowie" Considers 
Elijah and the Messenger of the 
Covenant one and the same Person 

--Himself 213 

Original Sin and its Penalty 214 

Satan a Murderer from the 

Beginning 215 

The Ultimate Triumph of Christ 

over Satan 219 

The Story of the Deluge 220 

Sons of God and Daughters of Men 222 

Noah was Perfect in his Generation 223 

Public Ministries of the Truth 224 

page 210: 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 

We announced in our last that we had these in good supply 
—presuming that our orders with the publishers would be 
promptly filled. They now advise us not to expect them before 
August 1. 



A TYPOGRAPHICAL ERROR. 

Please turn to page 189 of this year's TOWER, find the 24th 
line of its first column and cross off with your pen the first 
word on that line, "Most," and on the 37th line the word "Place." 

THE WIDE-MARGIN BIBLES. 

We mentioned, in our last issue, a special edition proposed. 
We are now purposing the printing of the DAWN and TOWER 
references on the wide margins. This will involve much labor 
and an expense of 25c each— if at all practicable. We will give 
further information in our next issue. 

DAWN VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 

Our German friends are urging that DAWN, VOL. V., be published 
in their language for the benefit of those who cannot so 
clearly, or at all understand the English language. We submit 
the matter to you and inquire now,— How many consider this 
advisable? Say how many copies you will want at 12-l/2c in paper 
covers postpaid in America, or 25c in cloth plus 10c postage anywhere. 
If we obtain a sufficient number of orders to meet one-half 
of the expense we will publish it. You need not send the 
money now, but merely say how many copies you will take if 
it is published. 



R2837 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE MESSENGER OF THE COVENANT. 

WE ARE loth to utter one word of personal 
criticism in these columns: we much prefer 
to discuss doctrines rather than persons. And yet at 
times it seems absolutely to the interest of the Lord's 
flock to identify persons with false teachings. But 
even in such cases we seek to deal with the doctrines 
of the persons and not with their personal affairs. 
This rule has Scriptural precedent. See the references 
to Hymenaeus, Philetus and Alexander.— 1 Tim. 1:20; 
2 Tim. 2:17. 

A man styling himself "Rev. John Alex. Dowie" 
has come prominently before the public during the 
past ten years. His specialty until about two years 
ago was the healing of the sick, in which he was to 
a considerable extent successful, according to his own 
accounts. We are informed that he used neither hypnotism 
nor medicine, but prayed for the sick in the 
name of our Lord Jesus. Being as sympathetic with 
every good work done in Jesus' name as we are opposed 



to every such work done by sorcery, hypnotism 
and other Satanic influence to deceive— such as 
Christian Science, Spiritism, etc.— we watched Mr. 
Dowie's career with a very friendly interest. 

Appealed to by WATCH TOWER readers for advice 
as to whether or not Mr. Dowie's work were of God, 
and whether or not it would be proper for them to 
seek divine healing as he proposed, we were obliged 
to answer them, and now think proper to summarize 
our reply for the benefit of all our readers and their 
friends, as follows:— 

We are expecting, according to the Scriptures, 
that our day will abound in deceptions specially prepared 
by the Adversary to "deceive if it were possible 
the very elect;" and that in his extremity Satan will 
even cast out Satan, and heal the sick, with a view to 
perpetuating his hold of power, and to deceive God's 
people and turn their attention away from present 
truth. We must remember our Lord's words, "Many 
will say unto me in that day, Master, Master, have 
we not taught in thy name? and in thy name expelled 
demons? and in thy name performed many wonders? 
And then I will plainly declare to them, I never approved 
you. Depart from me, you who practice iniquity." 
(Matt. 7:22,23, Diaglott translation.) This 
implies that Satan will have not only false teachers, 
but also false miracle-workers who will deceive themselves, 
as well as others, as respects the source of their 
power and teachings,— and only awake to a realization 
of their true position— that they are rejected from 
membership in the elect church— that they have failed 
to make their calling and election sure to a place in 
the Kingdom class, when "the harvest is past and the 
summer is ended."— Jer. 8:20. 

Nevertheless we are not to hastily assume that 
Mr. Dowie is of this deceived class;— let us wait a 
little, and not hastily decide, lest we think or speak 
evil of a servant of the Lord. However, there are a 
few very unfavorable symptoms in this case— foreign 
entirely to the spirit of Christ as we understand it. 
(1) Mr. Dowie's very apparent vanity and boastfulness 
—so different from the Lord's example followed 
by the apostles— manifested in his continual reference 
to himself in laudatory, boastful terms and in the publication 
of sundry photographs of himself in his own 
publications. (2) The gentleman uses extremely 
harsh, vulgar language in referring to any and all who 
oppose him;— manifesting a hatred rather than a love 
for his enemies. (3) One of the charges against the 
Pharisees was that they were covetous or literally 

R2837 : page 212 

"money-lovers"; and this seems to be one of Mr. 
Dowie's weaknesses. The poor were drawn to the 
Lord and got most of his favors, but the poor have very 



small chance of participating in Mr. Dowie's favors. 
If they cannot pay $20 to $25 per week to stop at the 
hotel, Zion's Headquarters, they have little chance of 
contact even with the great man's shadow as he steps 
from his palatial hotel into his carriage. The occupation 
and salary of Mr. Dowie's followers are inquired 
about considerably too; and each is given to understand 
that the only way to live at peace with God and 
Mr. Dowie is by faithfully giving one-tenth of his income 
to the Lord— to Mr. Dowie. These are unfavorable 
symptoms, and unless they are outgrown we can 
hope for nothing as respects Mr. Dowie and the harvest 
work; for it is written that "The Lord resisteth the 
proud but showeth his favor to the humble." 

As respects the Lord's people expecting miraculous 
healing in answer to prayer: we do not think 
that they should expect miraculous healing, or pray 
for it. All of God's people are surely welcome at the 
throne of grace, and they are invited to bring all their 
burdens and cares there and to obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in every time of need. But the saints 
are never invited to pray for their own physical healing. 
They are, however, assured that it is the Father's 
good pleasure to give the holy spirit to them that ask 
it. And the intimation clearly is that physical ailments, 
sorrows and pain work out for God's people 
the graces and fruits of the spirit if properly received 
and patiently endured. It is to those so afflicted that 
the Lord speaks as to St. Paul, "My grace is sufficient 
for thee." With this assurance the Apostle could 
glory in afflictions; and so may we also learn to do. 
-2 Cor. 12:7-10. 

This one prayer of the Apostle, repeated, he 
tells us, three times, is the only prayer for physical 
healing by any of the apostles, so far as the Bible-record 

R2838 : page 212 

shows. It was offered early in the Apostle's 
experience, before he had learned that his high calling 
was not to health and wealth and earthly blessings 
and ease in their enjoyment, but to sacrifice all these, 
that thus becoming a sharer in the sufferings of Christ 
he might attain to the heavenly condition— glory, 
honor and immortality— by and by. Thus also our 
dear Redeemer prayed not for earthly blessings for 
himself, and used not his powers selfishly. He could 
have commanded the stones to become bread, but he 
would not, and fasted forty days. He could have asked, 
and would have received for his defence and deliverance 
from his persecutors, twelve legions of angels; 
but he would not do so— instead he would endure 
whatever the Father might permit to be poured into 
his cup of bitter experience; accepting only the common 
blessings of nature open to all mankind. When 
weary he rested, or became so weak that he could not 



carry his cross, and sank under it. But he would not 
pray for strength. It would have been in opposition 
to his covenant or consecration unto death to have thus 
sought divine aid in resisting death. 

But while there are no evidences of the apostles 
praying for relief from physical ills (except the one 
instance above mentioned) we have records of their 
illness, and the illness of others whom they loved. In 
one instance the Apostle declares of Epaphroditus,— 
"He was sick nigh unto death: but God had mercy 
upon him; and not on him only, but on me also; lest 
I should have sorrow upon sorrow." (Phil. 2:27.) 
Can we doubt that if his recovery had been miraculous 
the thing would have been so declared to the glory of 
God? It is evident, then, that it was as stated, of divine 
mercy and not of prayer that the recovery took 
place. And so it is with us now: "Your Father knoweth 
what things ye have need of" and fulfils his promises 
of love and mercy, that all things, even sickness, 
etc., shall work for good to those called according to 
his purpose. 

Physical healing in answer to prayer, as described 
in the Bible, was performed upon the public, 
not upon the Church, except (as in James 5:14-16) the 
saint had gotten into sin and into sickness as a chastisement 
for sin and so could not go to God in prayer 
for himself. Such should send for the Elders of the 
Church, and they should pray over him, for the forgiveness 
of his sin; "and tho he have committed sins 
they shall be forgiven him, and the prayer of faith 
shall save the sick, and God will raise him up." 

Altho we are chronologically in the dawn of the 
Millennium we incline to doubt that any special restitution 
blessings will be dispensed to the world until 
the Gospel Church, the elect royal priesthood, is completed 
and glorified; for this is to be their very work. 

THE LEAVEN OF PRIDE AT WORK. 



Within the past two years Mr. Dowie's income 
from "tithes" of his followers (one-tenth of their incomes) 
has amounted to a handsome sum, so that he is 
now rated a millionaire. He has started a bank, purchased 
land and laid out a city, and embarked in various 
commercial enterprises. He has also taken the 
title of "Overseer" (bishop), and has ordained assistants 
to represent him in various cities, and the gatherings 
of his faithful are called churches of Christ;— tho 
they show no sign of recognizing Christ as their head. 
Rather, since they are ruled by Mr. Dowie in every 
particular, and their preachers are appointed by him 
at his pleasure, they have Mr. Dowie, and not Christ, 
for their head and ruler, and in all propriety should be 
considered Mr. Dowie's churches. 



R2838 : page 213 

Even to thus Lord it over God's too credulous people 
(Col. 2:18; 1 Pet. 5:3) does not seem to have 
satisfied Mr. Dowie, but rather to have still further 
intoxicated his pride; until during the past six months 
he has represented himself as being— 

THE MESSENGER OF THE COVENANT.-MAL. 3:1. 

Altho quite a number of his followers left him 
when this was fully understood (for it was broached 
carefully to "feel" how it would be received before 
stating it bluntly), yet the majority of the poor 
"sheep" under his influence seem to be thoroughly 
deluded— entrapped by his pomposity, which, on the 
contrary, they ought at once to have recognized as 
alien to the Lord's spirit, had they known and given 
close attention to the voice of the true Shepherd, who 
declares,— "My sheep hear my voice and follow me. 
A stranger will they not follow, for they know not the 
voice of strangers." We still have hope, however, 
that the delusion will not last long with many of the 
distracted and deluded ones, who in many respects 
give evidence of being of the Lord's flock. 

Whoever will refer to Mai. 3:1 should have no 
difficulty in seeing what Mr. Dowie evidently has not 
discerned, namely, that two messengers are referred 
to in the verse: first the antitypical Elijah to prepare 
the way, and second Jehovah's special servant, "the 
Messenger of the Covenant"— the Lord, the Christ. 
A New Covenant had long been promised, more favorable 
than the Law Covenant. Its Mediator would be 
greater than Moses— his antitype— Messiah. (Heb. 8:5-13.) 
Israel delighted to think of this coming 
Messenger of the New Covenant and of the blessings 
which would then be theirs. 

ELIJAH THE PROPHET. 



Emboldened by his success with his people under the 
title "Messenger of the Covenant," Mr. Dowie made 
great preparation for a public declaration of his greatness. 
He rented the immense Auditorium, made previous 
announcement that something great and unusual 
was to be expected, and thus gathered several thousand 
people including newspaper reporters, who give 
the following details of the speaker's words, etc.:— 

"I am Elijah, the prophet, who appeared first as 
Elijah himself, second as John the Baptist, and who 
now comes in me, the restorer of all things. Elijah 
was a prophet, John was a preacher, but I combine in 
myself the attributes of prophet, priest and ruler over 



men. Gaze on me, then; I say it fearlessly. Make 

the most of it, you wretches in ecclesiastical garb. I 

am he that is the living physical and spiritual embodiment 

of Elijah, and my coming to earth a third 

time has been prophesied by Malachi, by God himself, 

by his Son Jesus, by Peter, and three thousand years 

ago by Moses. All who believe me to be in very truth 

all of this will stand up. 

"(Over three thousand people rose to their feet 
and greeted the blasphemous declaration with cheers 
and hand-clapping.) 

"Understand well what I mean (he continued, 
striding down to the edge of the platform), I will take 
no counsel in my methods of government. I have 
come to proclaim theocracy pure and simple, the government 
of God by God, and for God, and I will never 
rest till all other forms of government have been driven 
from the earth. 

"You talk about your democracy. Bah! I tell 
you democracy has been tried in the balance and has 
failed. The government of the people, by the people, 
and for the people is twaddle. I stand loyal to the 
flag and countenance no revolution, but I demand, here 
and now, that the name of God must be placed foremost 
in the Constitution of the United States, and the 
supreme authority of God over all things must be 
recognized. 

"Listen to the first message of the prophet: You 
must pay your tithes and offerings into the storehouse 
of God. Accursed be ye if ye would seek to rob his 
house of its fulness by not obeying this, his will, sent 
through Elijah. I am come among you to fight the 
worship of mammon in all its forms." 

CONSIDERS ELIJAH AND THE MESSENGER OF THE 
COVENANT ONE AND THE SAME PERSON-- 
HIMSELF. 

Poor man! The kindest view of his course is to 
presume that his reason has become unbalanced;— in 
a manner, by the way, that is extremely common. A 
large proportion of the inmates of insane asylums 
have the organ of self-conceit too largely developed, 
and reason is unbalanced. Some think themselves 
Jesus, some apostles, some Mary, some kings and 
queens of earth, and dukes, etc., etc. Others of an 
opposite cast of mind accuse themselves of sins never 
committed, or imagine themselves given over to devils 
for torture. 

Mr. Dowie's reasoning is faulty: that John the 
Baptist was not the Elijah because he did not have 
faith enough to believe it, and to so proclaim himself. 
Was it a proof that Jesus was not the Christ because 
he did not so declare until near the close of his ministry? 
Then, he asked the apostles, "Whom say 
ye, that I am?" and Simon Peter answered, "Thou 



art the Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus 
answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou, Simon 
Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto 
thee, but my Father.... Then charged he his 
disciples that they should tell no man that he was 
Jesus the Christ." (Matt. 16:15-20.) How different 
from Mr. Dowie's course! 

Our Lord's words respecting John the Baptist explain 
the matter much better than does Mr. Dowie. Jesus 
told his disciples after John was dead that John was 
the Elias— thus contradicting Mr. Dowie's statement 
that he had failed to comprehend his privilege and 

R2838 : page 214 

never became the Elijah. (See Matt. 17:12,13.) However, 
our Lord intimates that John did not do all that 
is to be done by Elijah, and hence that a greater Elijah 
is to be expected, when he said,— "If ye will receive it, 
this is Elias which was for to come."— Matt. 11:14. 

John's work as Elijah did not fail because of his 
own lack of faith, but because of the Jews' unreadiness 
of heart to be influenced by him. Not many had faith 
to receive the message, and hence not many were 
ready to receive Messiah. 

The fact that Jesus came to the Jews as their 
Messiah in the flesh and was introduced by John as a 
forerunner or introducer (in the power and spirit of 
Elijah— Luke 1:17) does not hinder the fact that the 
Messiah (Head and body, 144,000) is shortly to be 

R2839 : page 214 

presented to the world in spiritual power and great 
glory. And as the man Christ Jesus was introduced 
by the man John doing an Elijah work of preparation, 
so the great and glorious Christ must be preceded by 
a great Elijah who will make ready for the Second 
Advent, by testing the people whether they will receive 
the King in peace and joy, or whether the earth 
must be smitten with the curse of a great time of 
trouble in order to make ready for the Heavenly 
Kingdom. 

This great antitypical Elijah is greater than Mr. 
Dowie and John the Baptist, as the glorified Christ is 
greater than Jesus of Nazareth in his humiliation. 
This antitypical Elijah, as we have already shown, is 
clearly proven to be the entire Gospel Church (Head 
and body) in the flesh. For nearly nineteen centuries 
this Elijah has been coming, and been doing his work 
in the world. Had men received the message joyfully 
the world would now be longing for the Lord of glory 
as do we, praying, "Even so, come, Lord Jesus." But 
as John's message was heeded by but few in nominal 
fleshly Israel, so also but few have heard the message 
of the antitypical Elijah. As a consequence the earth 



must be smitten with a curse, a blight— a terrible 
trouble of anarchy to make mankind ready and anxious 
for the Kingdom. On this subject see our detailed 
proofs that the Church in the flesh is the antitypical 
Elijah.-MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., page 249. 



R2839 : page 214 

ORIGINAL SIN AND ITS PENALTY. 

-GEN. 3:1-15. -JULY 14.- 

"Where sin abounded, grace did 
much more abound."— Rom. 5:20. 

SIN is in the world; the fact is indisputable. 
All intelligent people recognize the fact, but 
only such as accept the Scriptures have an intelligent 
idea respecting its origin. True, the narrative of Eden 
and its first perfect pair, and their fall from perfection 
under divine condemnation, is more or less held, in a 
legendary way, in heathen religions; but none of these 
attempt to connect up and philosophically state the 
relationship between the disobedience, the fall and the 
penalty, the redemption and salvation from it, as do 
our Scriptures— the Bible. To the Bible student who 
is meek and lowly of heart the explanation is most 
satisfactory; only to the worldly wise and those who 
hold to the traditions of men, and neglect the inspired 
revelation, is there anything obscure or unsatisfactory 
in connection with the narrative of the fall, the redemption 
and the restitution, which constitute the 
Bible story from Genesis to Revelation. 

We are to think of Adam (consisting at the time 
of two parts, male and female) as perfect, in the sense 
of being mentally and morally fashioned after the likeness 
of the Creator— well poised, well balanced— not 
"prone to sin as the sparks fly upward," as he subsequently 
became, and as his children now are. We are 
not, however, to think of him as perfect in knowledge 
or in character; knowledge must be acquired, but he 
was fully equipped with all the mental and moral apparatus 
for a rapid acquirement of knowledge. As 
for character, in an intelligent being it is a fixity of 
the will; and such a fixity can only come with knowledge. 
In other words, the perfect Adam was ready 
to acquire perfect knowledge, and had a perfect 
Creator, able and willing to give him the requisite instruction; 
and as this right instruction would be received, 
and this perfect knowledge be attained, character 
(good or bad) would be established;— either in 
favor of the principles of righteousness already established 
by God, or in opposition to the will of God, in 
unrighteousness. 



We are not to think of Adam's condition and trial 
as an experiment on God's part, the result of which 
would be doubtful; but, on the contrary, we are to remember 
that the results were fully known to the Almighty 
before the trial began, and that he saw the end 
of his work from the beginning, else he would never 
have undertaken it. Divine foreknowledge is conceded 
by a large proportion of professing Christians, who, 
nevertheless, are sadly confused by certain false theories 
which imply that the Almighty's foreknowledge 
was to the effect that the vast majority of the posterity 
of Adam would spend an eternity in most horrible 
suffering, and that God prepared the arrangement for 
their suffering in advance of their creation. This view 
is untenable amongst those who combine any measure 

R2839 : page 215 

of knowledge of God's character with any measure 

of reasoning ability. In this lesson we shall see conclusively 

that our Lord had a much more just, reasonable 

and loving plan than that,— that he foresaw 

beneficent results before creating our first parents. 

There are two methods of giving and receiving 
instruction. One through precept and example; the 
other through experience. Man was not the first of 
God's intelligent creatures— previously God had created 
the angels, we know not of how many different 
orders or ranks— angels, cherubim, principalities and 
powers, as the Apostle enumerates. These had all 
been instructed in the first named manner, by good 
precepts; they had not even had instruction through 
example, except on the side of good example: they 
had no illustration of evil and its pernicious consequences. 
The divine purpose was to bring into being 
a new order of creature, humanity, whose instruction, 
it was fore-arranged, should be along the lines of experience; 
—which would incidentally add to the instruction 
of God's angelic creatures, by way of giving 
them an example of sin and its consequences, and of 
the divine attitude toward sin and toward sinners; 
and incidentally give an illustration of the operation 
of divine Justice and Wisdom and Love and Power. 

ADAM'S ORIGINAL FREE AGENCY. 

Man was intended from the first to be "a spectacle 
unto angels" (1 Cor. 4:9) as well as to be himself 
a miracle of divine mercy and love. It was in harmony 
with this feature of the divine plan that the perfect 
but inexperienced pair were subjected to a trial 
under which the Almighty knew beforehand that they 
would fail through lack of knowledge. The Almighty 
did not compel their disobedience; yet neither did he 
forfend them by minute explanations, warnings, 
guardings, and assistances against the wiles of Satan; 



nor was he bound to do so by any principle of justice. 

His creatures were perfect and were placed in comfortable, 

well-adapted conditions, with every reason to 

trust in their Creator and to implicitly obey his commands. 

But, as we shall see as we progress, while 

they had this sufficiency of information, their knowledge 

being limited, they were proportionately weak. 

SATAN A MURDERER FROM THE BEGINNING OF HIS 
INTERCOURSE WITH MAN. 



We have mentioned Satan as the tempter, and 
this is the testimony of the Scriptures throughout; 
the same kind of reasoning and logic that would relegate 
Satan to oblivion as a myth, merely a figurative 
representative of wrong or sin, and not an individual 
—this same kind of logic and reasoning, if applied to 
the Creator himself, would similarly make of him 
merely a good principle, and deny his personality; 
and this, indeed, is the course of reasoning adopted by 
some, "Christian Scientists" and others. But we 
are writing for those who believe the Scriptural statements, 
and who are neither seeking to get rid of God 
nor seeking to deny the personality of Satan, but who 
are ready and anxious to believe what the Lord has 
revealed respecting him, his present triumph as "the 
prince of this world," and his soon-coming overthrow 
and binding, and eventual destruction by the King 
of kings and Lord of lords. 

Nothing in the Scriptures indicates that Satan 
assumed any evil disposition or opposition to the Almighty 
previous to this incident of our lesson— his 
seduction of our first parents into disobedience to the 
Almighty's commands. This was the time of Satan's 
own temptation and fall into sin; previously, holy and 
in harmony with his Creator, he was one of his honored 
agents and servants; but now as he beheld the 
newly created pair in Eden, and saw that in them Almighty 
had implanted the powers of procreation, 
which eventually were to fill the world with a human 
race, Satan beheld certain possibilities before himself, 
by which he might set up a separate, and to some extent, 
a rival kingdom. If he could gain control of this 
first pair and their posterity he would have an empire 
of his own on the earth, similar to the empire of 
Jehovah amongst the spirit beings. He would thus 
grasp a position higher than the other angels, tho not 
as the equal of Jehovah; he would be like him, an 
emperor, a ruler, and above the others.— 
Isa. 14:12-15. 

We are not to suppose that Satan comprehended 
in advance the evil results which have followed his 
course. He could not know any more than others to 
what extent his own evil course and the communication 



of it to humanity would bring in all the degradation 

and sin and misery and pain and trouble and 

death which have resulted. He became the murderer 

of our race (John 8:44), tho, like many another murderer, 

he had not probably intended to commit murder 

at first, but only robbery; but the wrong course led 

on and resulted in murder, death. 

The serpent in the Garden evidently differed 
somewhat from serpents in general today, and apparently 
this is implied in the curse which came upon 
it. The testimony is to the effect that originally 
serpents were very wise, sagacious, evidently not at 
all repulsive, as at present, to the human family. It 
was this animal that Satan concluded to use as his decoy 
in bringing temptation to our first parents. We 
may or may not think of the serpent as addressing 
mother Eve in an audible voice; it is possible, we think 
highly probable, that the serpent spoke by his actions 

R2840 : page 216 

—that under the direction of Satan its actions aroused 
certain thoughts, feelings, intentions, in mother Eve; 
indeed, this fact is so clearly recognized that it has 
become an adage, that "Actions speak louder than 
words;" yet we would not consider it an insurmountable 
difficulty to believe that it spoke with an 
audible voice. But no matter how the questions and 
implications were suggested to Eve, they came through 
the serpent, and from Satan, who was the real tempter, 
bent upon captivating Adam and Eve and making of 
them his servants, as he indeed succeeded in doing; 
for the Scriptures inform us that the entire race was 
"sold [into slavery] under Sin," father Adam and 
mother Eve receiving but a small and highly unsatisfactory 
price in the transaction. 

To appreciate the situation and the nature of the 
temptation, we must remember that the Garden of 
Eden was full of trees of life;*— trees bearing fruit 
suitable to the perpetuation of human life; so that by 
continuing in the use of these life-giving fruits all 
tendency to decay would be counteracted, and the 
eaters of these, under their favorable surroundings, 
would have lived forever. While there were many 
of these trees of life, there was one kind, and one 
only, whose fruit they were forbidden to eat. This 
was really not a hardship, as they had an abundance 
and to spare. They should have reasoned that the 
Almighty had some wise purpose in objecting to their 
partaking of the fruit of this one kind of tree. It was 
no more a tree of life than were the other trees in the 
garden, but it was forbidden. Our first parents had 
probably lived in the garden for some time, partaking 
of the trees of life and enjoying their surroundings, 
at the time the temptation took place. They had 
probably wondered frequently why the Almighty had 



forbidden the use of the fruit of that one particular 

kind, but could find no answer; and it had been sufficient 

to them to consider that God, in his wisdom, 

had a good reason, and that ultimately, no doubt, that 

fruit would be theirs, as well as others, by divine 

permission. 

It was at this juncture that the serpent, which 
had previously been seen to be superior in wisdom and 
intelligence, was noticed going to and eating, regularly, 
of the fruitage of the forbidden tree; and with this 
observation would naturally come the thought, Why 
is it that the serpent is the wisest of all the lower 
creatures, if it is not that he gains from this tree some 
valuable quickening mental influence which gives him 
his superiority? And with our higher organism, if we 
should eat of the fruit of that tree would it not make 
us still more intelligent, still more wise, than we are? 
Then came the evil suggestion, Can it be that God 
has a selfish purpose in forbidding us the use of this 
fruit? Can it be that he wishes to restrain us from 
proper liberties and powers? If not, why did he ever 
forbid the use of this tree which might give us the 
increased wisdom? Might it not be that if we were 
to partake of its fruit we would not only be as we now 
are, greater than the beasts, but be as gods,— even 
as the serpent is wiser than the other animals? 

The suggestion that knowledge was to be attained 
in that direction, and that the Almighty was not acting 
justly and disinterestedly in his counsel and laws, 
and that the penalty attached was evidently a falsehood, 
since the serpent did not die— these considerations, 
these evil suggestions thus instigated by the 
Adversary, had their desired effect upon the mind of 
Eve, and she concluded that, without informing Adam 
of her decision, she would risk putting the matter to 
the test. She ate. We cannot know in what respect 
the fruit of that tree affected the intellect and the 
passions, but very evidently it did have a powerful influence 
which engulfed our first parents in sinful 
passion, and introduced them thus into a possible misuse 
of a knowledge of which previously they had not 
been entirely ignorant; the result of which was their 
realization of their own shame and nakedness. We 
are to remember that much is here told in few words, 
yet all, we may be sure, that is necessary for us to know. 

THE WAGES OR PENALTY OF SIN. 



How strange it seems that this simple narrative, 
which contains not a word respecting eternal torment, 
should be made the basis of all the fears which have 
tormented millions of Christian believers respecting a 
future of unutterable woe entailed upon father Adam, 
and through him upon his race, because of the disobedience 



set forth in this lesson. How simple the 
statement of the Lord respecting what the penalty 
would be— death; margin, "dying thou shalt die." 
How fully this is in agreement with the experiences 
which have been upon the race for now six thousand 
years— dying they have died, to the number of something 
like forty thousand millions. We would not 
make light of the original sin; we would have it appear 
in its full force as a deliberate, wilful disobedience 
of the divine command on the part of those who 
were not weak through a fall, but who were strong 
because fresh from the Creator's hands, in his likeness, 
mental and moral; and yet we assert with all 
confidence that no reasonable mind can find anything 
in this language indicating eternal torment as being 
the wages of sin. Nor could any reasonable mind admit 



*A grove or "woods" or orchard seems to be the thought 
of the original.— See Gen. 3:24; Rev. 2:7. 

R2840 : page 217 

that if eternal torment had been threatened it 

would have been a just penalty for the crime mentioned 

—disobedience in the eating of forbidden fruit. 

We have heard of the vindictive farmer who 
maimed a boy with a shot gun for robbing his orchard; 
and we know how public sentiment properly condemned 
his course as harsh and unjust; yet that poor, 
fallen man was merciful and generous as compared 
with God according to the theory of "Orthodoxy," 
that for the theft of one apple Adam and Eve and all 
their thousands of millions of children were condemned 
to an eternity of torture. 

Comparatively few seem to understand that the 
"orthodox" teaching is that it was on account of this 
"original sin" by father Adam and mother Eve that 
not only they, but all of their posterity were sentenced 
of God to an eternity of torment at the hands of devils, 
fully commissioned and empowered to injure and torment 
them in every conceivable manner throughout 
an unending future. It is the claim, further, that 
every member of humanity would surely have gone 
into that torture, had not Jesus come into the world 
and died for our sins; and that now only such as believe 
in Jesus, and lay hold upon him through faith 
and obedience, can hope to escape this universal 
catastrophe. Is this reasonable? Do sane people believe 
it? Do those who claim to believe it act in harmony 
with such teaching? Are they so unjust to their 
children or to their servants? Would they consider 
that such a character on the part of God would be 
worthy to be copied by any intelligent creature, either 
as respects its justice, its mercy or its love? The fact, 



we believe, is that the vast majority of Christian 
people have never had their senses exercised by reason 
of use in connection with such matters. They are 
blindly following blind leaders, who have received and 
adopted as truth "traditions of the elders," doctrines 
and theories promulgated during "the dark ages," 
and who do not investigate the Bible for themselves. 

Surely this lesson of original sin and fall and 
penalty, taught by over two million Sunday-school 
teachers throughout the civilized world to over twenty-three 
millions in Sunday-schools, using the International 
Lessons, should be productive of great good, 
should open the eyes of understanding of many, and 
help them to see wherein they have so greatly erred 
and misunderstood the sentence, and hence misunderstood 
also the redemption from it, set forth in this 
lesson. But we cannot hope for much, seeing, as the 
Apostle declares, that "the god of this world has 
blinded the minds" of so many;— some more, some less. 
They will read over the sentence, and where they 
read "die," will think, "live in torment." They will 
take the part of Satan as against God, and with him 
declare, "Ye shall not surely die;"— ye cannot die, 
ye are immortal by nature, and because so, ye must 
live forever, either in bliss in heaven, or in eternal 
torment in hell. Thus Satan has for six thousand 
years opposed God, opposed the truth, and enslaved 
many in sin, and blinded others by misrepresentations 
of the divine character and plan, and his entire effort 
has been worked out in harmony with his declaration 
of this lesson, contradicting God, saying, "Ye shall 
not surely die;"— the wages of sin is not death, but 
life in torment. 

HOW OTHERS VIEW THIS LESSON. 



A little curious to know what some of the so-called 
"theologians" would say respecting the matters 
of this lesson, and its statement of what the penalty 
of sin is, we looked up some of their opinions, and give 
two of these. One says: "Death as the wages of sin 
includes, not only temporal death, or the death of the 
body, with all the ills attendant upon a state of mortality, 
but also spiritual death, or the alienation of 
the soul from God, who is the only source of spiritual 
life, and lastly, everlasting death, or final exclusion 
from God and holiness and blessedness." The Doctor 
of Divinity, whose words we quote, has overlooked entirely 
the very essence of the sentence against sin 
expressed by the Lord in the words, "The soul* that 



*See tract, What is the Soul? Sample copy free. 



R2841 : page 217 

sinneth it shall die." The reason undoubtedly is 
that he does not believe that souls can die; it is contrary 
to his theology, and hence he treats the subject 
from every other standpoint than the divine standpoint. 
From God's standpoint the soul is the entire 
being; it includes the mental and moral powers as 
well as the physical: and implies a degradation, a 
corruption, a destruction, of all these in death. And 
so we find it; man has not only died physically, as a 
result of his penalty, but the same dying process prevails 
in his mental qualities and in his moral qualities, 
so that when death has completed its work all is gone; 
the soul, being, is dead; and that beyond any power 
of recovery, so far as man is concerned— a recovery, a 
resurrection, being only possible from the divine 
standpoint, by divine arrangement, and the exercise 
of divine power. In the quotation we are criticising, 
notice that the claim is made that Adam died a 
spiritual death; but nothing in the Scriptures informs 
us that he was a spirit being. On the contrary, the 
Scriptures tell us that he was of the earth, earthy,— 
not a spirit being, but an animal being, a human being. 
He could not, therefore, die to what he did not 
possess.-l Cor. 15:45,47,48; John 3:6; Gen. 3:19. 

Nor was man redeemed to a spiritual state or 
condition. On the contrary, the Scriptures assure us 

R2841 : page 218 

that restitution is to be the result of the ransom to 
whosoever will accept it on God's terms: a restitution, 
not to spiritual conditions, because these were never 
enjoyed, and never lost; but a restitution to all that 
was lost in Adam's disobedience— to the perfection of 
human life, under blessed conditions, in full harmony 
with the Almighty and in his image and likeness. As 
to spiritual life, we find the Scriptures teaching that 
the natural man has nothing whatever to do with it; 
that to the new creature, the Church, alone has it 
been offered as a change of nature: that only the 
Gospel Church of this present age is begotten to this 
spiritual nature, and is to experience a change from 
human to spirit beings in the resurrection. The remainder, 
even of the obedient, will not be "changed," 
but will be restored.— Acts 3: 19-23. 

The above expression which we are criticising 
declares, finally, that the ultimate meaning of the 
death sentence was, "lastly, everlasting death." We 
agree with the statement, but not with the meaning 
which the reverend gentleman expects his readers to 
attach to his words. He wishes them to think of everlasting 
death as never being attained, but always being 
approached. It is a mild way of putting the eternal 



torment doctrine, and probably nine out of ten of all 

who have ever read his utterance have so understood 

him. He was hindered from making his statement 

more definite by reason of the fact that he had not a 

single word in the Scriptural account whereon to hang 

any doctrine of eternal torment; he must hang everything 

on the word death, which is the declared penalty; 

he must, therefore, presuppose that his readers have 

been well indoctrinated according to the false standards, 

and have learned from theological instructors 

how to twist language to mean its opposite; how to 

make death, the Scripturally stated penalty, to mean 

life everlasting in torment, and this in the face of the declaration 

that life is the gift of God, and will be granted 

only to those who receive the Son. "He that believeth on 

the Son hath everlasting life, and he that believeth not 

the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God [the pronounced 

penalty for sin, the curse, the sentence, death] 

abideth on him." "The soul that sinneth it shall die." 

"The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal 

life through Jesus Christ our Lord."— John 3:36; 

Ezek. 18:20; Rom. 6:23; 1 John 5:12. 

Another Doctor of Divinity writes on this subject 
as follows: "It is not sufficiently borne in mind that 
man's exclusion from the tree of life, which could 
have conferred immortality, was the carrying out of 
the sentence." How confused are the ideas of theologians 
in general upon this subject! Note in this 
expression the thought that the eating of the tree of 
life could have given man immortality. Is it supposable 
that any kind of fruit could produce such a 
change in man as to make him immortal? It is not 
supposable; it is unreasonable. But, on the other 
hand, let us remember that this same Doctor of 
Divinity would in the same breath claim that man 
was already immortal; and that he, like all other 
theologians, bases all of his doctrines respecting the 
eternity of torment for the damned upon their assumption 
that man was created immortal, and therefore 
could not die. How absurd then, everyway, is this 
statement, that Adam was excluded "from the tree of 
life, which could have conferred immortality!" 

The narrative should be taken as it reads. All 
the trees were good for food, and desirable to the eye; 
—all trees of life— not trees of immortality, for no tree 
could give immortality; God alone had immortality 
inherently, and he hath given it to the Son, and hath 
promised it to the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and to no 
others. Immortality is the prize set before the Gospel 
Church of overcomers, and none others. Had Adam 
remained in the Garden of Eden forever, and partaken 
of all the trees of life therein, he would not have 
attained immortality, tho he would have possessed 
everlasting life thereby. His disobedience resulted in 
his exclusion from all the trees of the garden,— from 
all the trees of life: and he was thenceforth compelled 



to labor with sweat of face in the unprepared soil 
(outside the specially prepared garden, in which his 
trial took place), that thus dying by inches the penalty 
—death— should finally be accomplished to the full. 

"THE WOMAN WAS FIRST IN THE TRANSGRESSION. 



We cannot share in the general disposition to 
think of father Adam from the ignoble standpoint of 
"blaming the transgression upon his wife, and seeking 
to shirk his own responsibility." As a perfect 
man, unskilled in deceptions and the telling of "white 
lies," he would probably feel, especially when addressing 
his Creator and Judge, and in answer to a direct 
question, that he must tell the exact truth, and he 
neither felt shame in telling the truth, nor do we feel 
shame for him in respect to his testimony. The difficulty 
is that the majority of those who read the account 
have not appreciated the grandeur of father 
Adam's position in respect to his wife and the transgression. 
To our understanding of the narrative, 

mother Eve's disobedience and involvement in transgression 
was wholly apart from her husband's knowledge 
or complicity; and he, when he learned of her 
course, was so full of sympathy and so full of love for 
her, as a member of his own body, that his affection 
quite overcame his proper sense of duty and obligation 
toward God. 

Concluding that his wife's disobedience had forfeited 

R2841 : page 219 

her life, and that the result to him would mean 

the everlasting loss of her companionship, he deliberately 

chose to be with his companion in sin rather 

than to be separated from her, and to enjoy divine 

favor and blessing everlastingly without her: therefore 

he ate knowingly, to share her penalty— he suicided. 

To our view, in reporting the matter to the Almighty, 

Adam did not state his case in his own favor, did not 

state how he was overcome by the pressure of his own 

heart-love for the one whom the Lord had given him 

to be his companion; but in the simplest form he explained, 

as the question properly demanded, how he 

had partaken of the fruit at his wife's instance. We 

are not defending Adam; we hold that he sinned wilfully 

and deliberately, and came justly under the sentence; 

but we hold also that it was his lack of knowledge 

that lay at the foundation of his disobedience, 

even as lack of knowledge and a desire to gain the 

same lay at the bottom of Eve's disobedience. Had 

Adam appreciated the divine character, as the Lord's 

consecrated people may now appreciate it, in the light 

of fuller knowledge and revelation, his course might 



have been a different one. He might have trusted 
the matter to the Lord, that he was able to recover 
mother Eve from the terrible condemnation under 
which she had fallen through her disobedient act. It 
was his despair as well as his ignorance that led Adam 
to the disobedience that brought the death-sentence, 
otherwise called "the curse" and "the wrath" of 
God upon our race. 

THE WAGES OF SIN SEVERE. 



If to some it may at first appear that death is not 
a severe sentence, not a manifestation of divine wrath, 
not a curse, let them reflect further; let them note how 
all of the dying processes are only parts of death, and 
that as insane asylums mark those who become mentally 
dead before they are physically dead; and as 
hospitals mark those who become physically decrepit 
before they are mentally decrepit; and as prisons mark 
those who become morally dead or decrepit before they 
are physically dead; so all of the experiences of our 
race, "groaning and travailing in pain together," mark 
"death working in us." All sicknesses, pains and 
sorrows are parts of the dying process, in the fifty 
thousand millions of the human family who have come 
into the world during six thousand years. The "curse" 
or sentence of death has resulted in blighted hopes 
and loves and ambitions, and is rapidly placing the 
entire race in the great prison house of death— the 
grave. Surely, the true penalty of sin was a heavy 
one, tho we must admit it was a just one. Surely, it 
involved all of the race of Adam in the most natural 
manner, because all of his children are partakers of 
his sentence; because sharers in his weaknesses, his 
imperfection, resulting from his transgression of the 
divine law. 

THE SERPENT SHALL BITE THE DUST. 



The Lord's curse or sentence came upon all who were 
involved in the transgression: upon the serpent, the 
active agent of Satan; upon the woman, first in transgression; 
and upon the man, in whom centered the 

R2842 : page 219 

responsibilities. As to the expression, "Dust thou 
shalt eat," we incline to consider it as figurative, 
since we are not aware that the serpent includes dust 
in its food any more than do the other animals. The 
expression, "Lick the dust," has long stood for a 
demeaned, degraded condition, and as a matter of fact, 



serpents are despised of all and made to "bite the 
dust" (die) whenever and wherever found, and just 
such an enmity as is here described, between humanity 
and serpents, is notorious. 

THE ULTIMATE TRIUMPH OF CHRIST OVER SATAN. 



Our first parents must have understood the concluding 
sentence of our lesson as a ray of hope— "It 
shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise his heel." 
It was a very indefinite, vague promise of a future 
triumph of mankind over the Adversary, over sin, 
over all the evils connected with sin and its penalty, 
death; but we do not yet see such a victory. We see 
the race still blinded by Satan; we see him still 
"prince of this world," working in the hearts of the 
children of disobedience, who, alas! are vastly in the 
majority. But the faith enkindled by the Lord's word 
of promise has since grown and developed and been 
added to. The promise to Abraham, that his seed 
should bless all the families of the earth, was a further 
declaration of the statement made in Eden. Christ is 
this seed. Begotten of a new life, through the seed 
of the woman, he has indeed triumphed over sin and 
death, and declared that he will finally vanquish the 
Adversary; he has paid the penalty, the very penalty 
that was originally pronounced, death. "Christ died 
for our sins." We were thus "bought with a price, 
even the precious blood of Christ." 

We have this assurance, then, that God's plan is 
continuing to operate, to unfold, and we have good 
reason to hope for the promised ultimate consummation, 
in which Satan shall be utterly destroyed. The 
plan of God during this Gospel age is taking another 
step forward, in that it is selecting a special, "elect" 
class, to be members of this seed (Gal. 3:29), to be 
members of the body of Christ; and in harmony with 
this is the Apostle Paul's statement, "The very God 
of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly"— 
under the Church's feet, for the feet are the body of 

R2842 : page 220 

Christ, and he is the Head of the Church which is his 
body— hence, under the feet of the Christ— 
Rom. 16:20. 

Not very long, now, we may hope, will it be until 
the elect seed of Abraham, the elect seed of the woman, 
shall be complete, and the work of treading down evil 
and ultimately destroying it, and eventually destroying 
Satan himself, with all who intelligently and wilfully 
are coworkers with him in his rebellion against 
divine love and justice, will be accomplished. (Matt. 25:41.) 
Meantime the thousand years, the Millennial 



age, is set apart for this work of crushing evil, of 
stamping it out, of bringing in everlasting righteousness. 
Praise God for such a Gospel, such good tidings 
of great joy which shall be unto all people, as a result 
of the redemption accomplished by our Lord and 
Savior, Jesus Christ, and of the great deliverance 
which by and by, in due time, he shall bring to pass. 

Our golden text is the key to all of our hopes. 
Sin abounded as against not only our first parents, 
but all of their posterity, unto sentence of death. But 
God's grace abounded still more, and toward all, in 
that he provided, through Christ, not only a recovery 
of all who will of mankind from the penalty of sin and 
death, but also that the restored and perfected race 
shall have all that was lost in Eden, full and complete, 
and that everlastingly. Additionally God's grace 
abounded to the extent of taking out of the world of 
sinners a little flock to be heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, whose nature is to be changed, so 
that they, instead of longer being of the human nature, 
will become partakers of the divine nature, sharers of 
the divine glory and honor and office with their Lord 
Jesus— far above angels, principalities and powers and 
every name that is named. 

O, for such loving kindness and tender mercy 
which abounded towards us while we were yet sinners, 
and which much more abounds towards us in Christ, 
now that we are accepted in the Beloved one,— for 
this let the Lord's people give thanks continually, and 
let the thankfulness of heart extend and manifest itself 
in words and conduct, in all that we do and say, 
that all may be to the praise of his glory who has 
called us out of darkness into his marvelous light! 



R2842 : page 220 

THE STORY OF THE DELUGE. 

-GEN. 8: 1-22. -JULY 21.- 

"Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord."— Gen. 6:8. 

"HIGHER CRITICS" pick at and find fault 
with the record of the deluge given in 
Genesis, yet they are unable to gainsay the fact that 
there was a great deluge. They find its record written 
in all parts of the world, in some places indicated by 
the erosion of the rocks and the deposit of shells and 
gravel in high altitudes, and in other parts by immense 
alluvial deposits. Moreover, every nation and people 
throughout the world (the black race alone excepted) 
has its traditions and records of the great deluge and 
of Noah. The fact being so well authenticated, the 
critics have been obliged to content themselves with 



minor objections— finding fault with the Scriptural 
account of the Ark— considering it impossible that the 
flood should have been throughout the whole world, 
and probable that it was merely upon some portion of it. 

"Higher critics," amongst theologians and schoolmen, 
are disposed to criticise the text and to claim 
that the Bible narrative gives evidence, as do other 
parts of Genesis, of the consolidation of two originally 
separate accounts, combining the features of both. 
Many of them are disposed to consider that the book 
of Genesis was written by Ezra only a few centuries 
before Christ, and claim that Ezra got his account from 
the Babylonians during the captivity, and that he 
merely attributed it to Moses to give it the greater 
force and reverence before the people. Other critics, 
however, are forced to admit that the Genesis accounts 
of the creation and of the flood are immensely superior, 
in order and in every detail, to any and all accounts 
ever found elsewhere; and that the reasonable theory 
would be that the ampler and clearer accounts of Genesis 
were the first written, and that the accounts of 
surrounding nations were written subsequently,— legends 
and traditions. Prof. G. F. Wright says respecting 
the Babylonian records of the flood, which 
are meager indeed as compared to the Bible record:— 

"It is proper to observe that the cuneiform tablets 
(in their account of the deluge, copied from Babylonian 
records of 1800 to 2000 years before Christ) 
combine in one account, and in substantially the same 
order as that of Genesis, both the elohistic and Jehovistic 
documents, supposed by many critics to have 
been united into one only after the exile. In this 
comparison, therefore, we have well-nigh scientific 
demonstration that these critics are wrong in their 
inferences from literary analysis. And," he adds, 
"the attempt to make out that there are two combined 
accounts of Genesis containing irreconcilable chronologies 
is little more than a gratuitous supposition, 
for they can readily enough be arranged in one continuous 
chronological scheme. While we need not 

R2842: page 221 

maintain that science demonstrates the truth of the 

Biblical account, we can say that it presents no insuperable 

obstacle to the account when properly interpreted, 

while it does add plausibility to the study by 

bringing clearly before our minds a period of geological 

history since man came into the world, during 

which there was great instability of the continents and 

a succession of catastrophes, startling in their magnitude 

and short in their duration, which may well have 

culminated in the Noachian deluge." 

One of the pronounced higher critics, President 
Harper, of the Chicago University, admits the general 
correctness of the Scriptural account of the deluge, 



viewed even from the hypercritical standpoint, saying: 
"We may regard the deluge as a historical fact, preserved 
in a multitude of forms; 'an actual and terrible 
event which made so powerful an impression upon the 
imaginations of the first parents of our species that 
their descendants could never forget it. This cataclysm 
took place near the cradle of mankind, and 
previous to the separation of the families from whom 
the principal races were to descend.' The deluge was 
a fact; it was a part of a great plan; its record, as 
handed down to us in the Hebrew Scriptures, is the 
one clear, distinct account, and when compared with 
the other accounts bears on its face indications of its 
divine origin." 

To the Christian mind it is quite sufficient attestation 
to the truthfulness of the account of the deluge, 
as given in Genesis, that our Lord, the great Teacher, 
made no criticism of it, but by referring to it clearly 
implied its truthfulness and general correctness. And 
the evidence is still further strengthened by the fact 
that the Apostle Peter refers to it, and under the guidance 
of the holy spirit shows that it marked the close of 
the first dispensation,— as a great cataclysm of trouble, 
anarchy, symbolically called "fire," will mark the 
termination of the present dispensation, and prepare 
the way for the new era, called the new heavens and 

R2843 : page 221 

the new earth. -Matt. 24:37-39; 1 Pet. 3:20; 2 Pet. 2:5; 
3:6,7. 

Considering then that the truthfulness of the narrative 
is abundantly established, a first foundation for 
those who have the eye of faith and the ear of faith, 
we proceed to the examination of the lesson. Altho 
there are evidences that the whole world was at one 
time under water, pebbles and shells being found in 
the tops of the highest mountains in all parts of the 
world, nevertheless it would not be essential to the 
truth of the narrative that we should assume that the 
entire earth was covered with water in Noah's day; 
it may have been, or it may not have been. Apparently 
western Asia was the cradle of our race, and the 
whole world at that time was of very limited dimensions. 
That part of the world could very easily have 
been submerged, and again elevated, by forces not 
fully comprehended as yet by anyone,— for this is admitted 
to have occurred in various parts. 

The Ark, according to the measurements given, 
was an immense structure, with a storage capacity 
probably at least treble that of any vessel afloat today. 
Its length, three hundred cubits, would be about 
five hundred feet; its width, fifty cubits, about eighty 
feet; its height, thirty cubits, about fifty feet. Let 
us compare these dimensions with those of a great 
vessel of today, the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse. Its 



length is 648 feet; its breadth 65 feet; its depth 43 
feet. We are to remember, however, that the Ark was 
not built for navigation, but merely as a float, like 
a covered raft; hence it needed not to be pointed at 
either end, and toward the bottom, as are modern 
ships. We are told that it had three floors; and when 
we estimate the difference as respects the width at 
bow and stern, its capacity would be at least twice as 
large as the Kaiser Wilhelm der Grosse; and when we 
omit the motive power and steering apparatus it would 
practically give it at least three or four times the storage 
capacity of the latter vessel. 

This peculiar and enormous vessel had an immense 
cargo of animals, and food for their sustenance 
during the long period of confinement. Nor need we 
suppose that all the wild animals of today were wild 
and troublesome in the Ark; many may have become 
wild since then. The mention of animals taken 
into the Ark as being "clean" and "unclean" would 
rather seem to refer specially to the useful animals, as 
for instance, the cow and the sheep are clean— proper 
for human food, as provided by Jewish law, while the 
horse and the dog would be amongst the unclean, unsuitable 
for food, but nevertheless useful servants 
of mankind. 

Scientists have indulged in amusement as respects 
the poor ventilation, claiming that the Ark had only 
one little window, one cubit, twenty inches square; 
but rather we should understand that this window, 
twenty inches high, extended around the Ark on all 
sides under the eaves. The particulars are not given 
us, but from our standpoint Noah and his sons, the 
contractors for the building of the Ark, were not 
stupid men, only one degree above the monkey, but 
men of good mind, only a few degrees below the perfect 
man, as they had maintained to a considerable 
degree the original image of God, conferred upon Adam 
and transmitted by him. It was not many centuries 
after the construction of the Ark that the great Pyramid 
of Egypt was built, which likewise gives abundant 
evidence of skill. We can reasonably suppose that 
the architects and builders of these were sufficiently 
skillful to know how to provide for the necessary ventilation. 
Indeed, the Great Pyramid was for a long 
time a marvel in respect to its ventilation, which later 
was found fully provided for. 

Those who claim that evolution has been the process 
of mankind's development, find a serious obstacle 
to their theory in this record of the flood;— not only those 
who attempt to ignore the divine Creator, but those as 
well, who recognize Jehovah, and who claim, contrary 
to the Bible, that he has been developing mankind 
out of a brute stock. It goes against all evolution 
theories to claim that the race of Adam became so 
grossly corrupt that it was just and proper that it 
should be blotted out of existence, only a remnant being 



carried over for a new start. If Adam in Eden 

was but one remove above a monkey, what shall we 

say of the condition of the world of mankind after 

R2843 : page 222 

1656 years, and the Lord's declaration respecting them, 
that instead of evolving into greatness and dignity, 
they had corrupted their way and were not fit to live? 

SONS OF GOD AND DAUGHTERS OF MEN. 



The Scriptural account of the condition of mankind 
previous to the flood, is that the earth was full of 
giants and full of violence, and the explanation of this 
condition of things is that the giants had been born as 
a result of marital union between a class called "sons 
of God" and certain "daughters of men." Commentators 
in general have, we believe, fallen into grievous 
error as respects the meaning of this statement, supposing 
it to signify that the expression "daughters of 
men" refers to Cain's daughters, and that the so-called 
sons of God were the children of Seth. According to 
this claim, the wickedness of Cain descended to all of 
his daughters, and the supposed righteousness of 
Seth descended to all of his sons, for a certain time, 
and that the blending of these two families opened the 
flood-gates of wickedness. This supposition seems to 
us very untenable, for several reasons. First, there 
is nothing in the Scriptures respecting the posterity 
of Cain to imply that they were under any curse, because 
of their father's sin. To suppose such a law would be 
to suppose that it prevails still, and that heredity 
would entail upon the children of all murderers the 
guilt of their parents, and upon the children of all 
thieves, marauders and evil-doers the direct guilt of 
their parents. We admit that evil disposition is transmissible, 
and that to a certain extent it follows to the 
third and fourth generation, but we deny that there 
is any special curse of God after the fashion that is 
here claimed. Furthermore, according to this very 
theory, the sons of Seth retained his righteousness and 
favor with God for a time, and then suddenly lost it 
all— except Noah,— an unreasonable assumption. Furthermore, 
it would be difficult for those who take this 
position to explain to us why the evil seed of Cain intermarrying 
with themselves would not produce giants, 
and men of renown, and how a blending of these two 
families would produce that which neither of them 
could or did produce alone. The theory is lame and 
inconsistent in every particular. 

The Apostle Peter gives the key to the real solution 
of the matter when, in reciting the events connected 
with the flood, he tells us of the fall of the angels 



at that time, who "in the days of Noah" "kept 
not their first estate." (1 Pet. 3:19,20.) Those angels 
who were permitted to have a measure of control 
of the fallen race, with a view to helping them as 
much as they might be able, and who, for the purpose 
of rendering such assistance to mankind, were permitted 
to appear in human form, became enamored of 
the human female, and preferred the human or animal 
form to their own state as spirit beings. They thus 
left their original estate, as Jude also explains. (Jude 6.) 
These angels are the ones denominated "the sons of 
God," none of the human family being given that 
name after the fall. Adam, we are told, was originally 
a son of God (Luke 3:38), but none were so called 
subsequently until the Gospel age. We are told that 
at our Lord's first advent those who received him 
received privilege or liberty to become the sons of God. 
(John 1:12.) And so the Apostle declares respecting 
the Gospel Church, "Now are we the sons of God 
[prospectively], and it doth not yet appear what we 
shall be," when perfected as sons, when our adoption 
shall be completed, as members of the body of Christ. 
(1 John 3:2; Rom. 8:17.) On the contrary, the term 
"sons of God" is a general name applied to the angels. 
-Job 1:6; 2:1; 38:7. 

From this standpoint the whole matter is clear— 
every feature of it. Mankind, impoverished in vitality 
by fifteen hundred years of toil in the condemned 
earth, battling for his bread with thorns and thistles, 
was considerably weaker than in his perfection, the 
image of God, before the dying process began; while 
the angels, assuming human bodies, would possess 
completeness of vitality and virility, and in consequence 
of this, the children born to them by the daughters 
of men would not only be physically giants in 
strength, but also mentally— as declared in the record, 
"men of renown"— superior to other men in qualities 
of cunning, skill and ingenuity. Thus the agencies 
which God had permitted for the benefit of mankind 
became a snare to his spiritual governors, and a test 
of their loyalty to righteousness, to purity, to fidelity 
to God. And to our understanding God foreknew, 
foresaw, this fall of "those angels which kept not 
their first estate," even as he foreknew the fall of our 
first parents in their trial in Eden. And from our 
standpoint both of these falls were permitted to give 
instructive lessons, useful not only to those more particularly 
involved, but to all of God's human creatures 
who should afterward be born, and ultimately be 
brought to a knowledge of the truth, and additionally 
instructive to the holy angels who maintained their 
loyalty to God, to righteousness, to purity, to their 
first estate. 

The Apostles Peter and Jude clearly mark out the 
punishment visited upon those "sons of God" who 
thus betrayed their trust and fell into sin, "leaving 



their own habitation," their own nature, and affiliating 
with the human nature. Their punishment has 
been their deprivation of all such liberties, and their 
separation from God and from the holy angels: and 
this restraint is called, by the Apostle, "chains of 
darkness," while the restrained ones themselves, instead 
of being recognized as "sons of God," or angels 
of light, were thenceforth known as "angels of darkness," 
"demons," "wicked spirits." Incidentally we 

R2844 : page 222 

remark that these are the "spirits in prison" mentioned 

by Peter (1 Pet. 3:19), and that altho restricted 

as respects their powers of fellowship with the holy angels, 

and with mankind, being no longer privileged to 

appear as men, they still seek human fellowship, endeavoring 

to gain possession of human beings who 

yield up their wills, and who are then said to be possessed 

of devils or "obsessed." It is but a preliminary 

step toward thus getting possession of the individual 

that these wicked spirits appeal to humanity to 

become their mediums (spirit mediums), through 

whom they to some extent communicate. And they 

personate dead human beings, because they know well 

that humanity would shun them and fear them if their 

real identity were discovered.* 



*See What Say the Scriptures About Spiritualism? Proofs 
that it is Demonism. 10 cents, this office. 

R2844 : page 223 

"NOAH WAS PERFECT IN HIS GENERATION." 



From this standpoint, which we hold is the only 
reasonable, consistent and Scriptural one, the reason 
and necessity for the deluge is quite apparent. The 
reason is Scripturally given, that the whole world 
had become corrupt— the original Adamic stock had 
become confused and intermixed with another life. 
The divine purpose of redemption, blessing and restitution 
was confined to Adam and his family; that as 
by one man's disobedience sin came into the world, 
even so through the obedience of one many may be 
justified to life. Altho foreknowing the condition of 
things God made no provision for the mixed progeny 
of the angels— that was out of his order, out of harmony 
with his arrangement, and hence as soon as it 
had demonstrated itself and taught its lesson the flood 
swept all away, except the one family of Noah, of 
whom it is declared, "Noah was a just man and perfect 



in his generation." (Gen. 6:9.) Not a perfect 
man, for he was a fallen man, as were all of Adam's 
children, but he was perfect in his generation— he was 
not of the mixed seed, he was pure Adamic stock. 
The Hebrew word here rendered generation is toledaw 
and signifies descent, family. 

The lesson taught by this failure of the angels 
and its result to mankind was that any deviation from 
the divine plan and arrangement would work injury 
instead of good to those participating in, as well as to 
those affected by it. The angels who fell from their 
noble work and condition, and became groveling and 
sensual, manifested clearly in their own course the 
downward tendency of all transgressions of the divine 
law. Then their children, who might have been expected 
to be brilliant, talented, able, and who were all 
these in many respects ("men of renown") possessed 
their abilities in connection with a sinful and alienated 
condition; and it was proper that both angels and men 
should see that the greater the ability possessed, out 
of harmony with the divine arrangement, the greater 
would be the injury instead of blessing which would 
result. Thus we see that these renowned men, with 
their great abilities, physical and mental, tended not 
to the promotion of godliness, peace, joy, happiness 
in the world; but to strife, to oppression, to violence. 

It may be thought by some that we are straining 
the illustration, when we affirm that we see today in 
the world something that is in many respects analogous 
to this evil condition which led to the dissolution of 
the first world or dispensation; that we see that somewhat 
similar conditions producing somewhat similar 
evils are leading on rapidly to the great catastrophe 
with which "this present evil world" shall pass away, 
in a great commotion, symbolically called "fire" of 
anarchy,— giving place to the new order, the Millennial 
Kingdom. The analogy is as between humanity 
and the new creatures in Christ, who are Scripturally 
called "the sons of God." The influence of these sons 
of God upon the world of mankind should be instructive, 
elevating, helpful, showing forth the praises of 
him who called them out of darkness into his marvelous 
light,— transformed by the renewing of their minds, 
etc., they should be letting their light so shine before 
men that men would see their good works and glorify 
the Father in heaven. But the influence of mankind 
upon the Church seems to have been stronger than 
the influence of the new creatures upon mankind— 
not in all cases, but in some cases, just as it was with 
the angels. The sons of God (the Church), enlightened 
beyond their fallen and unregenerate neighbors, 
are men of renown, and the civilized world of today, 
Christendom, represents the influence of this combination 
of the spiritual with the natural in Babylon- 
Confusion. It has lifted up humanity wherever it 
has gone; it has sharpened, it has broadened, it has 



civilized; but instead of this combination working for 

the highest benefit of mankind in all cases, we find, 

rather, that the tendency is to combine the higher intelligence 

with human selfishness, and the result of 

this union is the bringing forth of giants in the earth, 

—corporative giants— which very shortly will give 

mankind a great deal of trouble and fill the earth with 

violence. 

Are not the trusts and combines, now rapidly developing 
throughout the world, the offspring of this 
union of heavenly light and intelligence with the selfish 
depravity of the fallen race? and what hope can mankind 
have when once these giants have reached their 
growth and strength, and when their necessities combined 
with their selfishness, shall influence them to 
exert their power in the world? Will it not lead to 
violence? Will it not bring about the time of trouble 
which Scripturally is described as being a period when 
"every man's hand will be against his neighbor"— 
when selfishness will be in control in every direction 
and amongst all classes except those who, like Noah 
and his family, are in the Ark of safety— under the 
Lord's special and protecting care? We would not 
press the figure too far, but we do see some analogy 
as between the end of the first world or dispensation 
and the end of the present dispensation, the second 
world. 

The printed lesson deals particularly with the going 
forth of Noah, his thankfulness to God, his worship, 
as expressed in the building of the altar, and the 
offering of the sacrifice, typifying man's reliance upon 
God and the great sacrifice for sin securing the return 
of divine favor which would be accomplished in due 
time by Messiah. The offering was accepted by the 
Lord, who declared that the earth should nevermore 
be visited by such a catastrophe, and that nevermore 
should every living thing be smitten; and in this we see 
another evidence that the coming trouble will not destroy 
all human life, altho it is represented symbolically 
as fire: the fire of that day will burn against all 
wickedness, against all sin, to destroy it root and 
branch, yet the Lord, through the Prophet, declares 
that after the fire of his anger shall have burned in 
fierceness against the world of mankind, he will subsequently 
turn to the people a pure language, that 
they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve 
him with one consent— thus indicating that while the 
symbolical fire of that day will destroy the institutions, 
arrangements, peculiar to this time, it will not destroy 
all the people, but prepare them for the reception of 
the Lord's message of favor and blessing, for it is 
written, "When the judgments of the Lord are abroad 
in the earth the inhabitants of the world will learn 
righteousness."— Zeph. 3:8,9; Isa. 26:9. 



page 225 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. JULY 15, 1901 No. 14. 
CONTENTS. 



"Beheaded for the Testimony of 

Jesus" 227 

Abraham Called of God 229 

Abraham's and Lot's Testings 233 

Interesting Letters 235 

A Special Edition of the Linear 

Bible 238 

Public Ministries of the Truth 240 

Items:— When Requesting Pilgrim 

Visits,— Millennial Dawn in 

Leather Binding, Etc 226 

page 226 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WHEN ordering tracts mention quantity. This applies also 
to the orders for Volunteer matter. Say how many more you 
will need with each order, and give full address to which you 
wish them sent;— separate from the letter. 

WHEN REQUESTING PILGRIM VISITS. 

Please say who are the regularly chosen Elders of the congregation 
requesting the visits. We will be glad to be informed 



in every case, on postal cards which we can file away for reference. 
Also state where and when meetings are held. 

MILLENNIAL DAWN IN LEATHER BINDING. 

These are put up in sets of five volumes,— and not sold 
otherwise. Retail price $5.00, plus 50 cents expressage or postage. 
Wholesale rates $2.50, plus 50 cents expressage or postage. 
The books are quite handsome and substantial— gold edges. 
The price is very low; less than cloth bound religious books 
with many publishers. 

DAWN VOL. V. IN GERMAN. 

Our German friends are urging that DAWN, VOL. V., be published 
in their language for the benefit of those who cannot so 
clearly, or at all, understand the English language. We submit 
the matter to you and inquire now,— How many consider this 
advisable? Say how many copies you will want at 12-l/2c in paper 
covers postpaid in America, or 25c in cloth plus 10c postage anywhere. 
If we obtain a sufficient number of orders to meet one-half 
of the expense we will publish it. You need not send the 
money now, but merely say how many copies you will take if 
it is published. 



R2844 : page 227 

"BEHEADED FOR THE TESTIMONY OF JESUS. 



"And I saw the souls [persons] of them that were beheaded for 
the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God;. ..and they 
lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years."— Rev. 20:4. 

ALL constituting the Kingdom class are here referred 

to as beheaded— every member of 

the glorified Church must, eventually, have this experience, 

whatever it signifies. But we reflect that 

our Lord was not beheaded and, so far as history 

shows, few, if any, of the apostles were literally beheaded; 

indeed, very few, if any, of the Lord's saints, 

from Pentecost to the present time, have died by decapitation. 

We are to remember, however, that this 

statement is from the symbolical book, and is therefore 

a figure of speech, a word-picture, and its meaning 

must be sought for accordingly. 

The Apostle gives us the key, saying, "The head 
of every man is Christ; the head of the woman is the 
man; and the head of Christ is God." (1 Cor. 11:3.) 

R2845 : page 227 

As a woman who becomes a wife accepts her husband 



as the head of the family, so the Church accepts 
Christ as its head, and each member of the Church 
thus comes into relationship with the Lord as a member 
of his body— not the head; and all of these, to be 
acceptable as members of the figurative body of 
Christ, must be will-less, headless: their own wills 
must be surrendered, so that, like their Lord, they 
can say, "Not my will, but thine, be done." They 
must be headless in the sense of ignoring their own 
wills, being dead to self and actuated henceforth by 
the will of the head of the body, Christ Jesus. His 
will, his mind, his spirit, must dwell in each member 
of the body, and abound, if it would abide a member 
of his body, the Church. Thus, as the wife loses her 
own name, and accepts the name of her husband and 
his headship, so each member of the bride of Christ 
must lose his or her individuality in order to be accepted 
as the Bride of Christ. It is this self-surrender 
to Christ on the part of his Church that is represented 
in the symbolism of the text before us. 

One of the prime hindrances to Christian growth 
is the failure to discern the completeness of the sacrifice 
requisite in those who would be accounted as members 
of the elect Church, the body of Christ. No one 
can be of this elect number, to live and reign with 
Christ in his Millennial Kingdom, who has not been 
thus beheaded. We often think of this when we hear 
well-meaning Christian people say, "I have a mind 
of my own; I do my own thinking." It is certainly 
better, in many instances, that one should do his own 
thinking than that he should let another man or another 
woman do it for him; than that he should allow 
a body of men to make a creed for him, even tho that 
body of men, professing to be his head, be called a 
Synod or a Presbytery or a Conference, and desire 
that the individual shall submit himself to its headship, 
and become a member of some earthly church. 
Such sectarian systems— heads and members— are false 
bodies of Christ, which the real Head never 
recognized. 

It is required of every one who would be counted 
in as a member of the true Church, that he should be 
not only beheaded (lose his self-will), but that he 
shall be united to the true Head of the Church and recognize 
himself as a member of the true body of Christ 
—"the Church of the living God, whose names are 
written in heaven." Membership in the Presbyterian 
body, or in the Methodist body, or in the Lutheran 
body, or in the Baptist body, or in any other human 
institution, does not count anything, for the simple 

R2845 : page 228 

reason that Christ never recognized any of them, never 
founded any of them, never joined or agreed to join 
any of them as their head. There are not many bodies 



of Christ, but only one, the Church of the living God 

—there is one body, one Lord, one faith, one baptism. 

The Lord is not the head of these human institutions, 

which call themselves his bodies, and membership in 

them will avail nothing as respects the reward of joint-heirship 

with Christ in the Kingdom; but rather (as 

intimated in the words of this verse which we have 

omitted), the worship, reverence, of these human systems, 

when once they are seen to be counterfeits of 

the true body, would be a barrier to a place in the 

true body and in the Kingdom glories. 

As Jesus was not the founder or institutor of these 
bodies, neither is he their head; neither were the 
apostles members of any of these human sects or 
parties, and all of the Lord's true saints who, under 
Satan's misrepresentations, have been led to consider 
these human institutions as bodies of Christ, and to 
join them, while really in heart holding an allegiance 
to Christ as far above them, as the only true authority 
and Head— these are now urged to come out of all 
these various systems; and the light of present truth 
is for the purpose of showing them where they are, 
and permitting them to renounce their allegiance to 
the human systems, and to declare their allegiance 
only to the one Head and to the one "Church which 
is his body." These systems are so numerous, and 
their theories so diverse and confused, that the general 
term "Babylon" (confusion) is applied to them 
as a general or family name, and God's true children 
are admonished, "Come out of her, my people, that 
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive 
not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 

In Israel God gave a typical representation of his 
Church in Aaron, the high priest, and his sons, the 
under priests. So, says the Apostle, we are "a Royal 
Priesthood," and again, "Consider the high priest of 
our profession [or order of priesthood], Christ Jesus." 
Now, be it noted, that in the type the beheading of 
the under-priests was fully illustrated in the fact that 
the under-priests were required to wear "bonnets," 
while the high priest alone was without the bonnet 
and wore the mitre. The high priest was thus proclaimed 
to be the head of the priesthood; and in covering 
their heads the under-priests said in the type, We 
are headless; look to the high priest; he is our head. 
So, in the antitype, the spiritual Royal Priesthood 
must all be headless, must all, in the language of the 
hymn, say:— 

"O to be nothing, nothing, 

To him let all voices be raised; 
He is the fountain of blessing, 
He only is most to be praised." 

And this headless or will-less condition is not 
merely a sentiment; it must be a reality, so far as the 
new creature is concerned. All those who are really 
"members of the body of Christ" must in their hearts 



reach that condition where they can say with the greatest 
sincerity of heart, The Lord's will be done, Teach 
me thy will, O Lord. They must reach that attitude 
of relationship to Christ that will be continually seeking 
to know the will of the Head, and seeking to do 
it. True, the new creature must operate through, and 
think with, the human organism; and the latter being 
imperfect, through the fall, the result may frequently 
be an imperfect apprehension of the will of Christ, as 
well as an imperfect doing of that will. However, the 
imperfections of the flesh are not imputed against the 
new creature, if the heart be loyal in seeking to know 
and in seeking to do the will of Christ. 

"The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy;" 
and the intimation of our text is that it will be fidelity 
to this spirit of the truth, the spirit of Christ working 
in us, in conjunction with the Word of God, the "exceeding 
great and precious promises," that will work 
upon us to effect the change from our own wills to the 
will of Christ— beheading us, making us dead to self 
and alive toward God through Jesus Christ our Lord. 
There is no intimation here of dependence upon sectarian 
arrangements and institutions; each "soul" (individual) 
must be beheaded for himself, and must be 
individually united to Christ, the Head of the Church. 
There is no intimation of the acceptance of sects and 
parties. On the contrary, sectarianism, in every sense 
and degree, is opposed to the Scriptural arrangement 
of union, direct and complete, between the Lord and 
the individual alone. 

What an honor and dignity are thus given to the 
Word of God— and the testimony of Jesus,— not in 
his own words only, but especially in his life and example, 
the spirit of which all members of the body 
must partake of, ere they can have fellowship in his 
sufferings, walking in his footsteps in the same narrow 
way of self-sacrifice— thus to be made meet for a share 
with him in the Kingdom. However, nothing in this 
should be understood to imply that there are no helps, 
no assistances, to be rendered and to be accepted and 
appreciated in the body of Christ, as between the various 
members; indeed, other Scriptures show us that if 
one member of the body rejoices, other members are 
comforted; and if one member suffers the others share 
the injury. And the Apostle makes very clear to us 
that our Lord, the Head, communicates with the members 
of his body by using certain of their own number 
as his representatives— so that one member may serve 
the body as an eye, another as an ear, another as a 
mouth. (1 Cor. 12:12-31.) Nevertheless, we must 

R2845 : page 229 

always consider the headship of the Lord; and the 
provision which he makes for the body is what in 
every instance is to be sought, and not what men may 



scheme or do in self-exaltation and as would-be teachers 
in the body of Christ. 

Dear brethren, let us consider well the force of 
this strong symbolic statement. Let us ask ourselves, 
(1) Have I in obedience to the spirit and example of 
Jesus, and the testimony of God's Word, given up my 
own self-control, self-will? (2) If I have, to whom 
did I give it?— to a large denomination, professing to 
be the body of Christ, or to a little denomination, professing 
the same? (3) Am I looking to these as my 
head, my instructors, guides to my conscience, the 
directors of my spiritual energies? Or have I renounced 
my own headship and fully accepted the 
headship of Christ Jesus,— to the ignoring of all other 
contrary heads and authorities— to be taught of the 
Lord, guided of the Lord, used of the Lord, and given 
such experiences as his infinite wisdom sees best for 
me? (4) And am I fully content to be thus a member 
of his body, cut off from all others, and to be used 
according to his will as I find it recorded in his Word? 
Or am I, so to speak, a double-headed man, seeking to 
go through life acknowledging the headship of Jesus, 
but at the same time having another head or will of 
my own— and thus what the Apostle James called 
"a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways," 

R2846 : page 229 

attempting to follow my own inclinations at times, and 
the Lord's directions at other times, and thus unstable, 
unreliable, as a member of his body, and unsuitable to 
be used by him, but in a condition to be ultimately 
repudiated if I do not become entirely beheaded as respects 
my own will? (5) Or have I, still worse than 
this, three heads, or parts of three heads,— some of 
my own head, or will, not fully cut off; some of the 
head or will of Christ, incompletely attached; and 
some of a sectarian, man-made head— a confusion 
worse confounded, which renders me utterly unfit to 
comprehend and obey the mind of the spirit? 

Dearly beloved, the time is short, the great prize 
we seek is near, the "mark" or standard of character 
to be attained is plainly set before us, and the Scriptures 
are luminous with illustrations of the necessity 
for complete consecration to the Lord,— showing us 
that it means deadness to self. Shall we not each see 
to it that by the grace of God every other head and 
authority is completely cut off and cast aside, and that 
henceforth, as the Apostle expressed it, "For me to 
live is Christ"— as a member of the body of Christ, 
guided by his will as discerned through his Word and 
providence and example? This is another picture of 
full completion of character-likeness to our Lord. Did 
he not fully give up his own headship, his own will, 
to the Father's will? He surely did; and as that full 
consecration was rewarded by the Father, so we have 



the assurance that our full consecration (and nothing 
less than this) will be fully rewarded by our Lord and 
Head in the Kingdom. 



R2846 : page 229 

ABRAHAM CALLED OF GOD. 

--GEN. 12:1-9.~JULY28.~ 

"I will bless thee, and make thy name 
great; and thou shalt be a blessing." 

ABRAM received his special call about four centuries 

after the deluge. The three sons of 

Noah became the roots, so to speak, of the different 

branches of the human family— spreading out in different 

directions. In the words of another, "The 

world was populated in three different lines by the 

sons of Noah: Shem, from whom were derived the 

Jews and other Semitic races; Ham, the ancestor of 

the colored races; and Japheth, amongst whose descendants 

are the European nations. To these three, 

the diverging races and the languages of men converge, 

as rays of light to their sources." 

The four centuries had undoubtedly accomplished 
much in the way of populating the immediate district 
which is called the "cradle of the race," in the vicinity 
of Babylonia. During these four centuries the downward 
tendency of our fallen race was farther manifested; 
for altho Noah was evidently a man of faith 
in God, and his sons and their wives, saved in the 
Ark with him, were doubtless firm believers in Jehovah 
God— their experiences attesting his greatness and 
his wisdom— nevertheless, in a comparatively short 
time their posterity, lacking faith in God and in his 
promises that there would never more be a flood, 
undertook the erection of the Tower of Babel as a 
protection, little realizing, apparently, the folly of such 
an attempt to outwit the Almighty. 

It was here that the oneness of the race, exercised 
injuriously, was effectually broken up by the Lord, by 
confounding the language of the people. Just how 
he accomplished this division of language is not 
explained, nor is such an explanation necessary. The 
fact is that language is split up not only into great 
divisions, but into minor dialects, notwithstanding the 
fact that, as surely as the whole race was originally 
one, the language at first must likewise have been one. 
This divergency of language tended to the disintegration 
of the race and its scattering into various bands 

R2846 : page 230 



or tribes— ultimately into every corner of the world, 
as at present. And such changes of conditions, in 
temperature, habits of life, etc., have undoubtedly 
had much to do with the great variety of types amongst 
men which we see today— these racial changes coming 
in gradually during the past 4000 years. 

Abram, and so far as we may know from the 
Scriptures, his father and all of his brethren, maintained 
to a considerable degree a faith in Jehovah; 
and in harmony with this, enjoyed divine favors similar 
to those which operated in, and brought blessings to, 
Noah. But during those four centuries, so far as the 
records show, the world in general had become idolatrous 
and morally corrupt. 

During all those four centuries there was no 
preaching of the gospel, because there was no gospel 
to preach, no good tidings authorized to be proclaimed. 
Nor was there any threatening of men with an eternity 
of torture, because no such thing is true. The 
world simply moved along, taking its own course, 
which, as we have seen, is a downward one. We may 
safely say that while an individual might for a time 
hold himself from a moral decline, or might even take 
a few upward steps toward a better condition, mentally, 
morally and physically, yet we cannot surmise, from 
what we know of the race and the tendencies of sin 
working in its members, that any number would make 
upward progress: on the contrary, experience proves 
that the tendencies on the part of the whole is continually 
downward, in response to some moral force corresponding 
to gravitation. Observation of the Scripture 
records as well as observation of life teach us that 
any particular and extended uplift of our race or its 
members must come through a power from on high— 
a power outside of mankind. And this power of God 
operates chiefly through the mind, and is conveyed 
generally through divine promises, which the Apostle 
declares are designed of God to work in us both "to 
will and to do God's good pleasure." 

Here we find Abram, the youngest son of Terah, 
living with his father and with his brother Nahor. 
His elder brother Haran was of the same family group, 
and is supposed to have left two children when he and 
his wife died— Lot and Sarah. It was at this time that 
in some manner, not explained to us, the Lord manifested 
to Abram his favor, calling him to separate 
himself; to leave his own country and his father's 
house, and to expect, in so doing, increased manifestations 
of divine favor and blessing. Apparently this 
call, while given before his father Terah's death, was 
understood by Abram to be a preparatory admonition 
so that he might respond, as he did, directly after his 
father's death. Meantime he had reached the age of 70 
years, had married Sarah and had considerable possessions 
in the way of flocks and herds, with quite a 
retinue of servants and assistants necessary to the care 



of these. Abram, for his name had not yet been 
changed to Abraham, was what is called in that 
country a sheik, and his change of abode in response 
to the Lord's call meant a great deal in the way of 
breaking up of established usages, sundering of family 
ties, etc. How large his camp must have been may 
be judged from the fact that a little later on (Gen. 14: 14), 
the number of his armed servants born in his own 
household was 318— implying a general household of 
at least 1,000 persons. Abram was thus a sort of king 
according to the conditions of that time; or a feudal 
lord or baron according to later conditions and usages 
in Great Britain; a sheik, father or ruler, according 
to his own time and country. 

Few seem to get the proper thought respecting 
the call of Abram: he was not called to escape hell 
and eternal torment, nor was he called to go to heaven. 
He was called to leave Chaldea and go forth whithersoever 
the Lord in his providence might direct. Terah, 
his father, was not called, nor was Nahor, his older 
brother. Sarah, who had become his wife, shared with 
him in the call, of course, but altho he took with him 
his nephew, Lot, the latter was not included in the 
call; altho a sharer in God's favors to Abram, he had 
neither part nor lot in the call and the subsequent 
promises and covenant connected with it; and this was 
all right. It implied no injustice on God's part. God 
had a great and wonderful plan for man's salvation 
which he purposed to work out largely through human 
instrumentality, and it was his own business, and no 
one else's, whom of the fallen race he would elect to 
use as his servant and as the channel for these 
purposed blessings— the character of which will be 
more clearly delineated in future lessons. 

During the five years between the time God first 
called Abram and the time when he started for Canaan, 
after his father's death, there was abundant opportunity 
for doubt and fear to do their work in his heart, 
and to hinder his obedience. Undoubtedly he thought 
the whole matter over carefully; and from what we 
know of his general character, we must assume that 
he decided the matter speedily— his confidence in the 
Lord being so great he could not question the wisdom 
of following such a guide. Nevertheless, the time 
must have come when it would be necessary to inform 
his friends and relatives respecting his departure and 
respecting his call of God. We may reasonably surmise 
their opposition, their lack of faith in the matter, and 
how they would endeavor to dissuade Abram from 
going, telling him he was deceiving himself, and that 
his chances for becoming great were far better at home 
than in his proposed emigration. No doubt they 

R2847 : page 231 

taunted him with a call which did not clearly specify 



where he was to go;— for we have the assurance of the 
Apostle that he obeyed God, "not knowing 
whither he went."— Heb. 11:8. 

Abram's call very much resembles the call of the 
elect Church. Neither are we called to escape eternal 
torment. Neither do we at first comprehend the leadings 
of divine providence, but are to follow and be led 
and taught of God day by day. Our friends also are 
in Babylon, in confusion, and they, like Abraham's 
friends, would dissuade us from the exercise of 
full confidence in the divine promises— they would persuade 
us of the folly of leaving Babylon, its comforts 
and associations: they assure us that our opportunities 
for greatness, etc., will be distinctly lessened by the 
course of obedience which we take. Nevertheless we, 
like Abram, go forth taking all of our possessions 
with us, great or small— nothing must be left behind 
to be a treasure in Babylon and to attract our hearts 
thither again. All things must be brought with us 
so that not our own lives and talents only, but our influence 
upon others, must all be made to count— every 
item of it— in harmony with the Lord's promises. 

The Lord's promise to his elect Church, designated 
Israel and children of Abraham, is very similar 
to the promise made to Abram, as recorded in this 
lesson. To us the Lord says, "Ye are. ..a royal 
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people;" yet 
these promises belong in such a large degree to the 
future, that only by the exercise of faith like Abram's 
is it possible for us to appreciate the situation and rejoice 
in and live up to the privileges of this position. 

To us who are united to Christ, the Father's words 
specially apply, "I will bless thee and make thy name 
great and thou shalt be called blessed." The fulfilment 
has already commenced in our hearts, but that 
is not the end, not the fulness, not the ultimate meaning 
of the promise; for by and by this holy nation 
(the body of Christ, the Church), shall be great indeed 
when filled with the divine blessing and power as 
God's glorified Kingdom. We realize, too, that while 
it is our blessed privilege to let shine upon others the 
light which the Lord by his spirit has graciously 
shined into our hearts, nevertheless, our time for bestowing 
the great blessing is still future— that it belongs 
to the period for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth." We reason 
that, altho our name may be now cast out as evil, and 
the reproaches bestowed upon the Head of the body 
may fall also upon us, his members, nevertheless, the 
time is surely hastening when the name, Christ, shall 
be great throughout all the earth; and that being the 
name of our Bridegroom it will also be our name as 
his bride and joint-heir. We look forward with joy 
to the time when the holy nation, now so misunderstood 
and considered a peculiar people, shall recompense 
the poor, blinded, Satan-deceived world and 



nominal church for all the evils inflicted upon the 
Christ, head and body, by blessing them, returning 
good for evil in the highest degree— instructing and 
uplifting all who will to return to divine favor. 

It is also true of the spiritual seed of Abraham 
that the Lord defends their cause, and that those who 
afflict or injure them, figuratively injure the apple of 
the Lord's eye, while those who bless them are sure 
to be compensated. Whosoever shall give a cup of 
cold water to one of the least of the Lord's disciples 
shall eventually receive a great reward for the kindness 
—if not in the present life, then, in the life to 
come. -Matt. 10:42; Zech. 2:8. 

Abraham's experience is recorded as an evidence 
of his faith. It would have been vain for him to have 
pleaded great faith in the Lord and to have said, The 
Lord is as able to bless me and to use me in Chaldea, 
Babylonia, as in any other place; and since what he 
seeks is to know my faith, he can just as well see 
that I have it here. Some who class themselves as 
spiritual Israel, seem to reason after this manner, but 
they make a great mistake. It is true that the Lord 
looks upon the heart, and that it is our faith, and not 
our imperfect works, which commends us to him, but 
he assures us that if we have the faith it will speedily 
manifest itself in works; and that if we have the faith 
and fail to act in harmony with it, to the extent of 
our ability, the faith will die out. Perfect works are 
not demanded of us, because we are imperfect through 
the fall; but any who would maintain a justified standing 
before the Lord, through faith, must manifest works 
in harmony with their faith to the extent of ability, 
for faith without works is dead— has lost all its vitality, 
all its virtue, all its life. It is thenceforth dead, 
worthless.— Jas. 2:17. 

Justification is a free gift, "not of works, lest any 
man should boast"— it is God's gift through Christ, 
based upon the ransom. But as it is accounted unto 
us only for the purpose of permitting us to go on— to 
sanctification— to self-sacrifice, such results or works 
must be forthcoming, or it will prove that we have 
received "the grace of God in vain."— Eph. 2:9; 
2 Cor. 6:1. 

After Abraham had thus proven himself obedient, 
showing his faith by his obedience, the Lord revealed 
his purposes to him much more specifically than at first, 
saying, "Unto thy seed will I give this land." This 
promise must have seemed quite improbable at that 
time, for the land was already peopled with strong 
nations, whose posterity would undoubtedly increase 
greatly, while Abram, on the contrary, had as yet no 

R2847 : page 232 

child. There was room for doubt in Abram's mind, 
but there was also room for faith. His faith accepted 



the promise, and he ratified it by building there an 

altar, on which we presume he offered sacrifices to the 

Lord, typical of the great sacrifice of Christ, through 

the efficacy of which all of God's promises will be fulfilled. 

Let us carefully notice that the special promise 

of God given to Abram ignored Lot and his family, 

and ignored the thousand or more persons of Abram's 

household. It is proper to call special attention 

to these matters in view of the very erroneous conceptions 

of God's elections, which have gained access 

to nearly all minds, and which need to be gotten rid 

of if we would rightly understand the divine plan of 

the ages. Those non-elect were "passed by" and 

not associated in the Abrahamic call and election, but 

not therefore sentenced to eternal torment; but, just 

like the non-elect of this Gospel age, they must wait 

for divine blessings until Abraham's seed shall bless 

the world during the Millennium. 

There is no suggestion in this promise neither that 
Abraham was to preach the gospel to any of his 1,000 
camp-followers, and herdsmen, nor that any of them 
were in any danger of an eternity of torture by reason 
of such a commission not having been given to Abram. 
The fact is that the wages of sin is death— including 
trials, weaknesses and sufferings of the present 
life incidental to the dying process. The whole 
world was in danger of this penalty,— more than this, 
the danger feature was past, for they were already in 
death;— dying under the original sentence passed 
against father Adam, and shared by all of his progeny. 
-Rom. 5:12. 

The whole race therefore, including Abram and 
Lot and the servants and all the families of the earth, 
were going down into the great prison house— death. 
No way of escape had yet been provided by the Almighty 
on any terms or conditions, and hence there 
was no gospel to preach; hence, too, altho the Lord 
subsequently made known to Abraham that the blessing 
of all of the families of the earth would in due time 
come through his seed— the Christ— nevertheless, the 
proclamation of this gospel or good tidings of a resurrection 
—of a recovery of the dead through the merits 
of the great atonement sacrifice— could not be made, 
could not be authorized of God, till first of all our Lord 
Jesus had paid the ransom price with his own life, 
purchasing the whole world of mankind, and the right 
in due time to resurrect such of them as will come into 
full accord with the divine law. It is appropriate, 
therefore, that the Scriptures tell us distinctly that 
this great salvation from death "began to be spoken 
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that 
heard him."— Heb. 2:3. 



R2847 : page 232 



ABRAHAM'S AND LOT'S TESTINGS. 

-GEN. 13:1-18. -AUG. 4.- 

"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to 
you, do ye even so to them."— Matt. 7:12. 

DEVELOPMENT of character implies a variety 
of experiences and tests. In choosing 
Abraham as his agent and channel through whom he 
would bring to the world his purposed blessings, God 
chose a good man, but not a perfect one— for there 
was not a perfect man to choose, as there has not been 
since, of all Adam's posterity. While God called 
Abraham, he made him only partial promises until he 
had manifested faith by obedience. And it was appropriate 
that various and severe tests of faith should 
come before the fulness of divine favor should be 
guaranteed him. One of these faith-tests came through 
a drouth in the land of Canaan, and, as a result, a food 
scarcity, a famine, in the region where Abraham had 
settled, flocks and herds. 

It would naturally be a severe test of faith for 
him to see his cattle lean and dying, and to think of 

R2848 : page 232 

the fertile country which he had left, and that this 

drouth-stricken land was the one to which the 

Lord had called him. He must go somewhere to find 

water and sustenance, and concluded not to go back 

to Babylon, but to journey south-westward into the 

country bordering Egypt. Egypt was well advanced 

in civilization, and like Chaldea, his former home, was 

a heathen land— to the extent that the people had considerably 

lost sight of the one God and his worship, 

and had become worshipers of various deities. It was 

a dangerous experiment: Abram might have become 

enamored of the civilization, etc., of Egypt and have 

lost his respect for the Lord's promise in regard to 

Canaan; yet it did not have this effect, but apparently, 

on the contrary, became a blessing to him; for his experience 

there convinced him more and more that he 

could not have true happiness under the prevailing 

conditions: he would rather wander about and have 

no continuing city, and not be bound by any of the 

customs and rules of the world which recognized not 

God. His experience taught him to look for, to hope 

for, to wait for, the New Jerusalem city or government, 

which has not yet been established, but for 

which the Lord's people still pray: "Thy Kingdom 

come, thy will be done on earth." 

R2848 : page 233 



Abraham little realized how much he needed to 
pray, "abandon us not in temptation, but deliver us 
from the evil one." On arrival he, as a great man, 
was brought to the attention of the king, and Sarah, 
his wife, was introduced,— but as his sister, or niece, 
not as his wife. Abraham heard probably about this 
time of an incident which had occurred with one of 
the Pharaohs, of which we now know through recently 
discovered papyrus records— that at the instance of 
his princes he sent an armed force and took a beautiful 
woman from her husband for his harem. Sarah 
was a beautiful woman, and Abraham feared that 
Pharaoh might kill him in order to have his wife. 
This difficulty probably did not occur to him when he 
started his journey, nor until he had arrived there 
and was called before the king. Thus the Lord's 
people always find it: if they leave the land of promise, 
seeking better things in the world, they find their 
difficulties and trials greatly increased. 

Abraham determined that as an expedient for the 
preservation of his life he would tell but a part 
of the truth and speak of Sarah as his sister, without 
acknowledging her as his wife. The transaction was 
an ignoble one every way, and quite unworthy of the 
man; but the Lord did not forsake him, but, as the 
record shows, returned Sarah to him with a rebuke 
from the heathen king which must have stung Abraham 
severely, and have served as a lesson for the remainder 
of his life. Thus all things work together 
for good to them that love God— even their mistakes 
and slips become lessons and blessings under divine 
providence. Having learned his lesson, Abraham 
quickly retraced his steps to the land of promise, returning 
again to Bethel where first he had built an 
altar to the Lord and formally consecrated himself: 
there again Abraham called upon the name of the 
Lord. The prompt retracing of his steps is also a 
lesson for the Lord's people of this Gospel age. If we 
find that through lack of faith or weakness of the 
flesh a wrong step has been taken, contrary to the 
Lord's will and our best spiritual interests, no time 
should be lost in retracing the steps and in calling 
upon the Lord. We have an altar consecrated with 
the precious blood of Christ, far superior every way 
to that which Abraham consecrated with the blood of 
typical animals; and the Apostle exhorts us, "Let us 
come boldly [courageously— full of faith] to the 
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in every time of need."— Heb. 4:16. 

One of the strongest evidences of the truth of the 
Bible records, and that they are not the work of 
priests or knaves, is the fact that the weaknesses and 
frailties of its grandest and most luminous characters 
are depicted with as free a hand as their virtues and 
strong qualities. Had the story of Abraham and the 
story of David, both men full of faith and after God's 



own heart, and acknowledged to be his friends, been 
concocted, they assuredly would have omitted all 
the blemishes of the present narratives. As it is, the 
weaknesses of these men, and divine compassion toward 
them notwithstanding these, and their faith and 
repentance and reestablishment in divine favor, have 
been lessons of incalculable value to the Lord's saints 
throughout the age, many of whom have at times 
found themselves more or less similarly entrapped, and 
to some extent stumbled by the great temptations of 
the world, the flesh and the Devil. 

Abraham's flocks and herds increased, and the 
number of his servants. Likewise also did Lot's— tho 
he was by no means as wealthy a man as his uncle. 
Prosperity seems as likely to bring trouble as adversity, 
or more so; and it does not surprise us to find 
that a strife broke out between the herdsmen of the 
two masters, and that apparently the strife extended 
to Lot. The land at that time was not thickly 
settled, nor was it owned and controlled by syndicates; 
hence Abraham and Lot moved hither and thither 
through the grazing country, merely seeking to find 
unoccupied pasturage, and as the Canaanites (Lowlanders) 
and the Perizites (Highlanders) dwelt in 
Canaan, it necessarily meant that migratory bands, 
such as Abraham's, would find the pasturage at times 
somewhat restricted. Abraham's prompt course for 
the maintenance of peace is worthy of emulation. 
His words to Lot on the subject would make a good 
motto for the home or for the shop; "Let there be no 
strife, I pray thee, between me and thee... for we 
are brethren." The Lord's people are not all peaceably 
disposed according to the flesh, but peaceableness 
is a prominent element in the new nature, the new 
mind, the new will, the new heart; hence peaceableness 
is to be cultivated and more attention is to be 
given to it in proportion as we find our natural disposition 
to be contentious. This is one of the ways the 
Lord's people are to be renewed in word and in deed; 
—"By the transformation of their minds." 

Abraham was not only peaceable, but generous, as 
his proposition to Lot shows; for altho he was the 
richer of the two by far, and his larger herds and 
flocks required more abundant provision, he nevertheless 
gave Lot the choice. Here is another lesson for 
all of the Lord's people: generosity, not an unreasoning 
and unreasonable generosity which would give 
away everything, but an even-handed, fair generosity 
which is well represented in our Golden Text; viz., 
the golden rule that we should treat others as we 
would reasonably wish them to treat us: whoever follows 
this rule, will, like Abraham, find that in the end 

R2848 : page 234 

it will be profitable— even tho it may at first seem 



unprofitable. 

It would appear that Lot was less generous than 
his uncle— more selfish; and taking advantage of the 
latter's liberal proposition he chose the rich, fertile 
valley of the Jordan— the land of Sodom, of which the 
record is that it was "like the garden of the Lord" 
(the Garden of Eden), and like the most favored portion 
of Egypt. Lot was a keen business man apparently, 
for his choice signified not only the richest 
of the grazing country, but additionally the best 
market for his flocks and herds; because the Jordan 
valley seems to have been a commercial highway frequented 
by traveling caravans, etc., the best of customers 
for sheep and cattle. Abraham and Lot together 
might have taken the Jordan valley at first, seeing its 
suitability to their occupation: no doubt the reason 
why Abraham avoided it is found in the fact of the 
wickedness of the people there, and that he did not 
wish to bring either himself or wife or servants into 
close contact with such people, preferring the less fertile 
district because of their separateness from such associations, 
with which he could not feel in harmony 
or fellowship. 

Lot possessed much less faith and much less character 
than his uncle, but was also a good man, and 
his determination to make the country of the Jordan 
his home does not signify that he had fellowship with 
the Sodomites. On the contrary, the record is that 
their course "vexed his righteous soul." (2 Pet. 2:8.) 
He evidently was deluded, as many of the Lord's people 
of today are deluded, into association with evil influences 
for the sake of worldly prosperity. He no 
doubt persuaded himself that he could live separate 
from the contaminations of Sodom, and even exercise 
a moral influence over the unrighteous. How unwise, 
very unwise, his course really was may be seen in the 
light of his subsequent history. The wisdom of 
Abraham stands out in striking contrast, and the two 
experiences furnish valuable lessons for all who are 
seeking the heavenly city and praying, Thy Kingdom 
come. Abraham's course illustrates our Lord's words, 
"Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven and its righteousness 
and all these [needful] things shall be added 
unto you." Lot's course illustrates our Lord's words, 
"What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole 
world!" Lot's quest for wealth, etc., no doubt brought 
rich returns, for he became a wealthy and influential 
man in Sodom, but his wealth and influence cost too 
much; first, they cost his peace of mind, for "his 
righteous soul was vexed;" he had no real happiness. 
Second, it cost him his children, sons and daughters, 
all but two unmarried ones, and even they apparently 
were blemished through their contact with evil example. 
And it cost him also his wife, whose sympathies 
for her children over-balanced her interest in the 
Lord and righteousness. It cost him additionally, in 



the end, all his flocks and herds and wealth, all of 
which went down in the fire from heaven upon the 
city of destruction. 

R2849 : page 234 

There is a great lesson here for us all, especially 
for such lovers of righteousness as have the care, the 
guardianship of children: the lesson is that they 
should think less of earthly advantages, social, political 
and financial, and think more, much more, of the 
moral and spiritual influences and advantages obtainable 
through isolation from the evil which is in the 
world,— so far as possible "make straight paths for 
your feet, lest that which is lame [blemished through 
sin] be turned out of the way [of righteousness]."— 
Heb. 12:13. 

Abraham did not attempt to coerce his nephew; 
but, properly no doubt, after having advised him to the 
contrary, he let him take his course, contenting himself 
with giving the admonition and example to the 
contrary. Here is another good lesson for the Lord's 
people; very many who like to have their own liberty 
are disposed to use force and coercion in dealing with 
others, and the results are generally bad for both 
parties. Lack of faith lies at the bottom of such difficulties; 
self-will attempts to regulate our own affairs, 
and branching out attempts also to regulate the affairs 
of others: whereas a consecrated will, resting by faith 
upon the Lord's promise, permits the Lord to have the 
helm; to control not only in respect to the believer's 
personal interests, but also in respect to the interests 
and affairs of others. Abraham had manifested his 
faith in God, not only in respect to the future blessings 
promised, but also in respect to the incidental 
details of his every-day life. Hence he could afford 
not only to not interfere with Lot's liberty, but could 
be generous to the extent of giving Lot his choice, 
knowing that the Lord would take care of him, and 
fulfil to him all the gracious promises incidental to 
his call. And in proportion as we are children of 
Abraham by faith we should have and should continually 
exercise similar faith, that we may experience 
similar blessings under God's providence. 

While Lot's choice led him farther from the right, 
Abraham's blessing was increased by his course; for 
again the Lord appeared to him, in a manner not explained, 
and gave him renewed assurance respecting 
the original promise, telling him to look in every direction 
and to know assuredly that, while this land at 
the present time was under various rulers, it should 
in time be given to him and his posterity everlastingly. 
Yet with this renewal of the promise must have come 
another testing of faith, because Abraham as yet had 

R2849 : page 235 



no child. How improbable, therefore, the fulfilment 
of the Lord's word, that his seed should ultimately be 
very numerous, hyperbolically "as the dust of the 
earth!" Yet Abraham's faith wavered not. Likewise 
the faith of the Lord's people today wavers not 
respecting his promise— for it has not yet had a fulfilment, 
as the Apostles Paul and Stephen both 
declare. 

Abraham lived in the land many years and died 
there, yet was a pilgrim and stranger; a sojourner 
and not an owner to the day of his death. (Heb. 11:13.) 
Stephen's explanation of the matter is very explicit. 
(Acts 7:5.) He declares that God never gave him so 
much of the space as would be covered by his foot; 
and points out that the time for the fulfilment of this 
promise is future— during the resurrection, the Millennium 
of Christ's reign, after the heavenly city, 
the New Jerusalem, the glorified Church, the bride 
with the Bridegroom, shall have been established in 
the control of the world as God's Kingdom.— Dan. 7:13,14; 
1 Cor. 15:24. 

With each manifestation of obedience on the part 
of Abraham came fresh blessings from the Lord, fresh 
repetitions and expanded declarations respecting the 
divine purpose, strengthening and encouraging him. 
Nevertheless he understood that the realization of his 
hope lay in the future, and this was clearly indicated 
by the Lord's words, "Arise, journey through the 
land, in the length and in the breadth of it, for I will 
give it unto thee." In compliance with this instruction, 
that he was to be a pilgrim, moving from place to 
place, Abraham only removed to Mamre, and, doubtless 
in harmony with his custom at each new stopping 
place, he built there another altar unto the Lord— another 
typical acknowledgement of sin, of his own unworthiness, 
and of the fact that his standing before 
God, his acceptance with him, was in the merits of a 
great Sin Offering which had not yet been made. So 
with us who are the Lord's people, wherever we are; 
we are under divine care, and may rest, and may have 
the peace of God which passeth all understanding, 
ruling in our hearts: nevertheless, we are not to be at 
home, nor to seek to feel at home under present imperfect 
conditions. We are to continually remember 
that the Lord has promised us a heavenly inheritance, 
and we are to seek for and wait for it, assured that it 
will be ours if we remain faithful to the end of life's 
pilgrimage. 



page 235 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Tho a subscriber to 
the WATCH TOWER I have never written you personally 
to tell you of the inestimable blessings I have derived 
from reading the MILLENNIAL DAWN series and the 
WATCH TOWER. O, the light, peace and joy that came 
to me! The riches of my Father's precious Word are 
now inexpressible. And you, dear brother, are the 
blessed instrument the Lord has provided to bring 
about these blessings. I am happy to say that by his 
grace I am running for, or pressing toward, the mark 
for j oint-heirship . 

Your humble brother in the Lord, 

THOMAS YOUNG,-Jamaica. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have been having 
quite an experience as a result of my attempts to teach 
the truth. As I have previously told you, I have a 
class of young people in Sunday school and have been 
teaching them along the lines of expositions given in 
the WATCH TOWER. This has brought down upon my 
head a spirit of opposition from the pastor and some 
others. They removed me as Superintendent of the 
Sunday school, and it was understood that I was to 
give up my class. I resigned the class, but the pupils 
would not have it so, so I am taking them along with 
me. I am finding the value of endeavoring to be "as 
wise as a serpent and as harmless as a dove," and also 
that it is not wise to "cast pearls before swine." I am 
trying to be more discreet and discriminating in handing 
out the truth, and find that everything must be 
done in the spirit of Christ if anything is to be 
accomplished. 

The Lord has opened up opportunities for service 
where I least expected them. I have one family started 
in the DAWN study, and through them two other families 
are becoming interested. My experiences thus far 
seem to be that even among seemingly truth-loving 
people many are loath to accept any doctrines, except 
as they seem to be in harmony with their denominational 
tendencies. I thoroughly enjoy the WATCH 
TOWER, and was very glad to see in a recent number the 
article entitled, "Who were Those Saints?" 

Sincerely yours in the Master's service, 

HENRY M. CAULKINS,--New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-For the last twelve 
years I have been a firm believer in the doctrines you 
teach. I have read VOL. I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN several 
times; also VOLS. II. and III. a number of times, 
and they have given me great consolation and comfort. 



All that I know of the plan of salvation I have learned 

from your writings. I was raised by strict Methodist 

parents, but all I learned from them only served to 

confuse and bewilder me, and to make me almost an unbeliever 

in the Bible as a divine revelation. After reading 

the DAWNS the fog was lifted from my mental 

vision, the crooked places were all made straight, and 

all was clear as noonday. May God continue to bless 

you and your work, is my prayer. 

D. P. SCULL,-Pennsylvania. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I feel constrained to 
write and tell you how very much I enjoy and appreciate 
your presentations of the truth regarding God's 

page 236 

wonderful "plan of the ages." My mother has read 
nearly everything you have written for nearly fourteen 
years, and has taught it to me, as fast as I would receive 
it; but until recently I have not taken the interest I 
should in trying to understand the plan, nor did I see 
the beauty in it I do now. Last March, during the 
revival at a Wesleyan Methodist Church near us, I was 
converted and joined that church, thinking that I had 
found a haven of rest for my weary feet. A few weeks 
afterwards mother laid VOL. V. of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN in my lap, asking me to read certain parts of it. 
I put aside all the prejudices I had formerly felt for 
your books and began to read for myself. I was completely 
captivated, from the first, with the beauty and 
harmony of the truth as you presented it. 

The more I read the more I became convinced of 
the folly of remaining in the organization I had just 
joined, especially as it makes such a specialty of teaching 
the God-dishonoring doctrine of eternal torment. 
Acting upon my convictions I withdrew from the 
church on May 14, after telling the pastor my reasons 
for doing so. He acted very reasonably— admitted that 
the church could not grant me fellowship unless I 
conformed to the creed. He, however, made it a point 
to warn his followers against MILLENNIAL DAWN. He 
said the author was a deep writer who mixed truth and 
error in such a manner that it appeared to be truth. I 
told him I believed it was all truth, for everything you 
said was based upon the Bible. I loaned him Vol. V., 
but I do not think he read it— "for fear of the Jews." 

Now I am free, thank God, to read anything you 
write, and my only regret is that I cannot recall the 
years of wasted opportunity— the time seems so short 
and I have so much to learn, for I am but a "babe" 
in the school of Christ. I am perfectly willing to consecrate 
my all to him; therefore, dear brother, I ask an 
interest in your prayers that I may be strengthened in 



love and faith and may become a true member of the 
"little flock," if it be according to his will. Again let 
me thank you for leading me "out of the darkness into 
his marvelous light." As I reflect on the Lord's 
goodness my eyes fill with tears, and I long to shout, 
"Glory to God for his love, wisdom, justice and power!" 
I feel it needless to ask him to bless you, for he will 
surely bless the instrument through which he is dispensing 
the "meat in due season to the household of 
faith." I beg that you will pardon my trespassing 
upon your valuable time. I believe I could write all day 
and never tell you half I feel. I will send you some 
money as the Lord prospers me. We are very poor, 
and I handle but little money, but I want to give you 
a little whenever I can. 
Your sister in Christian love, 

MINNIE R. BARNETT,-South Carolina. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We continue giving 
thanks to our Heavenly Father for the unfailing supply 
of "meat in due season" that comes to us through 
your labors, nor do we forget the workers in our 
prayers. We realize that the famine is sore in the land 
and that darkness is rapidly settling down upon the 
people. How rapidly the truth is becoming vitiated 
by the flood of false doctrines; how completely people 
are losing the last vestige of the faith! 

Brother Thompson is in town for a short visit, 
and we were very much pleased, indeed, with the last 
page in the June 1 TOWER. It is good to know the 
Pilgrims are busy spreading the truth; cheering to know 
there are so many places where Israelites indeed may be 
found. It helps to sustain our interest— makes us 
more patient to feel that the Lord is mindful of his 
own in this way; however isolated they may be, their 
"bread and water" is sure, spiritually and temporally. 

With Christian love to yourself and those associated 
with you in the work, and making mention of you 
all in our prayers, Yours in the one faith, 

T. K. McGINN,-Manitoba. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Brother Draper has come 
and gone. I bade him adieu and God-speed yesterday, 
and trust his heart was rejoiced and comforted by our 
rejoicing in the glorious light of the truth. Our meetings 
were not large, but I feel safe in saying that there 
was an intense interest depicted on each countenance, 
and that all our little gathering and a few from outside 
were deeply impressed with all the meetings, which 
were held in our new hall. 

On Sunday morning, at 10.30, about forty assembled 
at Balmy Beach (about 4 miles from the center of the 



city, many having to travel 6 to 7 miles) to witness the 
symbol of baptism in water. The morning was bright, 
cool, and very windy, causing quite a heavy rolling 
surf, which rather added to the interest of the occasion. 
Four sisters and five brothers were buried in the waves, 
thus showing forth to quite a large number of spectators 
on the beach their immersion into Christ's death. 
Our little party was indeed a happy, joyous little band 
as we returned home, to assemble again at our hall at 
3 P.M., and listen to our dear Brother Draper pour 
forth more of the precious things from the Holy Word. 

At 7 P.M. our last meeting commenced, there being 
88 or 90 in the hall, quite a number of the friends and 
acquaintances of the dear brothers and sisters being 
present, but very few strangers, and about 9.30 our 
feast of fat things came to an end for the time, and I 
think it would have been difficult to picture a more 
happy lot of faces than all wore; all were overjoyed 
at the precious things they had heard, and the words 
of comfort, exhortation and strength which came to us 
from our dear Brother. I feel that I am expressing the 
heart's desire of our assembly when I say that all were 
deeply thankful to our Heavenly Father, to our dear 
Lord and Master, and also to you, dear Brother, and 
our dear Brother Draper for providing us with such 
good things. I pray God we may continue abounding 
in love, peace and joy in the Lord. 

I must not close without mentioning one of the 
most interesting incidents of the meetings. A dear 
Brother, having come out from amongst the Jews (but 
quite a stranger to us at first), became deeply impressed 
with the "True Gospel." He had been seeking rest 
amongst the sects, but had found little or none. One 
of his difficulties, and perhaps his chief one, was the 
Trinitarian doctrine, and his face beamed with delight 
when he learned we did not accept this. He was indeed 
hungering for the truth, and at the close of Saturday 
night's meeting he came to me and expressed his 
desire to symbolize his consecration in water baptism, 
which he did on Sunday A.M. He is a most intelligent 
brother and withal so simple. He has already 

page 237 

undergone much persecution for Christ's sake, his wife 
and children being taken from him, as it were. As I 
understand it, they had their choice to remain with him 
or be cast out of the synagogue. He indeed seems to 
be an "Israelite indeed." We (I need hardly say) are 
all much interested in this dear brother. Truly some, 
at least, are "looking upon Him whom they pierced, 
and mourning," and yet their hearts rejoice to find Him 
whom they have waited for. 

With much love from all the dear ones here, and a 
desire for your continued prayers for our stability in 
the faith, 



Your servant in the Lord Jesus, 

EBENEZER STOVEL,-Ontario. 



R2849 : page 237 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-The article on "Patient 
Endurance," in April 1 TOWER seemed most opportune, 
as we heard a number of our people speak of it particularly; 
and I may say it is most highly appreciated by 
myself. Indeed, dear Brother Russell, every number 
of the blessed TOWER seems fraught with the spiritual 
refreshment most needed at the time, and my heart is 
continually lifted in deep gratitude to our Father for 
the heavenly food furnished through your instrumentality. 
That you have been enabled to so empty yourself 
as to be filled with God's precious messages so richly, 
is a cause of deep gratitude from all the household of 
faith. In reading over recently the first and second 
volumes of DAWN, I am astonished at the many things 
that had previously escaped me, or failed to leave their 
impression— probably through the pressure of worldly 
cares. The last three years have brought me riches of 
knowledge and experience, yet with them such an overwhelming 
sense of my utter unworthiness and incompetency 
that I would surely sink, but for clinging to 
the cross. 

I ask your prayers that I may not receive the grace 
of God in vain, but forget the things that are behind, 
and press forward to the mark— with patient endurance. 

With earnest desire for the continuation of His 
rich favors to you, and all needed strength, both physically 
and spiritually, and trusting in the merits of our 
great Redeemer, 

I remain, yours with Christian love, 

ALICE E. BOURQUIN,-New York. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-We have heard several 
times from you through Sister Giesecke in Germany, 
and received your greetings and sent our regards to you. 
But I feel as tho I should write directly to you this 
time, to inform you that the Lord has a people even 
here in Poland, and that a goodly number have been 
found here in a comparatively short time. There were 
only three of us when I first came here; but the Lord 
has blest the testimony and the circulation of the tracts 
and booklets to such an extent that now we number 
fifteen, nine brethren and six sisters. And the opposition 
on the part of those who claim to be faithful 
Christians, but who do not grasp the truth was, and is 
still, very severe, not only in this place, but in the entire 
vicinity, into which the truth has been carried in a 
wonderful manner, through various agencies, showing 



that it is the Lord's work. 

We are so thankful that the Lord has counted us 
worthy to see present truth, delivering us out of the 
gross darkness of Babylon, and translating us into his 
marvelous light. And we cannot help feeling that the 
Lord has condescended greatly in calling us, who in so 
many respects are much more unworthy than many 
others whom we know to be blinded and prejudiced 
against the truth, but who naturally seem to be much 
more qualified for service if their eyes were only open 
to the truth. 

We have great difficulty in getting literature from 
Germany, and in fact from anywhere outside the Russian 
border, especially so of late, on account of the recent 
ecclesiastical and social troubles, but we are thankful 
for what we have already received, and are feeding 
with delight at the richly decked table of present truth. 
We are glad that you have not decided to discontinue 
issuing the German TOWER, even tho it comes so seldom 
and not nearly with the quantity of food the English 
brethren have furnished them. We earnestly hope that 
the fifth volume of the DAWN may appear in a German 
translation, and until then we will endeavor to be satisfied 
with the grace already bestowed upon us. 

We wish you the Lord's richest blessing in your 
ministries of love, and remember you in our prayers, 
hoping and praying that we may be remembered also 
in your petitions. We would be delighted to receive 
an acknowledgement of the receipt of these lines. And 
finally we send you hearty greetings. May the Lord 
bless you! Yours in the fellowship of Jesus Christ, 
JOHANN WEINZ,-Russian Poland. 



The following is from the Bandera, Texas, Enterprise 
of April 11, 1901. We commend the Brother's 
method of announcing in his home paper the reasons 
for his withdrawal from a system, whose doctrines he 
could no longer support, and believe the temperate and 
careful manner in which he has stated the reasons for 
his action should be helpful in its influence upon 
any whom he may hereafter endeavor to interest in the 
"good news."— EDITOR. 

R2850 : page 237 

"WHY I WITHDRAW FROM METHODISM. 

"Having recently withdrawn from the Methodist 
Church, of which I have been a member for more than 
thirty years, and knowing, as I do, that some will be 
wondering at my motive in doing so, and knowing, 
also, that of the various motives which will be imputed 
to me, some are likely to be suggested by those who 
have not investigated the matter for themselves, and 



hence will be incapable of rendering a fair judgment, I 
desire to occupy enough space in my county paper in 
which to give my true reason for the step I have taken, 
and then leave it to the public to approve or disapprove 
as they may feel inclined. 

"My reason for leaving the church was not that 
I had any dissatisfaction with, or the slightest ill 
will towards, a single member of this or any other 
church, but simply because my honest convictions 
as to the true interpretation of God's Word had become 
too much at variance with the doctrines taught by all 
the churches with which I am acquainted to admit of 
my longer remaining therein with justice to the church, 
to myself or my God. 

"Whether by chance or by divine intervention, 
the MILLENNIAL DAWN series of Bible helps, consisting 

R2850 : page 238 

of five books, was recently placed in my hands. I 
confess it was with no little prejudice that I began to 
investigate the doctrines taught in them, but to my 
surprise I have found that:— 

" 1 . They teach nothing which is not in the very 
strictest accord with the New Testament code of morals. 

"2. I find that the author of said books 'reasons 
together' with his readers in the most fair, liberal and 
logical manner, giving quotation after quotation and 
reference after reference to the Bible in support of his 
construction and understanding thereof. 

"So logical, patent and convincing are the theories 
advanced (if you chose to call them theories: for my 
part I call them truths) that I cannot resist them. With 
such beauty and grandeur do the books depict the 
Power, Wisdom, Justice and Love of the great Father, 
the Creator of all the world, as well as the beneficent 
character of Christ, the blessed Redeemer of all the 
world, that my mind has been opened to a far more 
vivid realization of the actual existence of God and his 
glorious plans and purposes concerning his creature, 
man; also the height and depth and length and breadth 
of the love of Christ, and the far-reaching efficacy of 
his sacrificial death on the cross, are so apparent that 
my heart has seemingly enlarged manifold, and my respect, 
reverence, love and admiration for God and 
Christ, as well as my love and good will towards my 
fellow creatures, have reached a point far, far beyond 
anything I ever before experienced. 

"Hence I have determined to throw off the shackles 
of church creeds and prejudices, and with God's 
help let the new light shine forth in my daily life; to 
present the MILLENNIAL DAWN doctrine to as many as 
desire to hear it, and to help those who hunger and 
thirst after truth, to the very best of my ability, trusting 
God for direction and help. So, then, in the fear 
of God, I heartily recommend every one to procure 



these books, and with receptive mind and earnest 
prayer to God for his guidance, read them with Bible 
in hand. WM. HUDSPETH." 



R2850 : page 238 

A SPECIAL EDITION OF THE LINEAR BIBLE. 



A SHORT time ago we proposed arranging for a 
wide-margin Bible, and selected the new 
Linear Bible as being in every way the best, most up-to-date 
Teachers' Bible published— possessing an excellent 
Concordance, and giving in the text the readings of 
both the Common Version and the Revised Version in 
good, readable type, and of a size not extremely bulky. 
On the adjoining page we lay before our readers what 
the publishers have to say in favor of the Linear Bible, 
and their regular prices for them; also a sample page, 
showing style of type, etc. By special arrangement we 
can procure a large quantity of these Bibles for WATCH 
TOWER subscribers at a very much lower rate than the 
prices at which they are usually sold. And additionally 
we can have inserted eighty photographs of the 
Holy land and vicinity; and have the outer margin 
made 1 inch wide. 

At first it was proposed that TOWER readers should 
in this margin make reference memoranda to the five 
volumes of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and the last six years' 
issues of the WATCH TOWER,— opposite each verse, 
throughout this Bible. Subsequently, however, considering 
how much labor this would mean— how many 
hours and days would thus be spent, and how many 
would fail entirely to secure the desired results, and 
how many others would blot and blur, and only secure 
unsatisfactory results, we concluded to see what could 
be done in the way of printing these references in the 
margin. We find, as hinted in our last issue, that it 
will be quite an expense, both of labor and of money, 
to publish the Bible in this manner. But we reflect 
that when complete it would be one of the greatest 
blessings to the Lord's people interested in present 
truth that could possibly be prepared for them; and 
this would compensate for much trouble. It would be 
a Bible Commentary arranged in the most satisfactory 
manner ever designed. It would give the dear friends, 
as they meet in various parts of the world for the 
study of the Lord's Word, an opportunity of having 
the Editor present with them at each meeting, to offer 
suggestions respecting the meaning of the texts. This 
would not mean, of course, that his suggestions would 
be considered indisputable or infallible, but merely 
that he would be present with the little companies of 



the Lord's people throughout the whole world, to discuss 

with them the Father's Word and to assist as much 

as possible in throwing a correct light upon its meaning. 

We have already received a large number of responses 
on the basis of our first announcement of a 
blank wide margin, and unless countermanded we will 
understand these to be for the Bible as now proposed. 
But now we invite postal cards from all subscribers 
who have not responded, who would like to 
have the Bible as it is now proposed it shall be; namely, 
with the references in the margin. It is quite possible 
that we would never get out another edition, and we 
believe that every WATCH TOWER reader who can afford 
it at all should have the Bible proposed, in the cheaper 
or better binding. 

We now propose that if we receive responses from 
2,000, we will proceed to publish the Bible as stated, 
charging the following prices: In "French Seal," divinity 
circuit, gold edges, linen lined, $2.00, including 
postage. In "Persian Seal" (Morocco), gold edges, 
leather-lined, $3.00, including postage. These prices 
will apply only to those who place their orders in advance 
and thus guarantee us against loss. We may 
publish a few more than will be represented by the 
orders, but they will be sold at higher prices. It is our 
opinion that every WATCH TOWER reader who secures 
one of these best books, will consider it worth $10— 
that he would not sell it for $10. We invite postal 
cards at once, that the matter may be determined upon. 
We expect to have them all alike, none with thumb 
index, which would spoil the references. Send your 
postal cards at once, but send no money until the books 
are announced as ready,— which will probably be not 
much before Christmas. 



page 239 

THE HOLMAN 
Comparative Self-Pronouncing S.S. Teachers' Bible 

CONTAINING, IN COMBINED TEXT, 
The Authorized and Revised Versions of the Old and New Testaments. 



It presents in a single line and in large, clear type the texts of the 
Authorized and Revised Versions, where said texts are alike. Where they are 
unlike, either in language, spelling, italicization, capitalization, 
parenthesis, punctuation, or otherwise, the difference is clearly and at once 
set forth by means of double lines of smaller type, making a readily and 
easily readable combined text. Thus, direct and instant comparisons of the 
respective texts are assured, and all complexities and imperfections are 



avoided. Both eye and mind are instantly, and as fast as one can read, 
addressed to every difference in the language, spelling, italicization, 
capitalization, parenthesis, punctuation, or otherwise, of the two versions. 

Ease and Comfort of Reading. 

There is nothing mysterious or involved about the Linear Parallel readings 
—all is plain sailing. To read the Authorized Version, one has but to read 
the large type line along to any point of difference in the respective 
versions, and then follow the UPPER small type line through such difference. 
Likewise, to read the Revised Version, one has but to read the large type line 
along to any difference in the respective versions, and then follow the LOWER 
small type line through such difference. This rule holds as to every 
difference, even to that of a comma. Thus, not only the readings but the 
comparisons of the two versions become easy, immediate, satisfactory and 
perfect. 

Other Distinguishing Features. 

This Linear Parallel Edition also embraces all the distinguishing features 
that have made the HOLMAN S.S. TEACHERS' BIBLE a standard wherever the English 
tongue is spoken. It is self -pronouncing, introduces the prefaces, company 
names, and appendices to the Revised Version, and contains a New Analytical and 
Comparative Concordance, with its 100,000 references; A SERIES OF NEW MAPS, 
specially engraved to our order, with an elaborate cross-line index, etc. 

Labor and Cost. 

This grand desideratum for ministers, teachers, students and general 
Scripture readers, and this triumph in Biblical publication, have not been 
attained except by long, painstaking and laborious effort, and by a most 
liberal expenditure on the part of the publishers. They, therefore, feel 
confident that the achievement of what has not, hitherto, been successfully 
reached, and the fresh and unique facilities offered for the reading and study 
of God's word, will meet with instant and hearty approval. 

STYLES AND PRICES: 

The Linear Parallel Edition of the Holy Bible is printed on the finest 
Rag Paper, and bound in styles commensurate with its novelty, utility and 
importance. It is furnished thus: 

No. 350. Imperial Seal, Divinity Circuit, Linen Lined, Rounded Corners, Red 

under Gold Edges. ..$6. 00 

No. 355. Persian Morocco, Divinity Circuit, Leather Lined, Rounded Corners, 

Red under Gold Edges... 8.00 

No. 360. Levant, Divinity Circuit, Calf Lined, Silk Sewed, Rounded Corners, 

Red under Gold Edges... 10.00 



EXPLANATION.— The "Linear" Parallel Teachers' Bible is a combination 
of the Authorized and Revised Versions. The words which 
are the same in both are set in Pica type, and where differences occur 
the Authorized version is given in the top line, and the New or Revised 
version in the bottom line of small type. 



GENESIS. 

CHAPTER 1. 

The creation. 



page 241 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. AUGUST 1, 1901. No. 15. 
CONTENTS. 



Balancing Earthly Good with Divine 
Favor 243 

"My Lips Shall Praise Thee" 245 

God's Promises to Abraham 

Reiterated 247 

Abraham's Age on Entering Canaan 250 

Questions on the Resurrection Hope 250 

What is Guaranteed by the Ransom? 250 

The Fervent Prayer of Abraham 253 

Saved So as by Fire 255 

Public Ministries of the Truth 256 

Items:— Those Prophetic Charts, Etc 242 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



WHEN ordering tracts mention quantity. This applies also 
to the orders for Volunteer matter. Say how many more you 
will need with each order, and give full address to which you 
wish them sent;— separate from the letter. 

R2853 : page 242 

THE MESSENGER OF THE COVENANT. 



Our issue of July 15 contained an article on this subject 
which should be put into the hands of all of "Rev." John 
Alex. Dowie's followers, who give evidence of sincerity;— peradventure 
they might be recovered out of one of Satan's snares. 
Remember the words of the Apostle.— James 5:20. 

We printed an extra edition of that issue in order to give 
you this opportunity for service. Order free, as many as you 
will promise to use judiciously. Or send us the addresses and 
we will mail them direct. 

page 242 

THOSE PROPHETIC CHARTS. 



We now have a good supply of the Prophetic Charts— very 
neat, 35 inches long, with hangers. Price 25 cents, including 
postage. One of these and one of the "Silent Sermons" should 
be on the walls of every WATCH TOWER reader's home. 

We have a number of these charts very slightly soiled 
which we will send free to any on our list who cannot afford to 
purchase, and who will send a postal card request. We will 
include one of "Silent Sermons," and prepay the postage, 
which will be 10 cents each. Order at once. We are anxious 
that all should have them. 



R2850 : page 243 
BALANCING EARTHLY GOOD WITH DIVINE FAVOR. 



"Because thy loving kindness is better than 
life, my lips shall praise thee."— Psa. 63:3. 

LOVING -KINDNESS, in our text, has the signification 
of favor. The Prophet, in speaking, 
represents the Church— the Christ, Head and 
body. The words are applicable to no others. None 
but the saints esteem divine favor more precious, 
more valuable, than the present life— than earthly 
good things. If we ask the world to balance this 
matter, to weigh on one side of the balances earthly 
interests, earthly pleasures, family ties, social position, 
pride, worldly aspirations, and to put on the other 
side of the balance divine favor, the reply would be 
that the earthly good things have all the weight; and 
that divine favor has none, for the worldly know little 
or nothing respecting divine favor. They have indeed 
heard that some people believe in a God, believe 
in his providential care, believe in his love, believe in 



a future life, etc., but as for themselves they conclude 
that such things may be, while the earthly things are 
certainties; and they would not think for a moment of 
exchanging present certainties for unknown and intangible 
matters, called divine favor. 

R2851 : page 243 

If we even ask the average nominal Christian to 
weigh this matter, and tell us if willing to exchange, 
—putting in the one side of the balance all the good 
things, hopes, ambitions, family ties, social position, 
churchianity, petty office and esteem of men, and putting 
into the other side of the scale God's favor,— he 
will hesitate and eventually decide that he will do 
nothing of the kind. The reason with many is that 
they do not appreciate divine favor. They have heard 
and believed certain things respecting the Almighty, 
some of them true and some of them false; and the 
misrepresentations of God's character have so neutralized 
and offset and made non-effective the truths 
which they have learned, that they lack confidence in 
the unseen: with such, worldly interests outweigh appreciation 
of divine favor ten to one. The truths they 
learned were respecting God's love and his gracious 
provision for his fallen creatures through the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord; and that he 
willeth not the death of him that dieth, but would 
that all should turn unto him and live, in the enjoyment 
of endless blessing. 

These truths are found in the sure Word of God; 
the untruths which they have learned came from a 
human source, or rather more remotely, from the great 
Adversary himself, Satan, "the god of this world," 
as the Apostle calls him. As he tells us, "The god 
of this world hath blinded the minds of them that believe 
not"— blinded them to the real character and 
plan of Jehovah, and deluded them into thinking of 
him most unkindly, most disreputably, we might almost 
say most blasphemously. He has blinded them 
into thinking that the Almighty, while declaring that 
he has all power, has declared also that he will exercise 
this power beneficially only over a mere handful 
of earth's teeming millions— that he will take out this 
sample to show his power and what he could have 
done for all if he had wanted to, and exercise his power in 
hurling the great mass of his creation into eternal 
torment;— that he made provision to this end before 
the creation of mankind,— prepared a great and awful 
place of torture,— prepared the fuel for eternity,— and 
prepared the devils to see that nothing was lacking in 
the worst form of torture. 

Is it any wonder that those who have thus received 
human traditions instead of the Word of God, 
those who believe such terrible things respecting the 



R2851 : page 244 

Creator and his plans, things which outrank in cruelty 
the doctrines of the heathen, received from the same 
Satanic source, should doubt the love of such a God? 
It is no wonder that such find themselves unable to 
reconcile such human theories with the plain Scriptural 
declaration that God is love, very pitiful, very 
merciful, and that his mercy endureth forever; and 
that he doth not willingly afflict the children of men. 
The two thoughts are in violent conflict; the one represents 
God as loving and kind; the other represents 
him as a demon of the worst imaginable character; 
and it is no wonder that those who have in their minds 
this mixture of human traditions which make void the 
Word of God, are unable to see God from the right 
standpoint implied in our text— unable to see his loving 
kindness, so great, so good, so beneficent, toward 
all of his creatures,— unable to reconcile such human 
theory with the Scriptural declaration, that Jesus 
Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every 
man, and that this grace of God in Christ is yet to be 
testified in due time to every creature, and that thus 
all are eventually to come to a knowledge of the truth, 
and thus all eventually to have an opportunity for life 
everlasting.— 1 Tim. 2:4. 

Is it any wonder that those who entertain so 
mixed a conception of the Almighty's character, when 
they attempt to balance the loving favor of God with 
earthly good things, find that the scale weighs down 
toward the earthly things, because, altho they appreciate 
some features of the divine character, these are 
practically neutralized by such misrepresentations of 
the Adversary through false theories. Well does the 
Apostle explain the object of this blindness on the 
part of Satan, saying, "The god of this world hath 
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the 
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image 
of God, should shine unto them." (2 Cor. 4:4.) 
Ah yes, here it is! The goodness of God, the loving 
kindness of God, God's favor, does not shine into the 
hearts of many, and while it does shine a little into 
some hearts, thick darkness of error hinders their 
hearts from receiving the full benefit of the light, and 
its blessing and joy. Such as are in this position find 
it impossible to love the Lord with all their heart, 
with all their mind, with all their being, with all their 
strength; because from all that they know of him, 
through this false representation of his character, he 
is not worthy of much love. The fear of the Lord 
might operate upon them under such circumstances, 
and might be balanced against the world and its 
good things, but his "loving kindness" has comparatively 
little weight in their lives. 

Are we to suppose, then, that there were no saints 
in the past, because in the past these false ideas of 



God held full sway amongst his professed children? 
Are we to suppose that Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingli, 
Calvin, Knox, the Wesleys and others, were not saints, 
and not joint-inheritors with Christ in the Kingdom? 
No; on the contrary, we presume that these were 
saints, and that they laid down their lives in the Lord's 
service; and we merely mention these prominent 
names as illustrations, and not by way of saying that 
they were the only saints of their times, and not disputing 
either that there were saints before them, all 
through the dark ages, as well as in the primitive 
Church. 

What we do claim, however, is that the mixed 
theology, which represents God as half love and half 
devil, never produced the sanctifying effect which we 
see in the lives of the class we have mentioned. We 
hold that all those who reached the point of saintship 
described in our text, and who were able to balance 
the present life and its earthly good things with the 
loving favor of God, and to prefer God's favor rather 
than life, so that they were willing to sacrifice earthly 
interests, that they might have the divine favor, both 
as respects the life which now is, and that which is to 
come,— these never reached this position through their 
mixed theology, but attained this grand position only 
in proportion as they were able to forget or ignore the 
human and Satanic blasphemies respecting the divine 
character, and to think of God from the standpoint of 
pure justice and love. Some of them have told us in 
their writings how terribly this devil-inspired theology 
weighed upon them; how they found the theory 
so antagonistic to all their conceptions of divine justice, 
mercy and love, that the only thing they could 
do under the circumstances was to shut the eyes of 
their minds to the nightmare of hell and devils and 
torments, and to say to the Lord, O Lord, I cannot 
understand this, but I accept thee as a very God of 
love and of justice, and I know that when I shall see 
thee as thou art, and when I shall see all the works of 
thy great and wonderful plan, then I shall realize, as 
I cannot now realize, wherein divine justice and love 
are compatible with this awful theory of eternal torment 
for all except the little flock, the elect. 

Thus by shutting their eyes to the error, and 
opening their eyes by faith to the real character of 
God, substantiated by so many declarations of his 
Word, the class we refer to, through all the darkness 
of the dark ages, was indeed enabled to love God supremely, 
so that they counted not their lives dear unto 
them, that they might have his favor; they were 
willing to lay down life and earthly advantages and 
hopes and favors, that they might have the divine 
favor now and everlastingly. And if God's people in 
the past were enabled to triumph in spite of blindness, 

R2851 : page 245 



what shall we say respecting our position today, now 
that the due time has come for this vail that was 
spread over all nations to be taken away, so that the 
true light of the knowledge of God, shining in the 
face of Jesus Christ our Lord, should shine into our 
hearts and give us to see through his Word, and freed 
from human tradition and Satanic misrepresentation, 
the justice and the loving kindness of our God! 

How shall we today balance this question of 
earthly life and its advantages and privileges and 
hopes and aims with the favor of God? Well, it will 
be a test to us, as it has been a test all through the 
ages. Those who are merely glad to find out that there 
is no eternal torment, and whose hearts are not 
touched with the "loving kindness" of God, will go 
on in the world, rejoicing that they have been delivered 
from a bondage of error, but not returning to 
give glory to God and to offer themselves in his service. 
And these, alas! are the majority; like the ten 
lepers who were cleansed by our Lord, of whom only 
one returned to give thanks and to become a follower 
of Jesus. Thus the test goes on today, as ever; for 
the Lord is now seeking only the Kingdom class, only 
the little flock, and he wishes to have in it only such 
as love him supremely— only such as, having tasted 
that the Lord is gracious, desire to and do feast upon 
his favor, enjoying it, relishing it, appreciating it far 
beyond any earthly pleasure, any earthly hope, any 
earthly ambition, any earthly love. 

This class today and at all times has been the 
same,— of one spirit with their Head. The Apostle 
Paul voices their sentiments; speaking on this very 
subject, and weighing the earthly life with the divine 
favor, he says: "What things were gain to me, those 
I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, I count all 
things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of 
Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered the 
loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I 
may win Christ and be found in him. ...That I 
may know him and the power of his resurrection, and 

R2852 : page 245 

the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable 

unto his death; if by any means I might attain to 

the resurrection of the dead." (Phil. 3:7-1 1.) The 

Apostle's sentiment is that of all the saints; it is that 

of all who will be accounted "overcomers," and who 

will be accounted inheritors of the promise of joint-heirship 

with Jesus. Nothing short of this will do. 

We must appreciate the loving favor of God as better 

than earthly life, else we are not worthy of him and 

not of the kind he is seeking. And it is with all who 

have the Lord's spirit just as it was with the Apostle; 

the moment they begin to weigh and contrast fellowship 



with God and the eternal hopes associated therewith, 
in contrast with earthly loves and family ties 
and earthly ambitions and pleasures, the latter all 
seem to be quite insignificant in comparison, dross as 
compared to pure gold. And from this standpoint 
they gladly renounce all, giving up life itself for the 
favor of God. 

ATTAINING CHRISTIAN MATURITY. 



But this full development is not at the beginning 
of the Christian experience with us, nor was it at the beginning 
of Paul's experience. It is development attained 
by growth. At the very beginning, however, it was 
necessary, before either Paul or we could be accepted 
at all of the Lord, as begotten of the new nature, that 
we should first balance the loving favor of God with 
the earthly good things, and the balance must be 
settled on the side of divine favor, so that we would 
give up the other,— earthly life, earthly hopes, earthly 
aims, earthly pleasures, consecrating them to sacrifice, 
in such measure as may be necessary in order to maintain 
divine favor and blessing. From the time the 
scale was thus turned to the Lord's side, and our 
hearts were consecrated to him, earthly things began to 
lose their weight and to lose their value, to lose appreciation 
in our eyes, as our eyes began to open the 
wider to the heavenly things; and the latter became 
more and more weighty with us, more and more real, 
until we could see with the eye of faith him who is 
invisible to the natural sight, and the crown of glory, 
and the exceeding great and precious things which 
God has in reservation for them that love him, and be 
more and more strengthened thereby. And so with 
some it may have been after weeks or months or years 
that they reached the position attained by the Apostle 
when he wrote, as above, that all earthly things were 
henceforth but as loss and dross when weighed in 
comparison with Christ and God's loving kindness or 
favor toward us in him. 

This loving favor of God, so much appreciated 
by the saints that they consecrate their earthly all to 
obtain it, is not merely a favor as respects future 
prospects and hopes— not merely as respects the Kingdom 
to come and the glory and the honor and immortality 
then to be granted to such as are in divine favor, 
but it extends to the present life. Gradually we come 
to appreciate fellowship and communion with the 
Father to such a degree as to produce misery of soul 
if this communion is interrupted. And this sentiment 
is beautifully expressed in the hymn which we 
sometimes sing:— 

"Sun of my soul, my Father dear, 
I know no night when thou art near; 



O let no earth-born cloud arise 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 
The true child of God will be in such close fellowship 
with the Father, and with the spirit of truth 

R2852 : page 246 

and righteousness and love, that anything which 
would interrupt or hinder this fellowship would be 
esteemed a calamity, however sweet or precious it 
might be to the natural man. The new creature is 
willing rather to cut it off, if it were dear as a right 
hand; to pluck it out, if it were precious as a right 
eye; than to allow any earthly thing to intervene between 
him and the divine loving-favor which he has 
learned so to enjoy that he considers it better than all 
the rest of life. 

"THEREFORE WILL MY LIPS PRAISE THEE." 



Many Christians, confused with the Babylonian 
din of false, contradictory theories, have felt that they 
would desire to show forth the Lord's praise; but then 
to offset this there arises in their minds the terrible 
errors which, as a great nightmare, darken their souls 
and hush their lips, so that as a rule few are 
found ready to speak of the Lord and his matters except 
those who speak either from a sense of duty or 
from a love of money and worldly position. And so 
it is that today, were the emoluments of honor and 
salary taken away, and were it necessary in order to 
be a minister of Christ to follow the example of the 
Apostle Paul, and to labor, working with their hands, 
in some sort of tent-making, nearly all of the ministers 
of Babylon would cease preaching. As it is, the 
ablest and most intelligent of them can only be retained 
in the service by making it pay them better in 
money and honor of men than any other occupation 
which they know of. 

On the other hand, those who have tasted of the 
Lord's grace, those who have come to realize his favor 
as better than life, and who have joyfully laid upon his 
altar every earthly good thing, and hope and ambition, 
rejoice to tell the good tidings to others; they 
rejoice to tell forth the praises of him who called them 
out of darkness into his marvelous light. The message 
is too good to keep; they not only do not require 
to be hired to tell it, but they are willing that the telling 
of it, and the enjoying of God's favor in connection 
with the telling, shall cost them something— cost 
them trouble, cost them money, cost them the loss of 
earthly friendships, cost the straining if not the breaking 
of some of home ties, cost the frown of the world 
and of churchianity;— yes, they rejoice, saying, in the 



language of the Prophet, "He hath put a new song 
into my mouth, even the loving-kindness of our God!" 

Some one, perhaps, will say this is exaggeration; 
it will not cost earthly friendships nor home ties; it 
will bring with it respect and honor of men, and a salary. 
We answer, No! The Lord's Word is still true; 
he is still the example to all who will walk in his footsteps. 
For what did the Master suffer the loss of 
social position? Why did the Doctors of Divinity of 
his day, and the notables of the religious people, hide 
as it were their faces from him? Why did they finally 
become so embittered against him, and so hate him, 
that they crucified him? Was it because of evil-doing 
on his part? Nay, but "he went about doing good." 
It was because he told the truth— truths which they 
believed in great measure, but with which they had 
mixed "traditions of the elders," which blinded them 
and made them children of darkness. Our Lord gives 
us the key to the situation when he says, "The darkness 
hateth the light." The darkness does not hate 
the light so that it will not wear a garment of light to 
deceive, and so the Adversary, in inculcating the darkness 
of misrepresentation of the divine character, 
takes care that this false doctrine shall always have 
associated with it, to some extent, as a sugar-coating, 
a garment of love and charity also. He associates a 
blasphemous misrepresentation of the divine character, 
which teaches that God is hurrying the masses of 
poor, frail humanity into the hands of demons for 
eternal torture, with moral platitudes and church-work, 
and on the other hand satisfies the human 
cravings for better lives by instituting hospitals, asylums, 
orphanages, etc., thus giving mankind the suggestion 
that they are really better than God, for they 
would care for and assist the poor and the weak and 
the fallen, while the Almighty would deliver them 
over to demons and torment, and foreknew and purposed 
it so from the beginning— this is their theory. 

Those who were deluded by Satan at our Lord's 
first advent so hated the glorious message which he 
brought, and so hated his purity and truthfulness, that 
they called him the prince of devils, Beelzebub, and 
he told his followers that if he was thus treated they 
must not marvel if they shared a somewhat similar experience. 
And as his persecutions and oppositions 
came not from the world, the Gentiles, the heathen, 
but from the professed holiness people of his time, so 
all through the dark ages, and at the present time, 
those opposing the Lord and the truth are not worldly 
people, but sectarians whom Satan has more than half 
blinded with his false doctrines and misrepresentations. 
We are not, therefore, to be surprised that we find it 
as the Lord declares, that wherever his truth goes it 
will be like a sword to separate, and that especially in 
the home and the family. And as he declared, "Ye 
shall be hated of all men for my sake."— Matt. 10:22. 



These experiences are for the very purpose of 
testing us, as the Lord's experiences were for the purpose 
of testing him. He consecrated his life fully and 
completely at the beginning of his ministry, when he 
reached thirty years of age, and symbolized his consecration 
in baptism. So fully did he appreciate the 

R2853 : page 247 

Heavenly Father's loving kindness and favor that it 
required not a moment's hesitation for him to decide 
that it was better than life— to decide to sacrifice the 
earthly life; and immediately he began to proclaim 
the truths respecting the divine love and provision. 
And well he understood from the beginning how this 
would bring the hatred of nominal professors of Judaism, 
and that in thus letting his lips praise the Lord 
he was doing so at the cost of his earthly life, and all 
the blessings and privileges associated therewith. 

Likewise with those who walk in Jesus' footsteps 
in the narrow way; however much it may surprise 
them, they find that the proclamation of good tidings 
of great joy which shall be unto all people— the loving 
favor of our God, manifested in Jesus Christ our 
Lord— told in its fulness, brings the hate, the scorn, 
the persecution of nominal Christendom of today. 
Those who love the present life close their lips and refrain 
from speaking his loving kindness; but those 
faithful to their covenant, and appreciative of the 
Lord's favor as "better than life," will show forth his 
praise at any and every cost of an earthly kind. 

The "harvest" message of good tidings which is 
now revealed to the Lord's consecrated people, by 
which they discern the loving kindness of God, which 
they feel they must tell forth to others, not for money, 
nor for reputation, but at the cost of worldly reputation, 
at the cost of financial loss, at the cost of home 
trials and difficulties— this message is the "new song" 
mentioned by the Prophet, that the Lord has put into 
the mouths of his consecrated ones. It is the same 
new song that is mentioned by our Lord in Revelation, 
which none others might sing except the elect 
144,000, who have the Father's name in their foreheads 
—publicly professed. If others hear of the song 
they cannot sing it, because it costs something to sing 
this song. "Because thy loving favor is better than 
life [more esteemed by us, more than all of earthly 
life and its good things] therefore will my lips praise 
thee." 



R2853 : page 247 

GOD'S PROMISE TO ABRAHAM REITERATED. 



-GEN. 15:1-18.-AUG. 11.- 

"I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward." 

LOT had not lived a great while in Sodom when 
king Chedorlaomer descended upon the 
Sodomites with an army and took away many persons 
and great spoils of flocks, herds, etc., including Lot 
and his family and possessions. Word of this affair 
reached Abraham, who armed his own servants, 318, and 
with two associates pursued the victors, who, doubtless 
expecting no army or night attack, were careless as to 
their defenses, and being surprised by a night attack 
were routed; and Lot and his family and goods, and 
the Sodomites and their goods were released. The conduct 
of Abraham in connection with this matter was 
most noble and unselfish. Not only did he inconvenience 
himself and all his affairs for the sake of others, 
but subsequently he refused any share of the booty 
which he had saved. Would that the children of God 
could fully appreciate such benevolence and copy it 
more in the little affairs of life! Much of the distress 
prevailing in the world is the direct or indirect result 
of selfishness, and all of the Lord's people should be 
on the alert to practice and to exemplify the opposite 
spirit of benevolence in the little things as well as in 
the great things of life; and should remember that 
selfishness is a depravity, which needs to be fought 
against, and to be, so far as possible, overcome by the 
new nature. 

One would have supposed that Lot's vexatious experience 
in Sodom, and after experience in his capture 
and subsequent deliverance by his uncle, would have 
led him to desire a reunion with his uncle, with a 
keener appreciation than ever of the fact that God was 
with his uncle, blessing him and guiding his affairs 
and interests. But this does not seem to have been the 
case: he was still willing to cast his lot with the ungodly. 
He reminds us of the words of the Psalmist, 
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel 
of the ungodly, nor standeth in the way of sinners, 
nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful." (Psa. 1:1) 
Lot did not pursue this course, and hence failed of a 
blessing. It was not sufficient that his righteous soul 
should be "vexed" continually by the misconduct of 
those about him; his love for righteousness should 
have been such as to lead him to the sacrifice of temporal 
interests on behalf of his own heart and on behalf 
of the interests of his family. Let all of the Lord's 
people who may find themselves in a similar position 
remember the Apostle's words, "Make straight paths 
for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of 
the way; but let it rather be healed."— Heb. 12:13. 

It was directly after his experience in the delivery 
of Lot and the defeat of Chedorlaomer, and while Abraham 
was evidently feeling somewhat disheartened or 



discouraged, that the Lord again manifested himself to 
him. We do not know the cause of the discouragement, 
but may infer that he realized that in his 
attack upon, and defeat of the army and the military 

R2853 : page 248 

forces behind it, he had probably incurred a displeasure 
which could not be wiped out by anything short of 
the destruction of his own camp. As ever, Abraham 
was peaceably disposed; and the battle he had just won 
implied the straining of his whole nature. He had 
done what he considered to be his duty in the interest 
of justice, and especially in the defense of his own 
ward, Lot; but now that the excitement was past the 
reaction set in, and with it certain gloomy feelings and 
forebodings. So also some of the Lord's people today 
have moments in which for various reasons the flame 
of faith and hope smokes, and darkens the eyes of 
their understanding and the clearness of their perception 
of the divine character and plan; but if they still 
hold firmly by faith to the hands of divine providence 
they will find, as Abraham did, that even the trials and 
difficulties and discouragements of life will be overruled 
for good to them. 

It was while Abraham was downcast that the Lord 
appeared to him in vision and said to him, in the language 
of our Golden Text, "Fear not Abraham: I am 
thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward." Apparently 
this was the great lesson that God was teaching 
him and which he was learning by the experience permitted, 
much better than had the Lord not delayed 
some of the promised favors. Abraham was now 84 
years old; and, altho wealthy and highly favored of the 
Lord, he was a pilgrim and a stranger, away from kindred 
and home through his respect to the divine call and 
promise. He had no children to cheer and enliven and 
comfort his home, and even his nephew, Lot, whom he 
had not detained unwillingly, had preferred the companionship 
of the wicked and had left him, and even 
when rescued from his enemies, at the cost of danger 
and sacrifice, he had not appreciated the matter fully, 
and still preferred the strangers. 

No wonder poor Abraham felt as tho his life, passing 
quickly by, was a comparative failure— no wonder 
he felt discouraged. How the words of the vision 
must have brought new thoughts, new sentiments to 
his heart; God was his shield— to protect him, to guard 
him from the anger and power of all the kings of earth 
and their armies, and able and willing to make all 
things work together for his good. What a comfort 
was in this thought. How it reminds us that God is 
our shield also; our protector from every evil thing 
and power. The thought is beautifully expressed in 
one of our hymns:— 

"Shield of my soul, tho tempests rage, 



And 'gainst me hosts of foes engage, 

My refuge and my fortress thou; 

Before thee every foe must bow." 
The latter part of the message is no less striking: 
the fact that, nor flocks nor herds nor servants nor children 
nor friends, were to be the prize upon which his 
heart should be set; but that God himself was to be 
his reward;— the having of God for a friend and counselor 
and guide was to be esteemed far beyond every 
earthly interest and blessing. And so it is also with the 
Church of the Gospel age. We may have blessings or 
adversities or both, as respects the present life. We 
have promises which pertain to the life that now is and 
also to that which is to come; but all of these together 
are inferior, subordinate to the one great thought that 
God, the great Creator is ours,— our Father, our God, 
our Friend. 

Undoubtedly Abraham's heart was comforted by 
this message; and yet his reason was still operative, 
and hence his inquiry of the Lord, How can you bless 
me and fulfil to me your gracious promises, seeing that 
I go childless— seeing that my servant Eliezer and his 
children are the only heirs apparent for my estate? Is 

R2854 : page 248 

it wonderful, Lord, that I should feel discouraged, seeing 
that apparently the most indispensable part of your 
promise is unfulfilled for now fourteen years, and that 
Sarah and myself are growing old; and that even my 
nephew, Lot, who might have perpetuated the family 
and been the heir of my estate, cares not for me and 
has gone from me? The Lord was not displeased to 
have Abraham use his reason in this manner, for it 
was not a reasoning of skepticism or doubt as respected 
the divine power, but merely the proper questioning of 
faith as to how the promises on which he had left his 
home could be fulfilled; and a request for guidance in 
understanding. And so may we inquire of the Lord 
respecting his gracious promises. Indeed, he invites 
us to reason, saying, "Come, let us reason together." 
In Abraham's case the Lord merely repeated and 
amplified previous statements to the effect that he 
should have a child of his own who should be his heir; 
and leading him out from his dwelling in the starry 
night, he assured him that his children would yet be 
multitudinous as the stars of heaven. This feature of 
the promise evidently applies to the spiritual Seed— 
the Christ, the elect of God, Head and body, as explained 
by the Apostle. (Gal. 3:29; 1 Pet. 1:2.) 
The other expressions,— "as the dust of the earth," 
and "as the sands of the sea," represent, not the natural 
children of Abraham, but the whole number of the 
human family who, under the blessing of the spiritual 
Seed, during the Millennium, shall ultimately attain 
to the faith and obedience of Abraham, and full human 



restitution and the Lord's reward for these— life everlasting. 
-Rom. 11:12,15,32. 

The record is that Abraham believed on the Lord 
—his faith in God triumphed over every obstacle and 
rested securely, confidently;— his doubts and fears fleeing 
away. The faith of Abraham is the particular point 

R2854 : page 249 

of his character prominently set before us in the Scriptures 

for the encouragement of our faith, for our example. 

Abraham was not perfect, even as others of 

our race are imperfect,— "There is none righteous, no, 

not one." (Rom. 3:10.) But we are told that God 

so highly esteemed Abraham's faith that he counted it 

as making up for his natural blemishes and imperfections. 

"It was counted [reckoned] to him for righteousness." 

(Rom. 4:3.) He had faith in what God 

had told him, and, as James (2:22) points out, he manifested 

his faith by his general conduct. We of the 

Gospel age are also justified by faith— righteousness is 

reckoned to us through the exercise of faith— but not 

faith in the same promises. 

God does not promise us earthly children nor an 
earthly inheritance in the land of Palestine as he did 
promise to Abraham; hence we are not to have faith in 
the same things. As the Apostle says, God has given 
unto us "exceeding great and precious promises"— 
promises much greater than those given to Abraham: 
heavenly, instead of earthly promises. We are to believe 
the promises given to us and to act upon them as 
implicitly as Abraham believed the promises given to 
him and acted upon them. The promises made to 
Abraham were attested by the Lord's word and by his 
oath, and similarly, tho on a still higher plane, the 
Lord has made known to us, has attested to us, his 
love and power, and his willingness to perform for us 
all the good things promised. 

In answer to Abraham's request the Lord attested 
his promise in connection with sacrifices, after a manner 
that was probably customary at that time, as described 
in our lesson. The sacrificed animals, part 
over against part, were separated by a narrow path along 
which between the parts passed a small furnace enveloped 
in smoke, out of which shot a flame of fire. In connection 
with the weird scene the Lord revealed to Abraham 
that his posterity would not come into the land of 
promise for some four hundred years after his son 
should be born, but would have affliction as a people, 
even as Israel experienced this in Egypt. The four 
hundred years being a statement in round numbers, 
otherwise more explicitly stated as four hundred and 
thirty years, included the wanderings of Isaac and 
Jacob before going down into Egypt, as well as the 
captivity in Egypt. The revelation further pointed out 
the fact that the deliverance of Israel from Egypt would 



be with great wealth, and that in connection with it 

judgments of the Lord would come upon Egypt, and 

that meantime the Amorites, who then resided in 

Canaan, would fill to the full the measure of their iniquity, 

and fully deserve to lose the land of promise; 

and at that time Israel would be brought in to inherit 

it. 

As God's favor and faithfulness toward Abraham 
were attested by the sacrifices and revelations of the 
divine plan, so do they testify to his faithfulness in this 
Gospel age, that we also may have strong consolation, 
and full assurance of faith. He testifies to us the fulness 
of his favor and love by showing us the better 
sacrifices for sins, through which the New Covenant is 
sealed, ratified, made operative. He has shown us 
through his Word that darkness must prevail for a 
time, and that the Christ (Head and body) must be 
brought in contact with the fiery furnace of trial and 
affliction, the smoke of which might well represent the 
incidental confusion and darkness that necessitates our 
walk by faith and not by sight, while the flame of light 
would represent our guidance by the holy Spirit. Being 
thus assured by the Lord of his love for us, and of 
the bountiful provision made for our welfare, and of 
the necessity for trials, persecutions and difficulties 
during the time of the great darkness, we are strengthened 
in our faith and enabled to endure as seeing him 
who is invisible, and to follow in the footsteps of 
Jesus. 

It was at this time that the Lord revealed to Abraham 
that the great blessings already promised him were 
to have a far distant fulfilment— for it was here indicated 
that he should die and his children not inherit 
the land for some four hundred years: and that he 
would not see the fulfilment of the promises, altho a 
part of the promise was that he, as well as his seed, 
should inherit the land, and join in the work of universal 
blessing and uplifting of humanity. Abraham 
was thus indirectly taught to hope in the resurrection, 
for this last revelation clearly implied that he could 
have neither part nor lot in it except God would raise 
him from the dead. And this was in full accord with 
the subsequent words of Stephen. (Acts 7:5.) It was 
no doubt for Abraham's good that the Lord did not tell 
him that it would be about four thousand years before 
the full blessing would begin;— did not reveal to him 
that the natural seed could not inherit all of the great 
promises;— that the likeness of his seed to the stars of 
heaven and to the sands of the sea were two different 
figures;— the first representing the spiritual and heavenly 
seed, and the other an earthly or human seed. It 
was to his advantage not to know that so long a time 
would elapse before the completion of the spiritual 
seed, of which Christ is the Head and the Gospel Church 
the body; and that through this Seed, glorified, must 
come the blessings upon the earthly seed, and through 



the latter to all the families of the earth during the 
Millennial age. 

But God has revealed these things to us, and we 
may well feel that we have more advantage every way 
in connection with the divine promises and plan than 

R2854 : page 250 

even faithful Abraham, whose trustfulness under very 
adverse conditions is a stimulus to all of God's children. 
We have not only his example, but many other 
noble examples, including that of our Lord and his 
apostles; and we can see, under the guidance of the 
Word, as revealed by the spirit, that all things have 
been and are yet working together harmoniously for the 
development of the Lord's great plan for man's salvation, 
briefly summarized in his promise to Abraham, 
"In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed." 

Nothing is more evident than that God's promises 
to Abraham have not yet been fulfilled. Abraham reasoned 
that they would not be fulfilled in his day; Isaac 
and Jacob and all the prophets reasoned that they had 
not been fulfilled during the Jewish age; and the Apostle 
declares that the whole twelve tribes of Israel were 
still waiting for the fulfilment of those promises in his 
day. (Acts 26:6,7.) Those promises have surely not 
been fulfilled during this Gospel age, as we all are witnesses 
—the natural seed of Abraham has been outcast, 
persecuted and without divine favor, while the true 
ones of spiritual Israel, though possessed of divine 
favor and rejoicing therein, have been persecuted and 
caused to suffer for righteousness' sake, and thereby to 
learn lessons of patience and experience to prepare 
them for the great work they are yet to do in fulfilment 
of the divine promises to Abraham. 

The Apostle Paul clearly sets this matter forth in 
Gal. 3:16-29. He tells us that Christ is the Seed of 
Abraham— the spiritual Seed; and are not we "members 
of the body of Christ," over whom, as the Scriptures 
declare, Jesus Christ is the head forever under God's 
blessing? (Eph. 1:22,23.) And so the Apostle declares 
(vs. 29), "If ye be Christ's [members], then are ye 
Abraham's Seed, and heirs according to the promise." 

And if the Lord's saints are still heirs of that Abrahamic 
promise, assuredly it proves that the promise has 
not yet reached fulfilment. Thank God that we are still 
privileged to be heirs of that wonderful promise, "heirs 
of God, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be 
that we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified 
together." Let our faith be strong, trusting in the 
promise and in him who made it, who is able to do for 
us, and for all who trust in him, exceedingly abundantly 
more and better things than we know how to ask or 

R2855 : page 250 



expect. Let us through patient perseverance, based 
upon an undimmed faith, complete our sojourning 
here; and by the Lord's grace make our calling and 
election sure to a share in the promised glory, honor 
and immortality, and in the opportunity to bless, which 
the Lord purposes to give to the faithful in Christ Jesus. 



R2855 : page 250 

ABRAHAM'S AGE ON ENTERING CANAAN. 



We are in receipt of a number of letters, calling 
attention to what seems to the writers an error in the 
Chronology given in the MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., 
relative to the date of Abraham's birth, his entrance 
into Canaan, etc. For the sake of these, as well as others 
who may have the same difficulty, we here enlarge upon 
what is stated in VOL. II., pages 44-47. 

Gen. 1 1:32, says that at his death Terah's age was 
two hundred and five years; Acts 7:4 says that then 
Abraham removed into Canaan; and Gen. 12:4 states 
that Abraham was seventy-five years old when he left 
Haran. Hence Terah's age at Abraham's birth must 
have been one hundred and thirty years. 

But is not this out of harmony with Gen. 1 1:26, 
which says: "And Terah lived seventy years and begat 
Abram, Nahor and Haran?" We answer, No. The 
point of confusion is in the fact that Haran, the eldest, 
is mentioned last, while Abram, the youngest, is mentioned 
first— possibly because of his greater prominence 
in the narrative, or possibly, as a little stumbling-block 
to hinder us from seeing the facts except as guided by 
the Lord, in his due time. 

That Haran was the eldest of the sons of Terah is 
quite evident from the recorded facts. His son Lot was 
old enough to be the companion of his uncle Abraham. 
Lot and Abraham were probably nearly of the same age, 
as each had his own flocks and herds and herdsmen. 
When Sodom was destroyed Lot had two daughters of 
marriageable age and others already married. This was 
before Isaac was born, Abraham being then ninety-nine 
years old.-Gen. 17:24; 18:1,16; 19:8,14. 

Again, notice the likelihood of Haran's being much 
the oldest of Terah's sons, and Nahor the second, thus, 
—Nahor married one of his brother Haran's daughters 
(Milcah— See Gen. 24:15), whose grand-daughter, Rebekah, 
became the wife of Abraham's son, Isaac— 
Gen. 24:67. 

Our reckoning as given in the DAWN is, therefore, 
sustained by all the known facts, as well as by the exact 
statements of Scripture. 



R2855 : page 250 

QUESTIONS ON THE RESURRECTION HOPE. 



WHAT IS GUARANTEED BY THE RANSOM? 



Question.— Would it be correct for us to say that 
our Lord Jesus by his death canceled the sins of the 
entire human family, so that there is now no condemnation 
to any? 

Answer.— No; this would not be a correct statement. 
The Scriptural declaration is, "There is now 
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus." 
There is still condemnation upon all who have not yet 
come into Jesus through faith in the precious blood 
and through a reformation of life in harmony with 
that faith. This is directly implied by the Apostle's 
words. Again, he says, "We were children of wrath, 
even as others [are], but we who believe [who have 
accepted Jesus] have escaped the condemnation that 
is on the world." These Scriptures imply that the 
condemnation was still on the world at the time of 

R2855 : page 251 

these letters, after our Lord's death and resurrection. 

Consequently the death of Jesus did not cancel 
the condemnation, it did not remove the sins, and all 
the world of mankind not only have continued under 
the condemnation, but also under its sentence of 
death, and have died, the same since Jesus died as before 
—except in the case of the Church, whose death 
is reckoned as being no longer Adamic death, as a 
penalty for sin, but as "being dead with him," as 
joint-sacrifices, participators in the sin-offerings. 

That our Lord's death did not cancel sin is again 
attested by the Apostle Peter's declaration to some at 
Pentecost (after our Lord's death and resurrection, 
ascension, etc.): "Repent and be converted, that your 
sins may be blotted out when times of refreshing shall 
come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send 
Jesus Christ [at the Second Advent]." This Scripture 
shows that the blotting out is a future work, just 
as the Apostle elsewhere shows that the sins of those 
who are in Christ Jesus are now covered from God's 
sight, to permit us to have present blessings and privileges, 
prior to the time when the sins shall be blotted 
out. The sins of the Church will be blotted out, and 
no more record will appear of them forever, as soon 



as the first resurrection shall have taken place, for all 
who have part in it will have perfect bodies, without 
a trace of sin, blemish or imperfection in them. And 
as for the world of mankind in general, the blotting 
out of the world's sins will be during the "times of 
restitution"— a gradual work, as implied in the word 
"blotting." Every one who accepts Christ and the 
Kingdom, and endeavors to live in harmony with the 
Lord under the terms of the New Covenant, will, during 
the thousand years of Christ's reign, find his sins, 
his blemishes, mental, moral and physical, gradually 
giving way, yielding to perfection, and they will thus 
be in process of blotting out until, at the close of the 
Millennial age, there shall no sin remain unblotted 
out for any one who has desired to have them blotted 
out, and who shall have availed himself of the abundant 
privileges of that time. 

Thus we see, by two lines of demonstration, 
either of which would be sufficient, that Christ has 
not canceled the sins of the whole world, nor the sins 
of any, and that he has merely covered the sins of the 
Church, preparatory to the cleansing time, while the 
world's sins are not even covered. To make these two 
proofs the more conspicuous we will state them thus: 

(1) The fact that God's Word speaks of the world as 
being still under condemnation, and children of wrath, 
is a conclusive proof that their sins are not blotted out. 

(2) The fact that sin, and its wages of death, including 
pain, sickness, etc., are still inflicted upon humanity, 
is a second and indisputable proof that the sins 

are not blotted out, for if they had been blotted out 
it would be wrong on God's part to punish for sins 
no longer recognized. 

Question.— If Christ's death did not effect the 
cancellation of man's sins, wherein lies the fault? 
Does it imply that the sacrifice was not sufficient to 
cancel the sins, or does it imply that God has not 
been just toward the sinners, but has accepted a payment 
from Jesus and is also requiring a payment directly 
from the individual sinner, as tho he had not 
accepted Christ's ransom sacrifice? 

Answer.— Neither of these is implied by the fact 
that the world's sins are not yet blotted out. The 
Scriptural statement of the matter is that our Lord 
bought the whole world with his own precious blood. 
(1 Pet. 1:19.) There is no statement anywhere in 
the Scriptures to the effect that the sins of the whole 
world were canceled by Christ's death, nor that God 
ever purposed to cancel the sins of the world as an offset 
to the sacrifice of our dear Redeemer. On the 
contrary, the Scriptures everywhere hold out the 
thought that neither the blotting out of sins nor even 
their covering, is possible, except as the sinner 
shall first of all accept of Jesus through faith. Thus 
we read that God arranged the plan as he did arrange 
it, in order that "he might be just, and yet be the justifier 



of him that believeth in Jesus." There is no 
proposition in this text, or in any other, to justify 
any others than believers— no proposition to justify 
the world in sin, but merely to justify those who desire 
to escape from sin and its penalty, accepting of 
Christ as the Savior. 

The statement of 2 Cor. 5:19 is in full accord 
with this. It represents a work begun by God in 
Christ, but not yet concluded. The ministry of reconciliation, 
committed to the Church, will not be finished 
until the close of the Millennium; and whoever of 
mankind shall by that time have failed to accept the 
reconciliation, proffered by God in Christ, will "be 
destroyed from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

The statement that our Lord Jesus was a propitiation 
(satisfaction) for our sins, and not for ours only, 
but also for the sins of the whole world, implies that 
his death was sufficient in merit to meet the penalty 
against every individual and to satisfy the claims of 
divine justice against each individual. However, the 
canceling of the sentence which Justice had decreed 
against Adam and his progeny would include and imply 
nothing of restitution whatever. It was merely a 
sentence that Adam could not live, having forfeited 
his right to life. The fact that after this sentence 
came upon Adam, and while under it, he and his 
race decayed mentally and physically, and became 
morally leprous, has nothing whatever to do with the 

R2856 : page 252 

original sentence— the degeneracy of the race is a side 
issue. It resulted from the sentence of death, but 
was not a part of it, and the removal of the sentence of 
death need not mean a recovery from the fall. 

The sentence of the divine law against Adam and 
his race, prohibiting them from the privileges of life, 
having been paid by the Lord Jesus' sacrifice, and the 
payment having been accepted by the Father, there 
can be no objection now raised on the part of Justice 
to hinder the sinner and his race from having eternal 
life if they can now demonstrate their worthiness of 
it. Had such an offer been made to father Adam the 
day after his transgression and expulsion from Eden, 
he would doubtless have gladly reentered Paradise 
and stood a fresh trial, and with better hopes of 
success, having learned something, at least, by his experience. 
But after six thousand years of falling and 
degradation under the dominion of sin, Adam and his 
race are in no condition to profit by the removal of 
the sentence of Justice which was against them, being 
unable, in their fallen condition, to comply with 
the divine requirements, if granted a new trial by the 
Father. Hence this proposition is set aside at once as 
infeasible, and instead God turns over the entire race 
to his only begotten Son, their Redeemer, that the 



Son may institute amongst those whom he redeemed 
processes of restitution, which will be helpful to them 
in bringing them up again to the grand perfection 
originally enjoyed by father Adam. And when this 
work of restitution shall have been accomplished, the 
world, furnished with a large experience both in the 
fall and their restitution from it, will be ready for 
final testings or judgments preparatory to acceptance 
of those who stand the tests to eternal life which were 
set before father Adam, but which he failed to attain 
through disobedience. 

In order to make this restitution process of the 
largest advantage possible to mankind, the divine plan 
is that step after step of the journey upward from degradation 
to perfection shall be attained only through 
the cooperation of the restored ones with their Redeemer 
and Restorer. To this end it is called a period 
of judgments or discipline, under which every effort 
for righteousness will bring its meed of blessing, and 
every dereliction bring its stripes or punishments. 
Thus day by day and year by year during these 
"times of restitution" the lesson on the desirability of 
righteousness and heinousness of sin will be given to 
the world of mankind, with every encouragement to 
those who will to do right; but with the rod, and 
eventually "everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord," to all those who, under those favorable 
conditions, love iniquity and serve it rather than 
righteousness. 

Thus seen, Christ's death became the offset and 
cancellation of the legal sentence against man, but it 
did not and was not intended to remove his degradation. 
Man's sentence, recorded in the race, mentally, 
morally and physically, is still in evidence all about 
us, and will continue in evidence even after the Millennial 
reign has begun, and until the gradual processes 
of "blotting out" these sins shall, by the close 
of the Millennium, have completely obliterated them. 
The record of sin is in every human being, and the 
blotting out of those sins will mean the full restoration 
of that being to the image and likeness of God. 
This blotting out of sins, therefore, was not accomplished 
by the satisfying of the claims of justice and 
the removal of the sentence of death, but must be accomplished, 
if at all, in the divinely arranged manner, 
by processes of restitution to the image and likeness 
of God— to which none will attain except as they cooperate 
with the great Restorer— the life-giver, Christ. 

Suppose an illustration of this matter of the canceling 
of the sentence in respect to an earthly criminal 
sentence by an earthly court. Suppose a criminal 
had been sentenced for life, and that fifteen years after 
sentence he was pardoned and set at liberty. In those 
years he might have changed quite considerably, 
might have contracted disease and have become bald-headed 
and crippled with rheumatism. But no one 



would suppose for an instant that in pardoning him 
the court would undertake additionally to give him 
back his hair, his strength, his health, and the fifteen 
years of life which he had lost in prison. Neither 
does the remission of the original sentence by the 
heavenly court in any sense of the word promise or 
imply restitution of the things which man lost while 
under the sentence of death. The promises of restitution 
through Christ, while all based upon the ransom, 
are separate and distinct from it— the operation 
of love and mercy, and not in any sense of the word 
the operation of Justice, on man's behalf. 

In regard to Rom. 5:18,19. The world could 
not be on trial before a court which had already condemned 
it, unless the condemnation were lifted; but 
in the case of man there is a transference of the case 
to a new court, of which not the Father, but the Son, 
is the Judge; as it is written, God "hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son." In one sense man starts 
in his new trial, under the new Judge, free from condemnation, 
that is, free from the judicial feature of 
his condemnation; but not free from the actual degradation 
which, in another sense of the word, is the 
curse or condemnation which rests upon our race. 
Justice will have nothing against the culprit, and 
makes no objection to his being awakened and assisted 
back to perfection by the new Judge; but neither 

R2856 : page 253 

Justice nor the new Judge will release the culprit from 
the difficulties under which he labors, called the curse, 
the fall, etc., except as he exercises both trust and 
obedience in the new Judge under the terms of the 
New Covenant; and the new Judge will only release 
him from this curse or condemnation little by little, 
as he shall, by obedience, give evidence of transformation 
of his character from that of a servant of sin to 
that of a servant of righteousness. 

In a word, the sentence or degree of death which 
came upon Adam, and through him upon us, was 
merely the judicial sentence, not the degradation 
which followed it as a consequence; and the removal 
of the judicial sentence by the payment of a price and 
the transfer of a sinner to the jurisdiction of Christ, 
for a fresh judgment or trial, secures merely the release 
of the original judicial sentence, but secures no 
release from the fall and degradation which followed 
the original sentence. The ruined sinner, whom justice 
would not permit to live, and who has degraded 
himself since, may now know that through Christ the 
demands of justice have been met for him, and that if 
he were back again to the condition in which father 
Adam was when he fell he would now be able to keep 
the divine Law perfectly. However, having fallen into 
degradation, and sin, he is now on so low a plane mentally, 



morally and physically, that altho the sentence 

be lifted, he is quite powerless to accomplish anything 

of consequence for himself. He first needed a Redeemer 

to ransom him, to pay the redemption price 

for him; he now needs a Savior, a Life-giver, to deliver 

him from the death-conditions, mental, moral 

and physical, into which he fell while under the divine 

sentence, and this will be the gracious work of 

the Kingdom, of which Christ will be the Head and 

King, and the elect Church his joint-heirs in the 

Kingdom, and under-representatives in the work of 

judging and uplifting the race. 



R2856 : page 253 

THE FERVENT PRAYER OF ABRAHAM. 

-GEN. 18:23-32.-AUG. 18.- 

Golden Text:— "The effectual fervent prayer of 
a righteous man availeth much."— Jas. 5:16. 

ABRAHAM at the time of this lesson was ninety-nine 
years old. He was camping at Mamre 
with his family and household, servants, herdsmen, 
etc., over 1,000 persons. His faith still rested in the 
Lord's promise, which he evidently believed would be 
fulfilled through his son Ishmael, at this time thirteen 
years old. As he rested in the door of his tent three 
men approached him, and, after the manner of the 
sheiks of that country today, he arose to meet them 
most hospitably, and provided for their entertainment 
tho they were strangers to him. By and by he ascertained 
that his visitors were heavenly beings, who for 
the occasion had assumed human form— one of them 
being a special representative of Jehovah himself, 
either one of the chief angels, or, we think still more 
likely, the Lord Jesus in his pre-human condition. 
How glad Abraham must have felt when he learned 
who his visitors were, that he had entertained them so 
kindly and hospitably. The Apostle calls this matter 
to the attention of the Church and urges that the Lord's 
people always be on the alert to show hospitality, and 
citing this case he says, "Thus some have entertained 
angels unawares."— Heb. 13:2. 

True, circumstances are in many respects different 
today from what they were in olden times, in that now 
we have hotels and boarding houses for the accommodation 
of travelers; hence our responsibilities are lessened; 
this very fact, we fear, inclines us to be more selfish, 
less hospitable, than would be to our profit. The 
Lord's consecrated people will do well to cultivate hospitality, 
and that of the kind which Abraham showed, 
—without waiting for it to be requested. A Scripture 



statement is, "There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; 
and there is that withholdeth more than is meet, 

R2857 : page 253 

but it tendeth to poverty." (Prov. 11:24.) Another 
declaration is, "The liberal soul shall be made fat." 
(Prov. 11:25.) In practicing liberality we are developing 
God-likeness, for is not God benevolent; is he 
not continually giving to his creatures? The greatest 
of all his gifts was the gift of his own dear Son to die 
for us— to ransom us. True, all cannot exercise liberality 
alike— those who are in debt or in poverty are 
properly to consider themselves hindered, limited in 
this direction by justice to their creditors, their families, 
etc. Nevertheless, the spirit of benevolence and hospitality 
should always abound in our hearts, whether 
we have much or little opportunity to manifest it; and 
rarely do those who exercise themselves in this respect 
fail to profit by this course, even in temporal matters. 
Where we cannot give all the succor needed, we can at 
least dispense words of consolation and cheer, which 
may prove of much greater value than money. Many 
need the spiritual counsel and advice and encouragement, 
which every true Christian should be able to 
give, far more than they need temporal assistance. To 
have Christ-likeness implies not only a desire to be 
helpful to the groaning creation and "especially to the 
household of faith," but it means more,— it means the 
effort to assist them, even at the cost of our earthly 
comforts and pleasures. 

R2857 : page 254 

It was while partaking of the hospitality of Abraham 
and Sarah that the Lord and his two companions 
were made known to Abraham— that they were not ordinary 
men, and at this time a further promise was 
made respecting the long-expected son Isaac. "Let 
patience have her perfect work," says the Apostle, and 
surely it would seem that this was the case with Abraham, 
who had waited twenty-five years indefinitely, 
and now for the first time received a definite assurance 
of a prompt fulfilment of this part of the promise. 
Isaac was born within a year, when Abraham was one 
hundred years old. Abraham's faith and patient waiting 
on the Lord are instructive to us. The Gospel 
Church likewise was called to inherit a promise and to 
perform a pilgrimage while waiting for its fulfilment. 
The promise to us is our deliverance as sharers in the 
Kingdom, and ultimately in the work of blessing all 
the families of the earth, to be accomplished at the 
second coming of Jesus, who was typified in Isaac, 
even as Jehovah, his Father, was typified in Abraham. 
The Gospel Church has had great need of patience and 
endurance, of trust in God, during the nearly nineteen 



centuries since Jesus suffered in the flesh and was 
quickened in spirit, and going away, promised to come 
again to receive us unto himself, and to fulfil all the 
exceeding great and precious promises foretold respecting 
him and us. The faith of many has cooled so that 
they are hoping for the long promised Millennial blessings 
through other channels,— hoping that earthly 
churches, human organizations, begotten not of the 
Lord's instruction, but unauthorizedly, like Ishmael, 
may convert and bless the world without the second 
coming of Jesus and the establishment of his Kingdom. 
But all those who have the faith of Abraham 
will also have the Lord's testimony that the blessing 
can come only through Isaac— Rom. 9:7; Gal. 4:28. 

At the same time that faithful Abraham and Sarah 
were consoled and refreshed, at the same time Isaac was 
begotten, the iniquity of the Sodomites had become 
great,— the cry of its wickedness calling upon Justice 
for repression. The Lord and the two angels took their 
departure from Abraham's tent, going in the direction 
of Sodom, Abraham accompanying them through courtesy 
and through a desire to continue in heavenly company. 
And because he was a faithful servant of the 
Lord it was revealed to him that the destruction of 
Sodom and her sister villages was imminent. Thus we 
see the principles upon which the Lord deals with his 
creatures— to those who are in heart-harmony with 
him, full of faith and trust and loving obedience, and 
yet willing to wait patiently for the various features of 
his plan,— he reveals his plans not only as respects the 
coming blessing of all the families of the earth, but 
also as respects the punishment of the ungodly. 

We do not find Abraham rejoicing in the calamities 
about to come upon his neighbors; on the contrary, 
we find him generous; and so we should expect to find 
all who are the Lord's true people, full of generosity, 
kindness and good wishes toward their neighbors- 
even toward such as they could in no degree recognize 
or fellowship. Instead of glorying in the adversities 
coming upon the Sodomites, Abraham instinctively 
prayed for them divine compassion. And we are to 
remember in this connection that he had no thought of 
their calamity extending beyond the loss of the present 
life. He knew nothing about an "orthodox hell" with 
its corps of devils to receive and everlastingly torture 
them. He merely understood the Lord that the destruction 
of the people and of their cities impended. If 
he thought at all of their future, it would doubtless be 
in connection with God's promise, that by and by all 
the families of the earth should be blessed through his 
promised heir. 

We notice with pleasure the modesty of Abraham 
as he petitioned the Lord to have mercy upon his 
neighbors: "Wilt thou consume the righteous with 
the wicked? Peradventure there be fifty righteous 
within the city, wilt thou consume and spare not the 



place for the fifty righteous that are therein?" He was 
not attempting to charge or condemn the Lord by applying 
his standards; rather he was wishing to ascertain 
what would be the divine standard in the matter 
—how much compassion the Lord could justly exercise 
in behalf of such as sought at all to walk in his ways. 
Abraham must have known well the unsavory reputation 
of the Sodomites;— no doubt being in communication 
with Lot frequently. It is to his credit, therefore, 
that he was unwilling to think of those people as badly 
as they deserved. Actually there were only three worthy 
of being delivered; yet Abraham, with generosity of 
heart, assumed that there might be fifty. Benevolent 
people generally are pretty sure to err in their judgment 
on the favorable side, when they think of the 
weaknesses and villainies of their neighbors. 

The Lord assented to Abraham's proposition, and 
the latter's faith thus encouraged, he ventured to lessen 
the number in his inquiry to forty-five, forty, thirty, 
twenty, ten, and with all his earnest desire he could 
not think of petitioning the Lord to save those cities 
from destruction if wickedness had gotten such a hold 
that only ten could be found loving righteousness. We 
rejoice in Abraham's mercifulness, as well as in his 
faith. Had mercy not been a part of his character 
we may doubt if the Lord would have called him to be 
the starting point of his plan of salvation. "Blessed are 
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." Such the 
Lord is seeking, to be his agents and the channels of 
the mercies he has provided for mankind, to be dispensed 
during the Millennial age. Only the merciful 
will be acceptable to the Lord as joint-heirs with Jesus 
in the Kingdom, and only the merciful of the ancient 
worthies will share with Abraham in dispensing divine 
favors to mankind as "princes in all the earth;" representatives 
of the spiritual Kingdom.— Psa. 45:16. 

We contrast Abraham's modest and reverent petition 
with some which we have heard uttered by those 
who suppose themselves to be members of the Gospel 
Church, the body of Christ,— and the contrast is immensely 
in Abraham's favor. "O let not the Lord be 
angry, and I will speak but this once [more]; peradventure 
ten be found there [will you have mercy upon 
the cities for their sake]?" How some can go to the 
Lord in prayer in rude and dictatorial manner, telling 
him what they want to have done— how many they 
wish to have converted, how he shall manage the 
various features of his work, whom he shall bless 
and how, etc.,— we cannot tell. Let not such persons 
think that they shall receive anything of the Lord; 
let them not think that such praying is either fervent 
or effectual in any good sense. Let us, on the contrary, 

R2857 : page 255 

as the Lord's people, reason how great he is, and how 



insignificant we are; how just and true are his ways, 
and how imperfect are our best conceptions; and let us 
approach him with reverence to ascertain what are his 
purposes, rather than to amend or alter them to alignment 
with our imperfect judgments. 

SAVED SO AS BY FIRE. 



Evidently Lot's decision to reside in Sodom was 
for business reasons: he evidently had some children 
twenty-five years before, when he started out with 
Abraham, his uncle, and probably his interests in business 
and his desire for prosperity leading him to reside 
among the Sodomites was chiefly for the prosperity of 
his children. Alas, how great was his mistake! Yet 
he did not seem to fully realize it until, urged by the 
angel, he fled from Sodom accompanied by his two unmarried 
daughters, losing all else he had in the world 
—his wife and married children and grand-children, 
his flocks and herds and servants and all his personal 
belongings. He was indeed saved, preserved, from the 
destruction which there came upon the ungodly; but 
it was a bare rescue, not an abundant deliverance; he 
was, so to speak, pulled out of the fire. 

We may consider ourselves justified in considering 
Lot and his daughters who escaped to be illustrations, 
samples, whose antitypical lessons would apply in this 
present day. For as Abraham and his patient waiting 
represented the faithful, the overcomers, so Lot seems 
to represent a class in the end of the present age, who 
do not walk sufficiently by faith and who seek not 
chiefly the Kingdom and its righteousness; but who 
for the sake of earthly advantage are quite willing to 
risk their spiritual interests and the highest interests of 
their children, by choosing fellowship with the world; 

R2858 : page 255 

—by commingling to some extent with the world, the 
flesh and the devil, even tho, like Lot, disapproving 
their surroundings which vex their righteous souls. 
Such, the Apostle tells us, shall be "saved so as by 
fire." (1 Cor. 3:15.) Such the Lord illustrates as 
coming up out of great tribulation, washing their robes 
and making them white, and eventually obtaining a 
blessing, but not the chief one which they might have 
obtained had they followed faithfully with the pilgrims 
and strangers, the "little flock."— Rev. 7:9,14. 

The story of Lot's haste out of Sodom, and of his 
wife's transgression of the angel's command in looking 
back and hankering after the things left behind, are 
brought to our attention in that part of our Lord's 
great prophecy relating to the end of this age;— "Remember 
Lot's wife!" (Luke 17:32.) This reference 



seems to corroborate the thought that Lot's experiences 
were somewhat typical. The Lord's people will be 
tested along the line of their separation from the spirit 
of the world. Those who, like Abraham, are the friends 
of God will be far off from the danger; others not so 
faithful will be in the full midst of the trouble, yet if 
loyal at heart to the Lord they will be delivered with 
great loss, and the sufferings which such disappointments 
and losses will imply; yet in the end such will 
gain the heavenly, spiritual, life for which they started 
out. None, however, will be delivered if they remain 
in the city of destruction, Babylon. If they do not 
avoid it at first, they must at least be willing to leave 
it, and that with great energy, ere its destruction comes; 
and if they love the things behind, more than they appreciate 
deliverance— so that they in any degree look 
back or long for the evil things doomed to destruction 
in the coming trouble, it will mean that they will not 
be worthy of having any part or lot in the deliverance. 
The record is that Lot's wife became a pillar of salt, 
and altho infidelity has been inclined to dispute such a 
miracle, we have every reason to believe the truthfulness 
of the record; and like all miracles, if explained, 
it would no doubt seem reasonable enough. An explanation 
of the miracle has been suggested by a traveler, 
as follows: "Just as some of the victims of 
Pompeii stumbled in their flight, and were buried 
under the ashes, which still keep the outline of their 
figure, so Lot's wife was covered with the half-liquid, 
slimy mud." "An atmosphere heavily charged with 
the fumes of sulphur and bitumen might easily produce 
suffocation, as was the case with the elder Pliny 
in the destruction of Pompeii. And as no dead body 
would ever decompose on the shores of this salt sea, 
if left in such an atmosphere, it would become encrusted 
with salt crystals. Pillars of salt are found in 
the vicinity which have formed from the spray, mist 
and saline exhalations of the dead sea, and are constantly 
growing larger." 

SUFFERING THE VENGEANCE OF ETERNAL FIRE. 



Jude tells us that the destruction of Sodom was intended 
by the Lord to be an illustration of the fate of the 
wicked. But it certainly does not illustrate what that 
fate is generally supposed to be: it does not illustrate 
perpetual fire, with the Sodomites continually burning 
and never destroyed, and with demons poking the fires 
and torturing the victims. Nothing of the kind. The 
"eternal fires" which God intends for the wicked, and 
which he illustrated in the case of the Sodomites, signify 
fires, whose work of destruction is complete and 
everlasting. It is divine vengeance or retribution 
against sinners— "they shall be punished with an everlasting 



destruction" (2 Thess. 1:9), beyond all hope of 
recovery. The "lake of fire" of Revelation, and the Dead 
Sea of Sodom represent in symbol the Second Death 
—extinction, from which there is no hope by a resurrection 
or otherwise. None will go into the Second 
Death on account of ignorance. All who enter it will 
do so because of wilful, deliberate participation in sin, 
or because of sympathy with it. 

Supposing Sodom to represent Sin, the lesson 
would be that all finding themselves in an evil condition 
of life, even tho, like Lot, their hearts be out of sympathy 
with it, should and must flee from it if they would 
avert the consequences. They must flee in haste and tarry 
not in all the plain. Yet it is a comforting thought 
that as the angel laid hold of the hands of Lot and his 
daughters and helped, urged and encouraged them 
to flee, so the Lord's providences will take hold of 
every one who shall seek to escape from sin, and will 
so cooperate with their good wills in the matter that 
they shall eventually be fully rescued from it. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. AUGUST 15, 1901. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 

A Prophet, Like unto Moses 259 

Isaac, the Peaceable 262 

The World's Hope not in Missions, 

But in the Kingdom 264 

Jacob Becomes Abraham's Heir 266 

Israel, a Prince with God 269 

Public Ministries of the Truth 272 

Opportunities for "Harvest" Work 258 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 



or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



OPPORTUNITIES FOR "HARVEST" WORK. 

The chiefest service we could commend, open to all who 
are unencumbered and in active use of their faculties, is the 
Colporteur work. It is an honorable form of ministering the 
truth from house to house, as the apostles served. It is a service 
which the Lord seems to have blessed as much or more 
than any other for gathering the "wheat." It is apparent at 
once to all that to sell such books as the DAWNS at 25 cents each, 
cannot be for money -making: that it is merely another way of 
preaching the truth. No other religious books are sold at any 
such price. Indeed few subscription books sell for less than two 
to three dollars each. Any who can serve in this work are invited 
to write to us for "Hints to Colporteurs." 

THE VOLUNTEER WORK. 

Many who cannot give their entire time to the service can 
give an hour or so every Sunday to the "Volunteer" work;— 
distributing literature, which we supply free to Christian people, 
as they return from church services. The Volunteer force this 
year is a considerable one, including in some places 60 to 80 per 
cent, of the interested friends— all who can possibly engage in 
it. All testify that they receive great blessings from the service, 
and we have good reason to hope that deep and lasting 
impressions are being made on the recipients. 

OTHER METHODS OF SERVICE. 

Others circulate tracts on railway trains as they travel, or 
enclose them in letters to their friends. Others purchase DAWNS 
in quantities and sell, lend or give them away whenever they 
can find hearing ears. We are ready to cooperate with all who 
desire to serve in any capacity. "He that reapeth receiveth 
wages, and gathereth fruit unto eternal life." 



R2858 : page 259 

A PROPHET, LIKE UNTO MOSES. 



"For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your 



God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear 

in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it 

shall come to pass that every soul that will not hear that 

prophet shall be destroyed from among the people."— Acts 3:22,23. 

WE AGREE that the time for the fulfilment of 
this prediction is near, even at the doors; 
and now one, styling himself "Rev." John Alexander 
Dowie, heralds himself to the civilized world as being 
this Prophet. We are not hastily to accept his 
dictum, and to exclaim, "Verily, this is he of whom 
Moses, in the Law, and the prophets did write." 
Nor, on the other hand, are we hastily to decide that 
he is an imposter, a false prophet, simply because he 
happens to live in our day. Rather, in view of the 
fact that we are expecting the fulfilment of this Scripture 
we should look the subject carefully over, and 
weigh all the Scriptural testimony, and thus decide as 
to the truth or falsity of Mr. Dowie's claims. And, 
doubtless, in doing this, our investigation of the subject 
from a Scriptural standpoint will prove profitable 
to us, whether favorable or unfavorable to Mr. 
Dowie;— whether they prove him the Prophet foretold, 
or a deceived and deceiving false prophet. 

Analyzing our text, we perceive that its expression, 
"like unto," has the sense of antitypical; hence the 
Prophet to be expected must be much greater every 
way than Moses, as an antitype is always far superior 
to its type. Moses was the Mediator of the Law 
Covenant, and thus stood between Israel and God, as 
we read in reference to the sealing and delivery of 
the Law Covenant: "The Lord our God made a covenant 
with you in Horeb....The Lord talked 
with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of 
fire. I stood between God and you [a mediator, or go-between], 
at that time, to show you the word of the 
Lord; for ye were afraid by reason of the fire, and 
went not up into the mount." (Deut. 5:2-5.) From 
this we see that Moses, the typical prophet, was very 
great, very influential, had a very high office; and 
this would signify that the future Prophet whom God 
had in mind, and whose coming was foretold thirty-five 
hundred years ago by Moses himself, and further 
pointed forward to by the Apostle Peter in our text, 
must, as the antitype of Moses, be wonderfully great, 
wonderfully powerful, a still greater Mediator between 
God and men, a still mightier Law-giver whose 
word would be omnipotent, and violation of which 
would eventually mean destruction;— as it is written 
"Every soul which will not hear that Prophet shall 
be destroyed from among the people." (Acts 3:23.) 
Even at first glance every unprejudiced mind would 
say that Mr. Dowie, and every other man on earth, 
seems far too insignificant, far too small to fill the 
requirements. Not only too small for the antitype, 
but far inferior even to the type. 



Turning to the record of Moses' words in the Old 
Testament, we find them in Deut. 18:15-20, and here 
we see that the particular feature of Moses' work as 
a prophet and law-giver to Israel, which is here referred 
to as typical of a greater work to be accomplished 
by a greater Law-giver and Prophet, was the 
work which he performed for Israel as the Mediator 
of the Law Covenant at Mount Sinai, in the district 
called Horeb, already referred to. At the time of the 
giving of the Law, Israel witnessed a wonderful 
manifestation of divine power. "All the people witnessed 
the thundering and the lightning, and the 
noise of the trumpet and the mountain smoking; and 

R2858 : page 260 

when the people saw it they removed and stood afar 

off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us 

and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest 

we die." (Exod. 20:18,19.) In response to this their 

request God appointed Moses to be their Mediator 

or representative. Moses communed with the Lord 

in the mount, and received from him the Law, and 

came to the people and communicated the Law to 

them, and obtained their assent to the Covenant; and 

then, as a representative both of God and of Israel, 

Moses sealed the covenant;— ratified it by taking the 

blood of bulls and of goats and sprinkling first the 

book of the Law, or tables of stone on which the commandments 

were written, as representing Jehovah, 

and sprinkling, secondly, the people, as binding them. 

Thus the covenant between God and Israel was established 

at the hands of Moses, the mediator. It 

was at this time of the recognition of Moses as the 

Mediator of that Covenant that the Lord impliedly 

R2859 : page 260 

taught that the time would come when he would 
make a new and better Covenant, and establish it in 
the hands of a new and greater Mediator (the Christ); 
saying, "I will raise them up a prophet from among 
their brethren like unto thee, and I will put my words 
into his mouth."— Deut. 18:18. 

The Apostle assures us of this;— that the Law-Covenant 
was a type, an illustration of a greater and more 
wonderful covenant, between God and his people in 
the future. He points out to us that as Moses was 
a type of Christ, the great Prophet, so the animal-blood 
he used in sealing that typical Law Covenant 
represented or typified the blood of Christ— the blood 
which seals, makes binding, ratifies, the New Covenant. 
Our Lord referred to the same thing in connection 
with his death, and the institution of the Memorial 
Supper, when he said, "This is the blood of the 
New Covenant, shed for many for the remission of 



sins. "--Matt. 26:28. 

We are sure that we are right in this application; 
because the Apostle, in Heb. 9:19,20, refers us back 
to the sealing of the Law Covenant, saying, "When 
Moses had spoken every precept to all the people, 
according to the Law, he took the blood of calves 
and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool, and hyssop, 
and sprinkled both the book and all the people, 
saying, This is the blood of the covenant which God 
hath enjoined unto you." The entire tenor of the 
Apostle's argument shows us that he understood and 
taught that the antitype of this was to be found in 
Christ, in his sacrifice for sins, and not in Mr. Dowie, 
or any work that he might do. Continuing the same 
argument, into the next chapter (Heb. 10:16), the 
Apostle shows that the work of our Lord Jesus in 
offering up himself, as the ransom-price for mankind, 
was sealing the New Covenant, the antitypical covenant, 
which God had promised through Moses, and 
through all the prophets, saying, "This is the covenant 
that I will make with them after those days, 
saith the Lord." 

The Apostle evidently understood that the covenant 
which Moses, the prophet, instituted, typified 
the better covenant, which the greater Prophet, 
Christ, would institute in due time. Proceeding to 
compare these two prophets, the typical Moses and 
the antitypical Christ, the Apostle says, "He that despised 
Moses' law died without mercy;. ..of 
how much severer punishment suppose ye shall he be 
thought worthy who hath trodden under foot the Son 
of God, and counted the blood of the [New] Covenant, 
wherewith he was sanctified an unholy thing, 
and hath done despite unto the spirit of grace?" (Heb. 10:28,29.) 
The Apostle's argument evidently is that 
if God puts so much dignity upon the typical prophet, 
Moses, that violation of his covenant would mean 
death, we might reasonably expect that a severer punishment 
would come to all those who shall be brought 
under the benefits of the New Covenant, and who 
shall then spurn them, not appreciating the fact that 
they were secured by the precious blood of Christ, the 
antitypical Prophet. 

Continuing the same line of thought, viz., a comparison 
of the two mediators, and the two covenants, 
the Apostle draws to our attention the fact that Israel 
could not endure the terrible manifestations of divine 
power and justice at Mount Sinai, although they were 
only typical; and that as the typical Israelites needed 
and desired to be dealt with representatively instead 
of directly, through a mediator and not personally,— 
to be in the hands of the mediator, and not in the 
hands of God. So, says the Apostle, in respect to the 
New Covenant, and in respect to those who have apprehended 
that it was sealed with the blood of Christ, 
and that it is in operation now, and that we have the 



benefits of it conferred upon us.— If we should repudiate 
this New Covenant it would mean that we 
would thereby repudiate Christ (not Mr. Dowie), as 
our Mediator, and would fall into the hands of the 
living God, to be dealt with directly by him, and that 
without mercy. The Apostle clinches his argument, 
by saying, "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands 
of the living God." -Heb. 10:31. 

It would be a fearful thing to fall into the hands of 
the living God, not because God is unjust, but because 
he is just; and because we are imperfect, and therefore 
could not hope to meet the requirements of the 
law of absolute justice. Divine justice would be to 

R2859 : page 261 

us as a consuming fire, destroying us, because we 
could not comply with its requirements. It is for this 
reason that God has appointed for us a covenant of 
mercy, of which Jesus is the great Prophet and Mediator, 
—not Dowie. God having appointed this one 
channel of mercy it is for us to accept it as he proffers 
it, or, rejecting it, to fall into the hands of Justice, 
and to meet our desserts, utter destruction. Those 
who reject Christ, the Mediator of the New Covenant, 
will suffer more than those who rejected the typical 
mediator, Moses; for the latter lost merely the present 
life, but will have share in the restitution blessings 
of the next age; while all who intelligently and wilfully 
reject the Mediator of the New Covenant will 
die the Second Death. This is in full accord with the 
statement of our text, "The soul that will not hear 
[obey] that Prophet shall be destroyed from amongst 
the people." 

Having seen from Moses' own words and their context 
that this use of the word "prophet" signifies 
teacher, law-giver, mediator, between the people and 
God, and that this declaration looked forward to the 
giving of a greater law at the hands of a greater mediator 
and prophet and law-giver, we now turn to the 
words of the Apostle, which precede our text. (Acts 3: 19-21.) 
We find Peter discussing the second coming 
of Christ, and under the power of the holy spirit 
explaining to the people that with his second advent 
would come great blessing, "times of refreshing from 
the presence of the Lord," but that the heavens would 
retain him until those blessed times of restitution 
should be due. He connects this argument with the 
words of our text, showing that Moses' prophecy of 
the great Prophet, of whom he was but a type, would 
have its fulfilment at the second advent of Jesus, in 
the power and great glory of his Kingdom— "whom 
the heavens must receive, until the times of restitution. 
...For Moses truly said unto the fathers, 
A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you 
of your brethren, like unto [antitypical of] me." 



This leaves no room for question, at the bar of any 
reasonable mind, that the Prophet like unto Moses, 
announced for centuries as being the very center of 
the divine plan for the blessing of all the families of 
the earth, could not be fulfilled by Mr. Dowie, nor by 
any other ordinary or extraordinary man, but by him 
of whom Moses, in the Law, and the prophets did 
write— the Christ. 

The more we will examine the subject the more we 
will find it to expand, and the more we will appreciate 
the lengths and breadths and heights and depths of 
the divine plan. The Prophet like unto Moses, the 
great Law-giver, the great King, the great Mediator, 
will be the foretold "Seed of Abraham," in whom all 
the families of the earth shall be blessed— through the 
divine laws which he will enunciate, and the regulations 
he will enforce. And this Seed of Abraham, as 
we have already seen, as the Apostle has most clearly 
set forth, consists of our Lord Jesus, as the Head, 
the chief, and all of his faithful elect Church as members 
—as his body, "which seed is Christ... 
And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, 
and heirs according to the promise."— Gal. 3:16-29. 

In this view of the matter our Lord Jesus was raised 
up eighteen centuries ago as the "Head" of this great 
Prophet. He was raised up amongst his brethren, 
"a first-born among many brethren." He is not 
ashamed to call us "brethren," although he is the 
sanctifier and we the sanctified; he is the head over 
these brethren; and as such he has been raised— how 
high? Let the Apostle answer: "Far above all principality 
and power, and might, and dominion, and every 
name that is named" (Eph. 1:20-23); and the 
promise to his faithful followers is that they shall be 
counted with him as his "Bride," or, under another 
figure, as his "body,"— "members in particular of the 
body of Christ." (2 Cor. 11:2; 1 Cor. 12:27.) They 
also shall be raised, up, up, up. Already these are 
raised above the condition of the world, in that they 
have been favored of God, and called with a high calling, 
a heavenly calling in Christ Jesus. Already they 
have been raised up, in the sense of being transformed 
by the renewing of their minds, that they may 
prove the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. 
Already they are reckonedly risen with Christ, and 
walking in newness of life. And these, the members 
of the body of Christ, have the promise that they shall 
be raised up still further in due time— that they shall 
"have part in the first resurrection," to glory, honor 
and immortality; that they shall be like Jesus, their 
Head and Lord, and see him as he is, and share his 
glory, far above angels, principalities, and powers, 
and every name.— Eph. 2:6; Rom. 2:7; Rev. 3:21. 

Thus we see that the great work which God began 
in the person of our Lord Jesus, and in the sacrifice 
which he made for our sins and in his own exaltation 



in resurrection power, has not been lying idle 
since; but a work has been in progress in behalf of 
the world. Jesus personally has exercised the office 
of High Priest to and for the under priests, his 
"body," during this Gospel age, selecting, instructing, 
fitting and preparing them for the far more exceeding 
and eternal weight of glory in the future in behalf 
of the world. And we can easily see also that this 
work of raising up the great Prophet (Head and body) 
from amongst mankind, to a higher nature, even to 
be "partakers of the divine nature" (2 Pet. 1 :4) will 
soon be accomplished. Then what glory! What 

R2860 : page 261 

blessing, when this great Prophet, Priest and King 
shall exercise, in the name and spirit of Jehovah, the 
authority of earth, to bless mankind, to cause the social 
uplift which the whole world so greatly needs, 
but which can come from no other source; to restrain, 
and ultimately to completely overthrow, the powers of 
evil, of darkness, and of sin, and thus to purify and 
cleanse the world and bring in the glorious time promised, 
when there shall be no more sighing, no more 
crying, no more pain, no more death,— because the 
former things of sin, and its penalty, death, will have 
passed away! All who remain at that time, after that 
glorious reign shall have completed its work, will be 
in full harmony, mentally, morally and physically, in 
deed and in truth, with Jehovah God, and the righteous 
laws of his empire— all who would not obey the 
great Prophet, and thus come into accord, having 
been destroyed from amongst the people according 
to the divine declaration. 

Hallelujah! What a Savior! What a wonderful 
and comprehensive plan is this, which our great Creator 
has mapped out, of which we are, first, the subjects, 

R2860 : page 262 

and afterward, by his grace, his active agents 

in bringing to the world of mankind. O, there is a 

grandeur in the divine plan which Mr. Dowie evidently 

has never seen— a grandeur to which he is blind, 

because the Lord hath not revealed it unto him, because, 

even now, in the dawning of the morning, the 

god of this world still blinds his mind. 

A lesson in connection with this subject which is 
applicable to all of the Lord's consecrated people, is 
the lesson of humility. Only as we are in a humble 
attitude of mind can we get a view of the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths of the divine plan. 
Otherwise we would continually find our view of God 
and of his Word and plan obscured by self. Thus 
the Lord declares that he resists the proud and showeth 
his favor unto the humble. Let us, therefore, dear 



brethren, instead of thinking of ourselves as great 
ones, on the contrary remember that we are dust, and 
that as the poet has expressed it,— 
"My highest place is lying low 

At my Redeemer's feet; 
No real joy in life I know 

But in his service sweet." 
"He that exalteth himself shall be abased; he that 
humbleth himself shall be exalted. Humble yourselves, 
therefore, under the mighty hand of God, that 
he may exalt you in due time." (Luke 14:11; 1 Pet. 5:6.) 
Let us seek to be servants of the Lord and of 
the flock— faithful servants, ready and willing to lay 
down our lives for the Lord, for the truth, for the 
brethren. 



R2860 : page 262 

ISAAC, THE PEACEABLE. 

-GEN. 26:12-25. -SEPT. 1.- 

Golden Text:— "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they 
shall be called the children of God. "-Matt. 5:9. 

ISAAC signifies "laughter." Abraham laughed 

with pleasure when informed that he would have 

a son that would be born in his old age. (Gen. 17:17.) 

Sarah laughed with incredulity when she was 

informed on the subject. (Gen. 18:12.) And again 

she laughed in joy and appreciation at the time of 

Isaac's birth: hence he was named Laughter, or Joyous. 

His life, as recorded in the Scriptures, was 

rather an uneventful one. As might have been expected 

from the fact of the age of his parents, he appears 

to have been rather a quiet, thoughtful, non-resistant 

child and man, with less of the fire and aggressive 

energy than displayed by some others. Our 

lesson covers a considerable period of his life, and 

the chief points of character which it brings to our 

attention are, first, his meek, patient, peaceable disposition; 

and, second, his abiding faith in God and 

in the promises made to Abraham, his father. 

As Abraham, in the time of drouth, went southward 
into Egypt, so Isaac similarly went southward, 
but stopped in the land Gerar, the king over which 
was Abimelech. The Lord's blessing was so manifestly 
with Isaac that Abimelech and the people of 
that land urged him to move elsewhere, as his prosperity, 
they imagined, was somewhat at their expense. 
It is not amiss that we here note the fact that the 
Lord's blessing upon Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and 
their descendants— Israel according to the flesh- 
was manifested in temporal prosperity; whereas divine 



favors to spiritual Israel of this Gospel age are 
manifested in spiritual prosperity. And since the two 
prosperities, under present conditions, can rarely 
exist side by side in the same individual's experience, 
it follows that those who are in line with the spiritual 
promises of the present time are generally, in temporal 
matters, "the poor of this world, rich in faith, 
heirs of the Kingdom." "Not many wise, not many 
great, not many learned, according to the course of 
this world, hath God chosen."— Jas. 2:5; 
1 Cor. 1:26,27. 

It is not a little remarkable that, even in their cast-off 
condition, the natural seed of Abraham (to whom 
still belong certain as yet unfulfilled promises of God, 
which will surely be fulfilled as soon as the spiritual 
Israel has been selected), are nevertheless so kept 
and guided by divine providence that in all parts of 
the world they are comparatively successful in the 
commercial and literary competition of the world; 
so that, as Abimelech said to Isaac, "Go from us, for 
thou art more mighty than we," the various nations 
of earth feel toward and act toward Isaac's posterity 
—the Jew is continually asked to move on, because, 
even though alienated for the time being from the 
chief blessing of the Abrahamic promise, the Lord's 
hand is with him, and he prospers in his 
undertakings. 

The experiences of fleshly Israel in having no continuing 
city or country, but being pushed hither and 
thither throughout the earth for now several centuries, 
should have produced in at least some of that 
nation a spirit of humility and of patient waiting for 
the Lord, and his fulfilment of his gracious promises 
to them. And we are glad to hope that such will be 
found thus exercised and ready for the Kingdom at 
its inception; and yet amongst the Jews, as a people, 
we notice comparatively little faith and comparatively 
little meekness— especially amongst their wealthy 
ones. Evidently, the majority are not Israelites indeed, 
and will not be prepared for more than the 
average blessings upon the world at the beginning 
of the Millennial Kingdom. Nevertheless, we may 
hope that a goodly remnant of that people are in the 
condition of heart in which they will be ready to welcome 
Messiah's Kingdom, when the eyes of their 
understanding shall open, and to join with Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob, and all the holy prophets of their 
brethren, who will then be princes in all the earth 
(Psa. 45:16), in constituting a nucleus of a holy nation, 
gathered about the earthly phase of the Kingdom, 
—through which shall proceed to Israel and to 
all the nations the heavenly laws and blessings dispensed 
by God through spiritual Israel, then glorified 
with Christ at its head. 

The peaceable disposition of Isaac is exhibited in 
this lesson by the fact that although he recognized 



himself to be the divinely appointed heir of that land, 
who should ultimately inherit it; and although, with 
his large retinue of servants, King Abimelech himself 

R2860 : page 263 

had recognized his superior power; nevertheless, 

rather than have strife and contention, Isaac moved 

his encampment a considerable distance away from 

the place of strife, abandoning some of his rights for 

the sake of peace. And it was after he had thus relinquished 

his rights, trusting to God to give him 

the land in his own due time and manner, that the 

Lord appeared to him (in what manner is not explained), 

and reiterated to him the substance of the 

covenant already made with his father Abraham, 

saying: "I am the God of Abraham, thy father [I still 

recognize him; he is not extinct; he still has a place 

in my gracious arrangements and purposes, although 

he sleeps with his fathers; I am abundantly able, in 

due time, to resurrect him, and to fulfil to him and to 

his faithful posterity all my gracious promises]: fear 

not, for I am with thee [I recognize thee as associated 

in these promises and an heir with him— I approve 

also the element of faith in thy character, and thy 

submission to my times and seasons and arrangements 

—I appreciate the fact that thou dost not strive 

to attain the things I have promised, until the time 

that I am pleased to give them to thee], and I will 

bless thee and thy seed, for my servant Abraham's 

sake [—in harmony with the one covenant made with 

Abraham: you will understand that I am not making 

a new covenant with you, but merely confirming the 

original one]." 

Many of the spiritual children of Abraham need 
to learn the lesson of patience— patient waiting on the 
Lord for the fulfilment of his gracious promises. 
With quite a good many there is a disposition to 
hasten matters, to force things; and even questionable 
methods are sometimes adopted and commended, 
with the thought that the aggressive ones are more 
acceptable servants to the Lord than others; but instead 
of such aggressiveness, as the carrying of the 
gospel into China or Africa or India with the sword, 

R2861 : page 263 

being the evidence of a zeal which God approves, it 
should rather be considered an evidence of lack of 
faith in God, without which it is impossible to please 
him. A proper faith in God will lead to a careful 
study of his Word, of the promises; and a careful 
study of the promises would show that the present 
is not the time for conquering the world, but the time 
for calling out, proving and testing, the elect Church, 
which in due time, as the seed of Abraham, shall be 



fully empowered and fully commissioned to be both 

kings and priests, and to conquer the world in righteousness. 

A proper condition of faith in God must 

lead his faithful ones to wait patiently for him; praying 

the meanwhile, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will 

be done on earth;" and to expect that when the due 

time shall come Emmanuel will take the control of 

the world's affairs, and cause its subjugation and 

blessing to proceed rapidly and effectively. Now, it 

is our duty to avoid striving with the world; rather 

to give place— to permit our rights to be infringed, 

to wait on the Lord, and to expect that he will provide 

for us the things and the experiences most helpful 

to our development as new creatures, and thus to 

make us fit, "meet for the inheritance of the saints 

in light." 

Two other circumstances in Isaac's life seem to illustrate 
his attitude of faith, obedience and patient 
submission, even more than this lesson. One of these 
we have already referred to,— his submission as a 
young man, in health and vigor, to be bound by his 
father as a sacrifice upon the altar. In this complete 
submission to Abraham, his father, Isaac well typified 
his antitype, Christ Jesus, and his submission to the 
heavenly Father, Abraham's antitype, even unto 
death, even the death of the cross. 

The other was the matter of his marriage. Isaac 
manifested a wonderful degree of patience and trust 
in the divine providence which he seems to have realized 
was guiding in all the affairs of his father Abraham, 
and in his affairs as his son and heir under 
the promises. He was a full-grown man of forty years 
when his father Abraham, apparently without consulting 
him in the matter, sent the servant to select 
for him a wife, who, when she came, he accepted with 
full loyalty of heart, as being the Lord's choice for 
him. We are not setting this forth as an example in 
all respects for the fathers and sons of our day. On 
the contrary, we believe that some of these matters 
in ancient times were arranged with a view to the 
typical lessons embodied in the various circumstances 
and affairs of life. Isaac, as the type of Christ, 
was fully submissive to the will of his father, as a type 
of Jesus' submission to the divine will respecting the 
selection for him of the Gospel Church, to be his Bride 
and joint-heir in the great promises respecting the 
world and its blessing. Our Lord Jesus is fully in 
harmony with the Father's will respecting whom, 
how many, and of what character, shall be the joint-heirs 
of his Kingdom. The force and beauty of the 
picture is seen when we recognize the servant Eliezer 
as representing the divine message, the Spirit of the 
Word of truth, sent forth of God, to gather during 
this Gospel age a people, a little flock, who shall constitute 
the Bride, the Lamb's wife, and thus be members 
of the body of the antitypical Isaac— Acts 15:14; 



2 Cor. 11:2. 

The characteristics of God's dear Son must be 
found in all those who will be eventually accepted as 
his Bride and joint-heir. This will include the great 
faith in the Father which the Lord Jesus exercised, 
and which was typified in Isaac's full trust and submission. 
So, then, it is for us who are seeking to 
make our calling and our election sure to this gracious 
part in the divine plan, to be peaceable, peace-loving, 
gentle, willing rather to retire and be non-resistant, 
where no principles are at stake, where no 
command of the Lord is to the contrary. We can well 
afford to sacrifice earthly interests, since the promises 
to which we are heirs belong to the future, and 
are so exceedingly abundant, more than we could ask 
or think, that their attainment will far more than 
compensate for any incidental losses or deprivations 
as respects the present time. 

The Apostle says, "We, brethren, as Isaac was, are 
the children of promise" (Gal. 4:28)— Christ, our 
Head, and we, his members, are the antitype of him 
who was called "Laughter," or "Joyous." And do 
we not have more joy than others, even in this present 
time? True, we have a full share in the trials and 
difficulties and sorrows and disappointments that 
cause the whole creation to groan and travail in pain 
together: yet we have what they do not have— "the 

R2861 : page 264 

peace of God which passeth all understanding, ruling 
in our hearts" and enabling us to be "joyful in tribulation 
also," knowing that tribulation worketh patience, 
and all the various fruits of the spirit which, 
when perfected in us, shall bring us to the complete 
joy and rejoicing of the heavenly Kingdom. And if 
this name, Joyous, applies to us in such degree in 
the present time, what shall we say of the glorious 
future, when joined to our Master in the glories of 
his Kingdom we shall cause the knowledge and blessing 
of the Lord to fill the whole earth, and bring 
laughter and joy to a world of mankind, now weak 
and groaning under the administration of sin and 
death? "Praise God from whom all blessings flow!" 



R2861 : page 264 

THE WORLD'S HOPE NOT IN MISSIONS, BUT IN THE KINGDOM. 



FROM time to time we have demonstrated that 

there is no hope of a general world-blessing 

through Christ along the lines generally held by Christian 



people;— the conversion of the world by present-day 
missionary efforts. We herewith supply additional 
evidences on this subject from highly creditable 
sources— not with a view to casting disrespect upon 
all missionaries, but in order to demonstrate afresh 
that this foreign-mission-world-conversion delusion 
is doing positive and serious harm to the Lord's true 
people, in leading to false expectation and, consequently, 
to misdirected efforts. 

Foreign missions were undertaken with two convictions; 
one correct, the other false. (1) The correct 
Scriptural conviction that the only name by which 
any can be saved is the name of Jesus;— faith in his 
sacrifice, and obedience and devotion to him. (2) The 
false, unscriptural conviction that there is no hope 
for any who die in ignorance of the only name whereby 
we must be saved. These intertwined theories 
have been the cord which has drawn hundreds of 
noble lives to self-sacrifice, especially during the first 
half of the past century. It is the cord also which has 
drawn, and still draws, from sympathetic purses, millions 
on millions of money. And we need not wonder, 
if the money has, in turn, drawn some into the 
missionary work simply for an honorable and easy 
living. 

We are not objecting to the sacrifice of noble lives 
and consecrated money, either; for we firmly believe 
that lives and money given with sincerity have been 
pleasing to the Lord; even though given under some 
serious and discreditable misapprehensions of the divine 
character, and plan of human salvation. We object 
that this mixture of truth and error is very injurious 
to God's people, in that it diverts their hearts 
and efforts away from the truth. It draws them away 
from Bible-study— away from growth in knowledge 
and in the graces of the spirit. Instead, it inculcates 
the thought that the chief object of life for all Christians 
should be the snatching fellow-creatures from 
the hands of an angry God intent upon throwing 
them into eternal torment at the hands of demons. 
Or, if not this, the making and contributing of 
money which will pay the expenses of those who do 
the snatching. 

As a result, Christian people "have no time" to 
study the Father's Word; no time for studying the 
divine plan, cultivating their own hearts, etc. They 
say to themselves often, and sometimes, unguardedly, 
to others— Bible-study! Nonsense, we already know 
enough when we know that millions are perishing- 
going down to hell. Bye and bye we "hustlers" who 
have been less careful for our own spiritual development 
and for Bible study, but more "on fire" and 
"burdened" for souls, will have brighter crowns than 
yours— if indeed you "hair-splitting" Bible students 
are not rejected from heaven entirely. 

But a reaction from so unreasonable a position was 



bound to come with the advance of intelligence; and 
it has come. People in general no longer believe 
in the awful devil-god of the past, seeking for any 
possible pretext for the torture of as many as possible 
of his creatures. Reason is asserting itself, and 
man no longer poses as the sinner's only friend to 
save him from a malicious God. That is too absurd 
a proposition for the twentieth century. But men 
will have theories;— for theories still, as ever, are the 
basis of action— the rudder of human effort. It has 
become evident to all thinkers that one or the other 
of the strands of the original mission-cord is false, 
unreliable, rotten. Question: Which of the strands 
will they reject? 

We answer that the true one will be rejected; and 
the false one will be retained. They will continue to 
believe that all hope ends with death, and will reject 
the inspired declaration that faith in Christ is the 
only hope, and this the only name. They have already 
concluded and are more and more becoming 
convinced, that although the name of Jesus is a good 
rallying cry, especially when calling for missionary 
contributions, it is not the only name for salvation. 
They conclude, but do not care to declare it in so 
many words, that "education," "civilization," are, 
rather, the only names for salvation. And salvation 

R2862 : page 264 

at home and abroad is more and more coming to 

mean, not a personal relationship to him who is the 

light of the world, and in whom alone is life everlasting; 

but rather it now stands for social progress, 

municipal and national reform,— "social uplift." 

Thus has the false idea of missions and their conversion 

of the world led God's people farther and 

farther away from his Word and plan, which, in their 

zeal without knowledge, they have been rejecting. 

To those who are rightly instructed on the subject 
by God's Word— to those who lean not to their 
own understandings, but who search the Scriptures 
daily to be thereby taught of God— the utter failure 
of missions as respects any hope of ever converting 
the world to even the imperfect conditions which 
prevail throughout "Christendom," is faith-strengthening. 
Because it demonstrates, it proves beyond 
question, the truth of the Scripture teaching; namely, 
that God is not yet attempting the conversion and 
salvation of mankind in general, but is leaving that 
great work for the future age, to be accomplished by 

R2862 : page 265 

the Kingdom of God when it shall be established in 
power and great glory during the Millennium. It 
corroborates fully the Bible declaration that the present 



work of God is the election of a Church which, 
finished, polished and glorified with her Lord and 
head shall, bye and bye, fulfil the predicted blessings 
of all the world as Abraham's seed (Gal. 3:29); 
fulfilling the petition of our Lord's prayer, "Thy kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth, even as it is 
done in heaven." 

The following discouraging reports of missionary 
efforts we clip from the Literary Digest: 

"A SWEEPING CRITICISM OF FOREIGN MISSIONS. 

"The missionaries' side of Christian missions in 
foreign lands has been very fully stated from time 
to time in Christian churches and in the reports of 
missionary societies and conventions. Not so much 
has been heard as to how these missions impress 
others, except in the occasional private reports given 
by returning travelers. Reynolds' Newspaper (London) 
has lately been devoting considerable space to 
this topic. In a recent issue the results of some investigations 
by a special correspondent employed for 
this purpose are given. These investigations cover 
the missionary organizations in London— the great 
center of Protestant foreign missions— as well as the 
results obtained by them in the chief countries of the 
Orient. In speaking of the great sums collected 
from the people of England for this purpose, the 
writer states that the Church Missionary Society 
(Church of England) has an annual income of about 
L.404,906 (a little over $2,000,000). The collection 
of this money alone costs L. 25,843 (about $129,000); 
administration costs L. 15,9 17 (about $79,500); salaries 
to nineteen clergymen as association secretaries 
amount to L.5,432 (about $27,160). The London 
Missionary Society has an income of about L. 150, 168 
(about $750,840) yearly, while its foreign secretary, 
the Rev. M. Wardlaw Thompson, receives 
L.800 (about $4,000) per annum, and others receive 
'proportionately large amounts.' The missionary 
income of the Wesleyan Methodists for 1899 
amounted to L. 133,690 (about $668,450), out of which 
four ministerial secretaries received 'large salaries' 
in addition to extra charges for 'children, rent, rates, 
taxes, house bill, house repairs, and replacement of 
furniture, coals, gas, etc.,' amounting to about as 
much again. The Baptists in 1900 collected L. 73, 716 
(about $363,580) for foreign missions. 

"In commenting on the foreign results received for 
these vast sums, the special agent of Reynolds' Newspaper 
gives the following facts, based on his study 
of the official missionary reports: 

'"What are the results abroad? In India, with 
its great population of 350,000,000, the number of 
converts made by the Church Missionary Society, 
after more than a century's labor, is to-day 35,640, 



although no fewer than 3,424 agents are at work. 

How many of these converts are genuine is a different 

matter. The above number includes the helpless 

children. In the year 1889-90 there was a gain of 

1,836, mostly the babes of converts. Thus it took two 

missionary agents and a sum of L. 113,000 to secure 

one 'convert' babe, or adult, in a year. What a farce! 

This ridiculous result, too, is a falling-off on the previous 

year. The other societies have even a more unsatisfactory 

record. Mr. W. S. Caine, M.P., on his 

recent return from India, writing in the Birmingham 

Daily Post, February 14, 1889, thus sums up his opinion 

of the attempt to 'Christianize' India: 'Educated 

India is looking for a religion, but turns its back on 

Christ and His teaching as presented by the missionary. 

As far as turning the young men they educate 

into Christians their [the missionaries'] failure is 

complete and unmistakable.' A writer in The Contemporary 

Review for February, 1888, gives his Indian 

experience as follows: 'Christianity has taken 

but a poor grip of Hindu India. Its votaries are nowhere 

really visible among the population. A traveler 

living in India for two years might leave it without 

full consciousness that any work of active proselytism 

was going on.' 

"And the alleged converts? The Church Missionary 
Society for 1900 says: At present there is a 
rather low standard of Christian living.' It is the 
same as was told some years ago by the Rev. Sidney 
Smith, that the native who bore the name of 
Christian was 'commonly nothing more than a drunken 
reprobate, who conceives himself at liberty to eat 
and drink anything he pleases, and annexes hardly 
any other meaning to Christianity.' The London 
Missionary Society in the 1896 report (p. 186) ask 
subscribers 'not to despise the low ideas and motives 
with which they [the converts] come to us.' And, 
again, at page 145: 'A very large proportion who 
profess themselves Christians, and are baptized, are 
so very ignorant that great care and patience are 
required to make them intelligently acquainted with 
the fundamental truths of Christianity.' Among the 
Malay Christians, which the 1899 report of the Wesleyan 
Methodist Missions states 'furnish us with the 
great majority of our converts' (p. 76), a lady worker 
writes: 'When one questions them by themselves, 
the one appalling factor that forces itself upon one 
is their unimaginable ignorance. In most, the anxiety 
for the daily bread is the largely bulking factor 
for their consciousness.' Extracts of this description 
might be indefinitely multiplied. 

'"In China, the missionaries are now thoroughly 
disliked, although they have not been interfered with 
unless their zeal has outrun their discretion, for the 
Chinese, says Professor Douglas in his book on 
China (p. 370), are 'singularly tolerant of faiths other 



than their own.' In the Report of the Church Missionary 

Society for 1900 we are told that 'churches' 

have been organized by Chinese for the purpose of 

affording protection in law cases, such as the payment 

of debts. In 1869 our Foreign Office (Parliamentary 

paper on China, No. 9, 1870, p. 13) wrote 

as follows as to Protestant missionaries in China: 

'"There is good reason to suppose that the animosity 
which has lately been more intensely shown 
toward missionaries on the part of the ruling authorities 
in China is in a great measure to be attributed 
to the injudicious conduct of the native converts to 
Christianity. ...There seems sufficient reason 
to believe that converts assume and have acted on 
the assumption that by embracing Christianity they 
released themselves from the obligations of obedience 

R2862 : page 266 

to the local authorities and from the discharge of 
their duties as subjects of the Emperor, and acquired 
a right to be protected by the European power whose 
religious tenets they have adopted.' 

'"And again, Admiral Richards, in an official communication 
to the British Government (Parliamentary 
Paper, China, No.l, 1892, p. 24), says: 

'"It seems to be the special aim of missionary societies 
to establish themselves outside treaty limits; 
and, having done so, they are not prepared to take the 
risks which they voluntarily incur, but, on the contrary, 
are loudest in their clamor for gun-boats, as 
their contributions to the Shanghai press sufficiently 
demonstrate. ...It appears to be necessary, 
after the lessons taught by these occurrences, that 
some understanding should be arrived at with regard 
to missionary societies in China. ...It seems 
altogether unreasonable that the societies should exercise 
absolute freedom in going where they please, 
and then their agents should look to Her Majesty's 
Government for protection.' 

"The scandals in connection with the present 
war in China, published in The Daily Mail, and other 
papers, of missionaries engaging with the troops in 
looting, and inciting the burning of the houses of the 
Chinese, must give these followers of the great Confucius 
—who taught a doctrine in no sense inferior 
to Christianity, and long before Christianity was 
known— the notion that missionaries are a kind of 
barbarian horde, whose real object is to plunder and 
massacre. The number of 'communicants' in Christian 
churches throughout China, after half a century's 
work, is only a few thousands. In Ichang,' 
writes Mr. Little, 'the Bibles that are distributed 
broadcast are largely used in the manufacture of boot 
soles,' and, further, that no respectable Chinaman 
would admit a missionary into his house. In other 



parts of the country they [the Bibles] are employed 
to manufacture papier-mache tables. 

'"As to Africa one quotation may suffice. Sir H. 
H. Johnson, our present Special Commissioner for 
Uganda, and a man of many years' experience in Africa, 
says in The Nineteenth Century, November, 1887: 

"It too often happens that, while the negro rapidly 
masters the rules and regulations of the Christian 
religion, he still continues to be gross, immoral, 
and deceitful. ...They [missionaries] may have 
succeeded in turning their disciples into professing 
Catholics, Anglicans, or Baptists; but the impartial 
observer is surprised to find that adultery, drunkenness, 
and lying are more apparent among the converts 

R2863 : page 266 

than among their heathen brethren.' 

And again: 

'"I regret to say that, with a few— very rare— exceptions, 
those native African pastors, teachers, and 
catechists whom I have met have been all, more or 
less, bad men. They attempted to veil an unbridled 
immorality with an unblushing hypocrisy and a 
profane display of mouth-religion which, to an honest 
mind, seemed even more disgusting than the immorality 
itself. While it was apparent that not one 
particle of true religion had made its way into their 
gross minds, it was also evident that the spirit of 
sturdy manliness which was present in their savage 
forefathers found no place in their false, cowardly 
natures.... 

'"It is not on the spread of Christianity that African 
missions can at present base their claim to our gratitude, 
respect, or support... In many important 
districts where they have been at work for twenty 
years they can scarcely number in honest statistics 
twenty sincere Christians— that is to say, twenty 
natives understanding in any degree the doctrines or 
dogmas they have been taught and striving to shape 
their conduct by their new principles. In other parts 
of Africa, principally British possessions, where large 
numbers of nominal Christians exist, their religion 
is discredited by numbering among its adherents all 
the drunkards, liars, rogues, and unclean livers of the 
colony. In the oldest of our West African possessions 
all the unrepentant Magdalenes of the chief city 
are professing Christians, and the most notorious one 
in the place would boast that she never missed going 
to church on communion Sunday.' 

'"Considerations of space prevent us following the 
missionary into other fields of his activity. The tale 
is pretty much the same wherever we turn. But we 
have said enough to show how grossly deceived the 
public are with reference to the doings of our missionaries 
and the result of their missions. Far be it from 



us to say that there are not good and self-sacrificing 
men among them. But we assert that the fruit of 
their energies is so small, and the work left undone 
at home so great, that it is nothing less than a criminal 
act of human folly to give any special encouragement 
to the missionary movement.'" 



R2863 : page 266 

JACOB BECOMES ABRAHAM'S HEIR. 

GEN. 28:10-22.-SEPT. 8. 

"Surely the Lord is in this place." 

ALTHOUGH Abraham had two sons, one of 

them, Isaac, was made the heir of the most of 

his possessions, and exclusively his heir as 

respected the divine covenants and promises. Similarly, 

Isaac had two sons, Esau and Jacob, who were 

twins; but the former, being born a few moments in 

advance of the latter, was, according to the laws of 

primogeniture, his father's heir. So far as we know he 

did inherit his father's estate, flocks, herds, etc. The 

divine promise to Abraham was evidently highly appreciated, 

not only by himself and Isaac, but also by 

Isaac's sons; but Esau, being less religiously inclined 

than his brother, set more store by his inheritance 

of his father's possessions than in his rights as the 

first-born to the divine covenants and mercies pertaining 

to the future. Jacob, on the contrary, had an 

opposite estimate of values. He was quite willing 

that his brother should have every earthly advantage, 

but he coveted the special blessing of God, promised 

R2863 : page 267 

to his grandfather Abraham, and renewedly covenanted 
to his father Isaac. 

Severe have been the criticisms which have been 
levelled against poor Jacob because of his coveting 
earnestly the best gifts, which his brother despised. 
(1 Cor. 12:31.) He is freely described as a thief who 
stole his brother's birthright, who took advantage of 
his extremities, etc., and some even go so far as to 
suggest that his after tribulations were in the nature 
of divine judgments upon him on account of this 
transaction by which he became the legal owner of 
the divine blessing. To us it seems evident that 
there is a general misunderstanding of this transaction; 
for we note the fact that Jacob received no reproof 
from the Lord in respect to this matter, and 
that none of his experiences and disappointments, 
while working for his uncle Laban, are even hinted 



to have been punishments for a wrong done to his 

brother Esau. On the contrary, the Scriptures uphold 

Jacob in every particular; not only the Old Testament 

records, but also the New Testament records 

of the transaction complimenting him upon his appreciation 

of the divine promise, and his willingness 

to sacrifice every earthly interest in order to secure 

it. As the course of Esau is held up to reprobation, 

the course of Jacob is in the same proportion held 

up for our appreciation and approval— the general 

feature of his course, if not every particular item 

therein. 

The correct view of the situation, as we gather it 
from the divine record, is this: Esau loved his earthly 
interests chiefly; Jacob regretted that he was the 
second-born, not so much because it would hinder 
him from being the principal heir of his father's property, 
but chiefly because it would cut him off from 
being the channel of divine favor in respect to the 
future blessings which God had promised in his covenant 
with Abraham. He well knew that his brother 
Esau was irreligious and estimated his inheritance 
of the Abrahamic covenant very lightly. Hence it 
was, that one day when his brother returned from 
hunting, weary and hungry, and was attracted by 
some soup which Jacob had prepared, that he was 
willing to exchange anything he possessed for the 
satisfaction of his appetite— possibly, too, he may 
not have been too honest— he may have thought to 
sell the birthright for the soup, and to ignore the bargain 
subsequently. Indeed, this was the very course 
he pursued. 

Esau's chagrin and tears later on, when he found 
that the birthright had really passed to Jacob, do not 
necessarily mean that he appreciated the heavenly 
blessing; but, rather, that he understood that he had 
disposed of all his rank and inheritance as respected 
his father's estate. Jacob, on the contrary, cared 
little or nothing for that part of the inheritance; his 
ambition being centered wholly upon the divine blessing 
and covenant. He was, therefore, quite willing 
to flee from his father's house, leaving all the earthly 
inheritance to his brother Esau, although it properly 
belonged to him according to the bargain. He 
counted earthly advantage but as loss and dross that 
he might gain the divine blessing. Even when, years 
later, he returned to the vicinity of his father's home, 
so far from making a demand upon Esau for the temporal 
things which he had bought from him, Jacob 
entirely ignored that part of the transaction, and took 
from Esau not one solitary thing that the latter really 
valued. Instead of demanding the pound of flesh, 
according to the contract of purchase, he sent his 
brother a peace offering, a present of sheep, etc. 

Indeed, the entire course of Jacob, rightly understood, 
seems to us to have been a most noble one. 



The unhappy part of the bargain was the deceiving 

of Isaac— Jacob's personating his brother Esau. We 

are to remember, however, that Jacob having bought 

all of Esau's rights, had become legally his representative, 

with full authority to take such steps as might 

be necessary to secure for himself justice;— to secure 

that which he had contracted for and paid for. In 

what manner Jacob could have done better to secure 

to himself that which the Lord's Word concedes he 

had legitimately purchased, might be open for discussion. 

But one item connected with it is not open 

for discussion; that the Lord did not reprove Jacob's 

earnest coveting of the heavenly promise— 

which led him, first of all, to the self-denial of giving 

up his own dinner for its procurement; and, secondly, 

his willingness to desert all of his earthly interests 

in his father's house, and to become a pilgrim 

and a stranger in the world, forsaking all things 

for this divine promise. 

God attested his appreciation of such a character 
by specially appearing to Jacob that very night, and 
granting him a vision, in which he talked to him and 
confirmed to him the original promise made to Abraham 
and renewed to Isaac, saying, "I am the Lord, 
the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of 
Isaac; the land whereon thou liest to thee will I give 
it and to thy seed;. ..and in thee and in thy 
seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed." 
Any man who receives such unqualified divine approval 
and blessing we shall most surely refuse to 
call a thief, or any other evil name. On the contrary 
we shall hold him in high esteem, and shall 
commend to all of the spiritual seed of Israel to-day 
that they emulate the spirit of Jacob, and not the 
spirit of Esau— that they be ready at all times to exchange 
the pottage of earthly advantage, and to become 
pilgrims and strangers; outcasts from home 
and property, and from all earthly things, for the 
sake of being inheritors of the same heavenly promises 
—joint-heirs with Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Indeed, only to this class will the divine blessings 
come. Our earthly neighbors and friends may speak 
slightingly of us,— may charge us with ambitious 
designs, when they learn that we are seeking a heavenly 
Kingdom and joint-heirship with our Lord. 
They may charge that this is selfishness on our part. 
But the Lord makes no such charges. He tells us 
that he is pleased to see us so appreciative of the 
heavenly promises that we will be ready and glad to 
give up to others, to yield our earthly rights in any 
and every particular, if by any means we may win 
Christ and be found in him, and be sharers in his 
Kingdom. 

To the worldly mind Jacob did a very foolish thing. 
He should not have thought of the Abrahamic promise 
as being anything of special value. He should 



R2864 : page 268 

rather have sought out for himself the smoothest and 

easiest way through life, conciliating his brother 

Esau, etc. He was foolish to leave a home of wealth 

and many servants and flocks and herds to go out, 

a stranger in the world, to earn his own living, to 

begin at the bottom of the ladder. Quite possibly 

he felt a little of this sentiment himself, as he fixed a 

stone for his pillow and lay down on the ground to 

sleep on the first night of his flight. No doubt, he 

wondered whether or not he were pursuing a wrong 

course; whether or not the heavenly promise which 

he had so much appreciated would ever yield adequate 

returns. But the vision of the ladder reaching 

from his head up to heaven itself, and the angels 

of God ascending and descending upon it, and God 

at the other end speaking to him and encouraging 

him, and declaring to him that he recognized him as 

the heir of the Abrahamic promise, must have fully 

satisfied the mind of Jacob, and have made him 

thankful and appreciative of all the steps by which 

divine providence had thus far led his appreciative 

and faithful heart. The angels he might possibly understand 

to mean divine providences— divine care 

and supervision respecting himself and all his interests 

and affairs, while the rungs of the ladder would 

represent the various steps of the divine plan already 

known to God, by which the promise he had would 

reach fulfilment. 

When he awakened, Jacob was not filled with self-conceit, 
nor did he say to himself, Evidently I am 
greater than either father Abraham or father Isaac, 
for I have never heard that God ever so appeared 
to them. Rather, he was filled with a spirit of reverence 
and of awe; and he said, This is a holy place; 
God is here. I will set up a large stone here as a 
monument, as a reminder of God's blessing. I may 
come back this way at some future time, and this 
stone will remind me, not only then, but afterward, 
of the great favor which I received of the Lord, in 
that he was willing to manifest himself to me, and to 
declare me the heir of his promises. Quite a good 
many of the Lord's people seem rather to lack the 
spirit of fear, of reverence, as respects the Almighty. 
We are not to forget the Apostle's words, that "Perfect 
love casteth out fear," but neither are we to forget 
the other Scripture which declares that "The fear 
of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Whoever 
has not first received the spirit of reverence, cannot 
properly receive the spirit of love; and the love will 
never cast out the reverence, but rather increase it, 
casting out only the element of terror, of fright. 

The Lord's words to Jacob in the vision, "I am 
with thee, and will keep thee, whithersoever thou goest, 



and will bring thee again into this land," became 
a strength and assurance, a ballast, as it were, 
in Jacob's life and experiences; his faith grasped the 
situation, and he felt strong in the Lord and in the 
power of his might, in the word of his promise. He 
was ready now for any and all the experiences which 
might come to him, knowing that according to this 
promise all things would work out for his good. And 
so it is with the Lord's people of this Gospel age- 
spiritual Israel— the Church, the body of Christ. 
When we have believed God, and have trusted in 
his promises to the extent of forsaking all to inherit 
their blessing, it signifies our full consecration, our 
self-sacrifice in the divine service. Then it is that 
God speaks to us through his Word, and gives unto 
us exceeding great and precious promises, which affect, 
not only the interests of the life that now is, 
but also of that which is to come. Then it is that 
we are strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might, and that we are able to grasp the situation— 
that if God be for us the efforts of all who might be 
against us will prove futile. True, the promises which 
come to us are not exactly the same as those which 
were given to Jacob— they are better, grander, higher, 
than his— heavenly, instead of earthly; and correspondingly 
we have reason to rejoice, be strong in 
the Lord and go on our way rejoicing, even more 
than did Jacob. 

Then Jacob made a vow unto the Lord— a promise, 
a solemn agreement: the basis of this agreement 
was the Lord's promise we have just quoted, that 
he should be brought back in safety, and that the 
Lord would be with him and bless him with the best 
experiences during his absence. Jacob's vow was 
based upon the divine proposition above mentioned 
—that if God would do this for him he would surely 
be his servant, and that forever. Not only would he 
worship and reverence him and obey him, as best 
he could understand his will and do it, but additionally 
he would honor him with whatever substance 
he would give him, to the extent of one-tenth. 

So it is with the spiritual Israelite; when accepted 
of the Lord through Jesus, and assured of divine 
favor and blessing upon his pathway, he says to himself, 
in the language of the Psalmist, "What shall I 
render unto the Lord my God for all his benefits toward 
me?" What can I do in return? No true, noble 
mind can willingly receive many and continued 
blessings without desiring and seeking methods of 
acknowledgement of these mercies— without desiring 
to make some return in worship, in praise, in 
gratitude, in obedience. 

To us also comes the desire to honor the Lord 
with our substance. And here the degree of our love 
and appreciation are further manifested. Oberlin, 
the poor French minister, reading of the Jewish 



tithes, said to himself: "Well, I am sure that I, as a 
Christian, have three times as many blessings as the 
Jews had. If it was right for a Jew to give one-tenth 
of his property to God, surely I ought to give at least 
three times as much as that." Another minister has 
said, "The man who calls himself a Christian, and 
gives less than one-tenth of his income to the Lord, 
is meaner than Jacob, and has a lower standard than 
the king of Sodom, who was ready to give more than 
that to God's representative." 

The standard of giving is one which has apparently 
perplexed the Lord's people for a long time. Our 
suggestion is that the divine favor bestowed upon the 
enlightened Christian calls not only for one-tenth 
or three-tenths of his property, but, on the contrary, 
calls for his all. To our understanding he who gives 
himself to the Lord in consecration gives not only 
his every mental talent and every physical power, but 
also gives every dollar that he possesses— yea, most 
valuable of all, he lays his life at the Master's feet, 
in harmony with the Apostle's words, "I beseech you, 

R2864 : page 269 

brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your 
bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God, and 
your reasonable service." These sacrifices are earthly, 
and when offered and accepted the newly begotten 
mind or will is counted as a "new creature;" and at 
once this "new creature" becomes the steward, the 
caretaker, of the earthly nature and its affairs;— all 
that was devoted or sacrificed. Thenceforth it is the 
business of the "new creature" in Christ to use up in 
the divine service, as wisely, economically, and yet 
rapidly, as possible, all the earthly things, interests, 
hopes, ambitions, etc., that were originally presented 
to the Lord as a sacrifice. This complete sacrifice, 
this giving of our all to the Lord, is the Christian 
standard, and nothing short of this warrants us in 
considering ourselves footstep followers of our Lord 
Jesus Christ and his faithful apostles. Surely they 
gave all that they had. Surely we also must give up 
our little all if we would be joint-sacrificers and joint-heirs 
with the King of glory! 



R2864 : page 269 

ISRAEL- A PRINCE WITH GOD. 

-GEN. 32:l-32.-SEPT. 15.- 

Golden Text:— "Men ought always to 
pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1. 



FLEEING from his father's home, Jacob traveled 

a distance of nearly five hundred miles to Chaldea, 

the original home of his grandfather Abraham, 

where his uncle Laban still lived. His esteem for the 

promise of God had made him a pilgrim and a 

stranger, a wanderer from home, just as Abraham's 

faithfulness to the call had taken him from home in 

the opposite direction. While the blessings God had 

promised to Jacob were earthly and temporal, and in 

these respects differed from the promises which are 

made to spiritual Israelites, nevertheless, in order to 

prove Jacob's worthiness of the blessings— in order 

to test his faith in God's promises, he was permitted 

to pass through various trying experiences and disappointments. 

One of these was a love-affair with 

Rachel, his cousin, for whom he served his uncle in 

all fourteen years, seven before he got her as a wife, 

and seven years afterward; his uncle taking a dishonest 

advantage of him in the arrangement. Nevertheless, 

we see Jacob's patience and persistency, and note 

with pleasure that he never for a moment seems to 

have doubted the promises of God that he should be 

blessed as the inheritor of the Abrahamic promise. 

"Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving 
the Lord," would seem to apply well to Jacob's career. 
So energetic was he in Laban's service, so successful 
in all that he undertook, so persevering, that his 
uncle soon considered his service indispensable, and 

R2865 : page 269 

was glad to make favorable terms with him to have 
him remain and take chief charge of his property. 
Shrewdly Jacob bargained for an interest in the increase 
of the flocks and herds, etc., as his salary, and 
practically became a partner. There was nothing 
dishonest in his making a bargain with Laban that 
all the brown sheep and streaked and speckled goats 
should be his; nor was there anything wrong in his 
scientifically increasing the proportionate numbers of 
these colored and speckled animals. Laban became 
aware, before long, that he had a very capable and 
shrewd son-in-law, and, moreover, that the Lord's 
blessing was with him. He fain would have had him 
remain permanently in Chaldea, but Jacob's mind 
was full of the Abrahamic promise and of the reiteration 
of that promise to himself in the vision at Bethel, 
and he desired to return to the land of promise. He 
surmised, however, not without good cause, that his 
uncle would use force to restrain him from leaving, 
or to take from him some of the cattle, etc., which 
were properly his under the contract, and hence he 
chose an opportunity for leaving when Laban was 
absent. 

Laban was evidently a powerful sheik, having 
many servants, and indeed Jacob had become so by 



this time, as the narrative shows that he was able, 
shortly after, to give away as a present to his brother 
Esau, 220 goats, 220 sheep, 30 camels, 50 head of cattle 
and 20 asses. But when Laban pursued, with the 
full intention of bringing back Jacob, his family and 
servants and flocks and herds, God interfered, warning 
Laban in a dream, saying, "Take heed that thou 
speak not to Jacob from good to bad"— margin. In 
consequence of this dream, and Jacob's subsequent 
fair statement of his side of the case, showing clearly 
that he had not wronged Laban, but that Laban had 
repeatedly dealt hardly with him, he was let go on 
his way in peace. 

If we draw a lesson from these incidents respecting 
ourselves, as heirs of the promises of God, spiritual 
Israelites, it would be that while our hearts are full of 
rejoicing in God's promises we should not expect 
these to come to us wholly without our effort to secure 
them. If God has promised us spiritual blessings, 
we should put forth the effort to attain these, 
just as Jacob had put forth his efforts to attain the 
temporal blessings promised him. If adversity seems 
to go with us, and we meet with disappointments and 
more or less fraudulent conspiracy to take away from 
us our spiritual blessings, as Jacob met with disappointment 
which seemed for the time to interfere with 
his temporal blessings, we, like him, should patiently 
wait for the Lord, and trust and hope and labor on, 
knowing that the Lord will bring out the promised 
results in the end; knowing that he is on our part, 
and greater than all they that be against us. 

We noticed in previous lessons the peaceable disposition 
of Abraham, and also of Isaac, and now we 
note that Jacob not only left home and abandoned his 
share in the father's house, and family property belonging 
to the birthright he had purchased, rather 
than quarrel with his brother, but that similarly in 
dealing with his uncle he refused to quarrel; he submitted 
himself; he trusted to the Lord to bring out 
the results rather than to his own strength for a conflict, 
either mental or physical. The Lord apparently 
would have the spiritual Israelites learn this lesson: 
"Seek peace and pursue it;" "Patiently wait for the 
Lord, and he will bring it to pass." It is not of God's 
arrangement that the spiritual Israelites should 

R2865 : page 270 

contend with carnal weapons; but rather that they 

should submit themselves to the powers that be, learning 

the lessons which accompany such submission; 

and have developed in them the faith, the trust, 

the hope in God, necessary to a maintenance of their 

relationship to him, and growth in his grace. 

As Jacob and his caravan approached Palestine his 
confidence in God, and his reliance upon the Lord's 



promise to bless him, did not hinder him from taking 
a wise, generous, reasonable course for the conciliation 
of his brother. He did not stand upon his rights, 
and say: I purchased the inheritance, and was 
obliged to flee from it, and now I am differently situated, 
and will seek my first opportunity to take from 
Esau the cattle and substance which he received of 
my father's estate which are rightfully mine, and 
should there be any quarrel in the matter, let him 
look to his own side, for right is on my side and I may 
exert as much force as is necessary to obtain it. Quite 
to the contrary of this, Jacob said to himself: I care 
nothing for the earthly inheritance, I abandoned that 
all when I left home, and I do not intend to lay any 
claim to it, now or ever. I merely got what Esau did 
not appreciate, and now, if he can come to realize 
that I am not after the property, it will assuage his 
wrath, his malice, his envy. On the contrary, I will 
be generous to him; I will send him a valuable present, 
thus showing him that so far from wishing to 
take from him earthly goods I am disposed to give 
him more. Moreover, I will send such a message by 
my servants as will show him that I treat him as my 
superior— my lord, and that I rank myself as his inferior. 
He shall see that I am neither wishing to take 
the honors of his birthright nor its earthly emoluments, 
though all of these were purchased— I resign 
freely all of these temporal good things and honors, 
that I may have the Lord's favor, as represented in 
the original covenant with grandfather Abraham. He 
carried out his program successfully, and Esau became 
his friend. The lesson for spiritual Israelites 
along this line is,— We should not be sticklers for full 
justice and the last penny in earthly matters. Rather 
we may use the earthly mammon generously to make 
and keep the peace, and to forward our spiritual interests. 
Our readiness to do this will measure or 
gauge our appreciation of the spiritual interests, in 
comparison to which earthly blessings, "Mammon" 
should be esteemed as loss and dross. 

A MODEL PRAYER. 



Jacob's prayer at the time he was anticipating a 
meeting with Esau is recorded in this lesson, and 
may be considered one of the best examples of prayer 
to be found in God's Word. It is so full of confidence 
and trust in God. It recounts the original promise to 
Abraham, its renewal to Isaac, and its second repetition 
to Jacob at Bethel, and the Lord's promise there 
given him, that he would bring him again to his home 
country. It shows the humility of Jacob's mind, 
which cried out, "I am not worthy of the least of all 
the mercies and of all the truth which thou hast shown 



unto thy servant; for with my staff [only] I passed 
over this Jordan [when fleeing from home], and now 
I am become two bands [great companies]." He tells 
the Lord of his fear of Esau, yet shows that his fear is 
offset by his confidence in the Almighty. It was at 
this time, and doubtless in answer to this prayer, that 
the angel of the Lord appeared to Jacob, and so full 
of faith in the power of God, and in the promise of 
God was Jacob that he laid physical hold upon the 
angel, declaring that he would never let go until he 
got a blessing. 

Here, the lesson proper, relating to Jacob's struggle 
with the angel, comes in. The angel appeared as 
a man, as was frequently the case in olden times; Jacob 
had recognized him, nevertheless, and laying hold 
of him urged that he as God's representative, sent to 
meet him, should give him a blessing. We cannot 
suppose for a moment that the angel was not powerful 
enough to release himself from the grasp of Jacob, 
and hence that the wrestling and struggle between 
them kept up until the morning light, the angel vainly 
pleading, "Let me go," and Jacob as persistently 
holding on and declaring, "I will not let thee go unless 
thou bless me." We must suppose, on the contrary, 
that the Lord was well pleased to bless Jacob, 
and had sent the angel for this very purpose; and that 
the circumstances were intended as an opportunity to 
draw out Jacob's longing desires in this respect; to 
demonstrate to himself how much he really desired 
the Lord's favor, the Lord's blessing. And when the 
desired result had been obtained— when Jacob had 
evidenced the intensity of his desire for harmony with 
God and such blessing as God alone could give— then 
the blessing came— Jacob's victory. Not that Jacob 
prevailed to get from God, through his angel, something 
the Lord was not pleased to grant; but that he 
prevailed to obtain the coveted blessing by manifesting 
the zeal, the energy, the patience, and the faith 
which God was pleased to see and reward. 

The lesson of the spiritual Israelite in this circumstance 
is in harmony with our Lord's words, "Men 
ought continuously to pray and not to faint." God 
wishes us to be persistent, and our persistence measures 
and indicates the depth of our desires. If the 
blessing in answer to our prayer does not come in the 
moment of asking we are to continue "instant in 
prayer,"— patiently waiting for the Lord's due time, 
faithfully trusting him that he is willing to give the 
blessing which he promised, even though he may for 
a time withhold it with a view to our becoming the 
more earnest in seeking it. 

Although Jacob was a natural man, not a "new 
creature in Christ Jesus," nevertheless his prayer is 
a model one, in that he did not specify even the earthly 
things which had been promised him. All he asked 
was a blessing, in whatever manner the Lord might 



be pleased to give it. Alas, how many spiritual Israelites 
seem to have a much less keen appreciation 
of proprieties in such matters than had Jacob ! Many 
ask and receive not because they ask amiss, for things 
to be consumed upon their earthly desires— wealth 
or fame or temporal good things. (Jas. 4:3.) How 
many forget that the Lord has already promised to 
take care of the temporal necessities of his spirit-begotten 
children, and to do for them better than they 
would know how to ask or to think. How few seem 
to remember that as new creatures our conditions and 
desires should be specially for the things that pertain 

R2866 : page 271 

to the new creature, and that it is this class of blessing 
the Lord invites us to ask for and to wrestle to 
obtain, assuring us that as earthly parents are pleased 
to give good gifts to their children, so our Heavenly 
Father is pleased to give the holy spirit to those who 
ask him. (Luke 11:13.) If the Lord's consecrated 
people could all be brought to the point where the 
chief aim in life, the burden of all their prayers, would 
be that they might have a larger measure of the spirit 
of the Lord, the spirit of holiness, the spirit of the 
truth, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of a sound mind, 
what a blessing it would mean! If, then, they should 
wrestle with the Lord until the breaking of the day 
their hold upon him would be sure to bring the desired 
blessing. The Lord has revealed himself to his 
people for the very purpose of giving them this blessing; 
nevertheless, he withholds it until they learn to 
appreciate and earnestly desire it. 

Jacob got the blessing and with it a change of name. 
He was thenceforth called Israel, which signifies 
"Mighty with God." This new name would thenceforth 
be continually a source of encouragement to 
him, an incentive to fresh zeal and trust in the one 
whose blessing he had secured. All of Jacob's posterity 
adopted this name. They were all known as 
children of Israel, or Israelites; for God acknowledged 
the name as applicable to all of the nation. 
Similarly, in antitype, we have Christ Jesus our Lord, 
the true, the antitypical Israel, the one who, through 
faith and obedience to the Father, has prevailed, has 
overcome the world and the flesh and the Adversary, 
and has received the divine blessing as the result of 
his struggle. He has been highly exalted and is 
declared now to be prince or ruler of the kings of the 
earth. He has sat down with the Father in his throne. 
-Rev. 1:5. 

Nor does the analogy end here; for, as Jacob had 
twelve sons, so our Lord Jesus had twelve apostles; 
and these, and all who come into Christ through their 
ministry of the gospel, are accepted as the true, the 
spiritual, Israel. The same name belongs to all of 



these that belongs to the Head. As with fleshly Israel 
there were some who were "Israelites indeed," 
and others who were not, but of the synagogue of 
Satan, in the spiritual Israel there are nominal and 
real Israelites; and only the latter will ultimately obtain 
the blessing and be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ 
their Lord. And the name, "Victor," or "Mighty 
with God," will be a name which will apply to everyone 
of the Lord's faithful ones in the same manner 
that it applied to Jesus himself. Each one will be required 
to manifest his loyalty to the Lord, his faith, 
his trust, and only those who love the Lord and the 
promise he has made that they will hold on to his 
promise, and will not let him go without a blessing- 
only such will receive the great blessing, only such 
will be able to overcome the world, the flesh and the 
Adversary. "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even your faith"— in God and in his promises. 

ACKNOWLEDGING DIVINE FAVORS. 



Jacob had a method of marking the special manifestations 
of divine providence,— as when he called 
the place in which he wrestled with the angel Peniel; 
as a reminder that there he had been privileged to see, 
representatively, the Lord's face, to receive the Lord's 
blessing, the light of his countenance. Similarly, it 
is profitable to the spiritual Israelites that we should 
make note in some special manner of all the Lord's 
mercies and providences toward us. Many feel poor 
as respects the Lord's favor and blessing, simply because 
they have failed to let them make a proper impression 
upon their hearts at the time they were received. 
Divine favors are soon lost from our leaky 
earthen vessels unless special notation is made at the 
time, either upon the tablets of memory, or in some 
other manner to refresh memory. Doubtless we 
would all have more Bethels and more Peniels did 
we but follow the course of setting up some kind of 
monuments, and there entering into some special 
covenant or vow with the Lord in return for his mercies. 
Quite in line with this thought, that Christians 
generally have multitudinous blessings, and favors 
more than they fully recognize, the Allegheny 
Church has for some years held "Cottage Meetings" 
in various quarters every Wednesday evening, for 
prayer, praise and testimony. And the testimonies 
called for are not the "years ago" sort, however good, 
but the fresh living experience of the week. And as 
each seeks for fresh evidences of divine love and watchcare 
daily, each finds that he has far more cause for 
rejoicing and thanksgiving and encouragement than 
he would have been aware of without such watchfulness 
and notation. Let us daily and weekly as well 



as yearly rear to God our Ebenezers, if we would increase 
our faith and joy and love. 

As Saul of Tarsus, in receiving his blessing of the 
Lord, received also a thorn in the flesh, which buffeted 
him continually through the remainder of his 
experiences, but which he learned ultimately to appreciate 
as a channel of divine blessing, as a reminder 
of divine favor, so it was with Jacob. At the very 
time that he was wrestling with the angel and getting 
the blessing, he received a wound, a troublesome reminder 
of the blessing, which continued with him 
probably through the remainder of his days, causing 
him to limp. The record is that the angel touched 
him in the hollow of his thigh, probably touched the 
sciatic nerve, causing the sinew to shrink and a slight 
dislocation of the joint. The lesson not only was one 
for Jacob himself to the remainder of his days, leading 
him to remember his dependence upon the Lord, 
and that he owed everything he possessed to the divine 
blessing, but it served afterward with his posterity 
as a continual reminder of the same thing; for 
the record is that thenceforth the Israelites would 
not eat of this sinew from any animal. Jacob's 
"thorn in the flesh," no doubt, served to keep him 
humble, even as Paul's served to remind him that he 
was what he was by the grace of God, and not in any 
wise of himself. Similarly, the Lord permits certain 
weaknesses of the flesh to affect his spiritual children 
in the present time favorably. Undoubtedly some of 
our difficulties and trials, physical as well as others, 
are amongst our greatest blessings, working out for 
us a better portion in the future, by working in us 
faith, patience, true reliance upon the Lord. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. SEPTEMBER 1, 1901. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 275 

The Breach Widens 278 

A Modern Reformation 279 

Respecting Foreign Missions 281 

Preach the Gospel to Every Creature 282 

The Watered Lilies 284 

Quarterly Review 284 

Intemperance 285 

Interesting Questions Answered 286 

Public Ministries of the Truth 288 

Items: Preserve Your Towers, etc 274 

page 274 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THE CLEVELAND CONVENTION. 



Notice that lower rates have been secured— $1.00 per day. 
Inquire of your own ticket agent, in good season, respecting 
"G.A.R. Excursion Tickets." Notify us at once if you desire 
lodgings secured, as rooms will be scarce. 



PRESERVE YOUR TOWERS. 



Those who have preserved their WATCH TOWERS for some 
years back will be glad, especially in view of the new Bible 
with references to the DAWNS and past six years of TOWERS. 
Order sample copies for circulation among your friends. We 
advise friends to get their back TOWERS from 1895 to Aug. 1901 
bound. Together they make a splendid volume. Any binder 
can do it. 

WALL CHARTS IN FOREIGN LANGUAGES. 



We have had some copies of "The Chart of the Ages" 
painted in German, Swedish and Dano-Norwegian to correspond 
with the English— 5 ft. long. These cost 50c additional, namely, 
$2.00 each, carriage paid in U.S. Gotten up singly they would 
cost at least $5.00 each. 

THE LEATHER BOUND DAWNS. 



We are of the opinion that few have noticed the remarkably 
low price at which these are supplied. The present lot is 
very handsome. See next column. 



R2866 : page 275 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



RIGHT AND WRONG VIEWS OF THE PRESENT SITUATION. 



IF WE but remember that nothing in the world's 
history offers any comparison to present social 
and financial conditions, we may well regard with a 
great deal of charity the conflicting views of able and 
conscientious men respecting the causes, the disadvantages, 
the proper remedies, and the outcome, of 
the movements now on foot throughout the civilized 
world. God's people, justified and sanctified and 
separate from the world, with new aims and spiritual 
ambitions before them, and with the instruction and 
enlightenment of the divine revelation— the Bible- 
should be able to take a calmer, a clearer, a more 
comprehensive, and therefore a more true, view of 
affairs, past, present and to come, than others; for 



we are to remember that it is prejudice and self-interest 
which generally has much to do with the blinding 
of those who see not from the divine standpoint. 

From this standpoint we see that neither the rights 
nor the wrongs of motive or of action lie all on one 
side of these questions; and, seeing this, we are better 
able to take a sympathetic position, and to exercise 
our influence amongst those with whom we 
come in contact, in the interests of peace. All of the 
Lord's people should be peace-makers; none of them 
should be strife-makers. There are generally a sufficient 
number of selfish forces at work in and about 
every individual to stir up his mind, to breed in him 
discontent, and to arouse the passions of anger and 
malice and hatred; there are few influences, at work, 
on behalf of gentleness, meekness, patience, brotherly 
kindness, love. Hence there is the more necessity 
that the Lord's people continue pouring oil upon 
the troubled waters— the oil of the holy spirit, with 
which their cup is to overflow; the oil of joy as 
opposed to the spirit of heaviness and discontent; 
the oil of hope, which illumines the future gloriously, 
and thus offsets and counteracts the darkness of present 
discouragements. 

As an illustration of how good and wise men sometimes 
fail to get a correct view of matters, take the 
following extract from a Philadelphia journal: — 

A SPECIES OF INSANITY. 



"A terrible trouble is disturbing the earth at the 
present time. It more resembles a species of insanity 
than anything else. As we know, among members of 
an undeveloped society the maniacal tendency is not 
common; that tendency is an accompaniment of civilization. 
All must have noted the fact that the possession 
of extraordinary endowments and a facile loss 
of mental balance, or great wits and madness, as the 
poet has told us, are somehow near allied. They have 
a way of going together. Just so here. To-day it is 
not the dull nations, but the bright ones, the most 
advanced in refinement and everything of that sort, 
that seem craziest in the craze at this moment sweeping 
the world. The dementia is practically an exclusive 
possession of the Great Powers of Europe, 
troubling England worst, but reaching out and affecting 

R2867 : page 275 

us in this country in some ways, perhaps, 
worst of all. It seems a madness of the Anglo-Saxon, 
as he loves to call himself, more than of any other 
people. And plainly this madness is the result of a 
disease; it is the outworking of the greed microbe, 



or it comes from the yeasting in the human blood of 
the lust for property and dominion. And because 
of this frenzied, grasping tendency, which, as a sort 
of demonism, has taken possession of the leading nations 
of men, and of our own people and the ruling 
element among them particularly, the whole earth is 
plunged into a condition of singularly disastrous feud 
and conflict at the present moment. 

Leading nations have simply fallen into a veritable 
madness in their scramble for trade. That is precisely 
the way things are. Commercial interests, so 
called, stand ready and are eager to sacrifice everything 
—untold treasures of the people at large, along 
with their highest rights and profoundest welfare— in 
order to keep or attain supremacy for themselves and 

R2867 : page 276 

for the furthering of their ends. Think what, under 
this influence, not only Great Britain and we in America, 
but Russia also, and Germany and France and 
Italy, are ready to spend in this desperate rivalry! 
Millions on millions of the people's money are these 
nations hot to lavish in outlay so as to buy or bribe 
the chief advantage in trade lines, the one against the 
other. This is at the bottom of our militarism. Here 
is what our wars mean.... War, we may rest assured, 
is always precisely as General Sherman characterized 
it. There is no good in it for anybody; only 
evil— the consummation of evil. A trade war is 
the same as any other. Greed is behind it; and we 
have the highest authority for holding that greed is 
behind all wars. They come of men's lusts. But to-day, 
greed in the elaborations and marvelous complications 
of modern life has become an overmastering 
disease. The whole land is swept by it. Society 
quivers in its sway; so do our churches and our 
homes. Commerce is maddened by it. It is a craze 
in the heart of the nations. It has well nigh come to 
be a veritable demoniacal possession, driving the 
whole wide world, and especially the peoples that 
ought to be conspicuous in light and leading, into a 
desperate frenzy, making the immediate outlook for 
highest human welfare very dark and foreboding." 

This is all a mistake. The present agitation and 
grasp for power and trade is not the result of a special 
disease of greed and selfishness— not a new form 
of insanity. On the contrary, it is the result of a larger 
amount of reasoning on the part of humanity in 
general, and especially on the part of statesmen and 
financiers, along lines which the writer of the above 
article, however otherwise intelligent, has not fully 
appreciated. The fact is that the present movement 
is the result of conditions, and not the result of theories. 
Theories, aggressive theories, selfish theories, have 
prevailed in the world for centuries, and probably prevail 



no more to-day than in the past. It is not a new 
microbe of greed that has attacked mankind, but new 
conditions which appeal strongly to what for a long 
time has been known as the first law of nature- 
self-preservation. 

Statesmen and financiers the world over have realized 
that the new conditions brought into the civilized 
world during the past fifty years mean a revolution 
—an irresistible revolution. They mean that 
machinery and steam and electric power have become 
the servants of men, and that these servants 
can be multiplied at a comparatively small cost, and 
that the necessities of Christendom can now or shortly 
be supplied by one-third the population; which 
means that, now or shortly, two-thirds of Christendom's 
population will be in enforced idleness. Statesmen 
and financiers seek to ward off such a condition 
of things, realizing that it would mean calamity, financial, 
social and political. This is the secret, then, 
of the effort on the part of the most highly civilized 
peoples in the world to obtain new markets for their 
goods and to retain their hold upon the markets already 
established, at home and abroad. 

There are people who tell us that business should 
revert to old-time methods, moderation, fair prices, 
limited production, and general contentment; but 
such people fail to recognize the great change that 
has come upon the world in respect to conditions. 
They fail to see that the business pressure which is 
now exerted is not a voluntary one, but rather an enforced 
one; for those who would persist in following 
old-time methods in manufacturing or business 
would speedily find themselves bankrupt. Consequently 
all find it necessary to bestir themselves and 
adopt new methods of business adapted to our day. 
As they are pushed on by others, so others in turn are 
pushed on by them. The civilized world is like a 
great crowd; at the head are the world's notables, 
backed each of them by the hundreds and thousands 
and millions of humanity, willingly or unwillingly depending 
upon them for guidance, for life's comforts, 
yea, for its necessities. The entire crowd has tasted 
of the conveniences and blessings of civilization, and 
the determination of the whole is that they will not go 
back into barbarism and savagery, but will press on; 
and a fear of personal or class or national disadvantage 
is continually goading the great majority of this 
struggling mass, bidding each look out for himself 
and his own interests, and let no opportunity escape 
his grasp. 

With the majority the impelling fear is an undefined 
one; and yet, in a general way, all seem to apprehend 
that some sort of a check to the world's advancement, 
and to their individual progress, is imminent. 
Whether they can discern the ramified influences 
connecting them individually as factors in 



the problem or not, they can realize that the more 
lucrative situations in life are few in comparison to 
the numbers of humanity; and they can see, too that 
prosperous waves come to the world occasionally, 
through an increased demand for the products of machinery 
and the soil. They can see that if the Chinese 
Empire, for instance, with its hundreds of millions 
of population, were thrown fully open to the 
commercial enterprise of Christendom, it would cause 
the wave of prosperity in Christendom to have that 
much longer roll, because it would require time for 
the Chinese to fully adapt themselves to the new 
conditions introduced by machinery; it would require 
time for them to learn how to install and to operate 
the machinery, and thus that the evil day of 
over-production would be put off the further into the 
future. Instead of calling these men "insane" shall we 
not, on the contrary, say that they are wise in their 
generation;— that they are acting out the only part 
they could be expected to take, as wise men of the 
world, laboring under the law of personal and national 
selfishness,— the law under which all the world has 
for centuries been operating? We hold that the 
energy of these politicians and financiers is an energy 
begotten of wisdom, and remember the words of 
Solomon, "The wise man foreseeth the evil and hideth 
himself, while the foolish pass on and suffer for 
it."-Prov. 27:12. 

As our Master said at the first advent, so we may 
now repeat,— "The children of this world are wise 
in their generation"— wiser, sometimes, than are the 
children of light. Therefore the latter need to take 
the more earnest heed to the divine revelation, which 
is able to give them the "spirit of a sound mind" beyond 
all others. 

R2867 : page 277 

The Scriptures give the key to the present situation: 
they show us clearly that the divine law of love 
has always condemned the law of selfishness, under 
which fallen humanity has long governed itself. The 
law of selfishness is no worse a law to-day than it has 
always been. It has been the cause of wars, injustices, 
sufferings, slaveries, etc., in all the periods of 
history. It is neither worse nor better to-day; but 
new conditions have come upon us: civilization has 
lifted one-fifth part of the world to a higher plane of 
thought and sentiment, and upon these, since the beginning 
of "the day of his preparation," 1799, the Lord 
has been gradually lifting the veil and granting a discernment 
of the secrets of nature, which has resulted 
in great chemical and mechanical discoveries. 
These, while proving great blessings to mankind, are 
sure eventually to bring great calamities, by reason 
of conflict with the law of selfishness now prevailing. 



All thinking men realize that under the laws of selfishness, 

competition, etc., it is only a question of time 

when the vast resources and possibilities of machinery 

in the hands of the brightest and keenest of the 

world's population will reach the point of a death-struggle 

with the masses of Christendom,— not even 

waiting to reach the masses of heathendom. All wish 

to avoid this crash, for all instinctively realize that it 

will be terrible when it comes; but many seek to avoid 

the matter by saying to themselves, It will not come 

in my day, anyway. And meantime each feels as 

though he is powerless to stem the current, or to resist 

the pressure which is behind him. 



As an illustration of the forces at work in Christendom, 
a result of the new conditions introduced to the 
world during the nineteenth century, note the strife 
between the United States Steel Corporation and the 
Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers. 
Much can be said on each side of the question, but it 
all resolves itself in harmony with the foregoing. 
The capitalists, representing the money invested and 
the machinery, are pressed by competition and seeking 
to maintain their own standing financially and 
to make progress. They do not desire the degradation 
of their workmen in any sense or degree; but 

R2868 : page 277 

would much prefer that they were all comfortable 

and provided with steady employment. The more intelligent 

amongst the workmen realize that captains 

of industry and accumulations of capital are necessary 

to progress and prosperity; and while wishing 

to be comfortable, well-to-do, and to share in the 

comforts and luxuries of life, the better class of workmen 

have no special complaint to make that their 

employers are better housed, surrounded with greater 

luxuries every way than themselves. They have 

no desire to bring disaster either upon their employers 

or the trade in which they are engaged, or the 

country which is their home. Their interests in large 

measure lie in the same direction as that of their employers 

—they desire prosperity, and extension of 

trade to this end. The majority of them are not so 

anxious to become wealthy as they are anxious lest 

they should become poor— lest they should lose, in 

whole or in part, the comforts and advantages which 

they now enjoy, and which are far beyond those enjoyed 

by their parents at any time in the past. 

Why, then, is there need of a rupture? Why, with 
admittedly satisfactory wages, and admittedly satisfactory 
hours of work, should there be a strike and 
more or less of a paralysis of important business interests? 



The reason is fear. As the Scriptures declare 

respecting the present time, "Men's hearts are 

failing them for fear, and for looking after those 

things which are coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26.) 

Present conditions are satisfactory enough, all 

will admit— both employers and employed. The 

whole question is one pertaining to the future— fear. 

The Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel 

Workers demands that all the works of the United 

States Steel Corporation should be "unionized"— that 

the affairs and interests of all the workmen, nearly 

one hundred thousand in number, should be recognized 

as under the care and supervision, and subject 

to the arrangements and contracts, of the officers of 

the Amalgamated Association. The United States 

Steel Corporation refuses this demand, and claims 

that this in effect would mean that they would compel 

all of their workmen to join the Amalgamated Association; 

and, this they have insisted, would be an unreasonable 

thing to do, and one which they could not 

do. 

To the unsophisticated it will seem strange that 
there need be any serious ruction or quarrel over a 
matter of this kind; for, on the surface, as stated by 
both parties, benevolence would seem to be the object 
of both. The Amalgamated Association benevolently 
wants to assist the non-union men, and the United 
States Steel Corporation also benevolently wishes to 
protect the non-union men in their rights. Where 
pure love and benevolence of this kind controls on 
both sides of the question, why need there be any 
dispute or strike? 

Ah! there it is. In this question, as in nearly every 
other question, selfishness hides itself under a cloak 
of benevolence, and would fain deceive others, and itself 
also. Not pure benevolence, but almost pure 
selfishness, is actuating both parties. The United 
States Steel Corporation reasons that if all of its mills 
and employes were under the control of the union, 
it would be thoroughly at the mercy of the officers of 
that union, to whose generosity and justice they are 
unwilling to entrust themselves and their varied interests, 
valued at a thousand millions of dollars. 
They say, No ! So long as some of the mills are independent 
and under our control it will not matter 
so much if others of them are under the control of 
the union, for then we will not be completely at the 
union's mercy, and the latter will be obliged to treat 
us with a measure of consideration and justice. It 
is, therefore, a very serious question with us, and we 
prefer to lose millions of dollars now, than to risk, 
to jeopardize, our interests under the complete control 
and perhaps tyranny of a labor union. 

The Amalgamated Association is laboring, also, 
along lines of selfishness, and not from pure benevolence 
and good-will toward the non-union men. They 



say to themselves: It is all right as it is, so long as 
times are prosperous, as at present; but as there have 
been hard times before, so we may reasonably expect 
them to come again, when there will be overproduction, 
idle mills and idle men. At such a time we may 

R2868 : page 278 

be sure that the Steel Corporation, recognizing us as 
the protectors of skilled labor, and the maintainers of 
its interests as respects time and pay and conditions, 
and realizing a future time of still sharper competition 
and lower prices, would grasp such an opportunity 
to do all in its power to destroy our union, 
and thus to have labor unresistant at its command. 
We feel sure that in a season of dullness the 
non-union mills would be given the preference as 
respects steady employment, while the union mills 
would be at the disadvantage, to the intent that our 
organization might be disrupted. Now, therefore, is 
our time, while business is good, while our labor is 
in demand, while the mills are behind with orders— 
now is the time for us to strike, if thereby we can 
unionize all the mills and place ourselves and all 
workmen upon a firmer footing for the maintenance 
of our rights in the future, when the final desperate 
struggle between capital and labor must come. 

We cannot say that either party in the conflict is 
foolish or insane. We must admit that both are wise 
as respects their own interests. 

If these were all Christian brethren; if the spirit of 
Christ dwelt in them all richly and abounded; if the 
spirit of love had wholly or even half supplanted the 
spirit of selfishness, the matter might very easily be 
adjusted; for we remember that love is not puffed 
up, vaunteth not herself, seeketh not her own, but 
is the very embodiment of generosity and kindness. 
But, again, it is not a theory we have to deal with, 
but facts. In theory the civilized world is all Christian, 
sometimes called, "The Christian World," and 
"Christendom." But these are misnomers; the fact is 
the world is not Christian except in name; they are 
still "kingdoms of this world," still children of this 
world, and only a remarkably few belong to the Kingdom 
of the Lord, and either know him or desire to be 
controlled by his spirit of love. 

What can we do? Can we hope to convert these 
millions, to whom the message of the gospel has come 
with more or less clearness all their lives? We cannot 
so hope. We must remember, on the contrary, 
that this is not the divine plan; that in the divine plan 
part of the important lesson which the world is now 
learning is the very lesson which it was intended it 
should learn, viz., that selfishness always brings misery, 
—directly or indirectly. The world must thus 
learn the lesson that the only true peace and prosperity 



is that which God purposes, and will eventually 

establish through the Kingdom of his dear Son. The 

world is learning the lessons that wealth does not give 

complete happiness, but still leaves an aching void; 

and that all the comforts and conveniences of civilization, 

coming to the world of mankind, with good 

food, good clothing, and much advantage every way, 

do not change the heart nor bring in true happiness. 

In a word, the world must learn that civilization 

is not Christianization. 

For centuries the Lord's wheatfield, the Church, 
has been overgrown with tares, who are not the offspring 
of the Lord's spirit at all— who have never 
been "begotten again," who are not of the "wheat" 
class in any degree. These "tares" have been passing 
under the name of Christian, while really and truly 
they are worldlings— not bad people, many of them, 
not all immoral by any means, some of them generous, 
kind, and, in a worldly sense, good— but not "begotten 
of the spirit." We are in the harvest-time, 
"the end of the age," and a complete separation must 
be made. For not one tare is to be gathered into the 
kingdom garner. On the contrary, a complete demonstration 
shall be made, as between the wheat and 
the tares. There are grains of "wheat," so far as we 
know, interested on both sides of this question, but 
the vast majority on both sides are of the "tare" 
class. The wheat, therefore, are not to expect to be 
understood, or to have the true position appreciated 
by the others; but nevertheless are to be content and 
to rejoice in what the Lord discloses to them through 
his Word, viz., that this time of trouble that the whole 
world sees impending, will be the final lesson by 
which the Lord will demonstrate to the world the difference 
between the reign of sin and the reign of 
righteousness— between the reign of selfishness and 
the reign of love. 

In the great time of trouble, when all their various 
systems, religious, political, social, financial, go down 
in a maelstrom of anarchy, there will be a great opening 
of eyes,— a passing of present illusions. "When 
the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth 
the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness." 
They will come to see that the Lord's way is the right 
way,— the only satisfactory way; that the law of love 
is the only law which can bring everlasting happiness 
and blessing to any and to all who will obey it. 
They will come to see, what they do not now realize, 
that the Lord's true Church in the world was a "little 
flock," a "peculiar people," guided by the Lord's eye, 
and by his Word, who, through much tribulation, 
trials of faith, trials of patience, etc., will become 
heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their 
Lord, in the glorious Kingdom which will be established 
upon the ruins of present institutions, for the 
blessing of all the families of the earth, with a righteous 



government. Let us then continue to pray, 

"Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as it 

R2869 : page 278 

is done in heaven." 

THE BREACH WIDENS. 



Not long since it was announced that all "union 
workmen" would withdraw from the volunteer State 
and National Guards, lest they should be called upon 
to protect properties when strikes were on, or 
to suppress riots in which fellow-workmen might 
be engaged. Now we have the announcement that 
the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel 
Workers will start a military organization of its own. 
Indeed the movement took definite shape on Saturday, 
August 3, as announced in the Wheeling, W. 
Va., Register of August 4, as follows: 

"A.A. OF IRON & STEEL WORKERS TO FORM MILITARY 
COMPANIES." 

A movement was started in this city yesterday for 
organizing a strong military branch of the Amalgamated 
Association of Iron, Tin and Steel Workers. 
The organization is designed to band the members 
closer together, to promote a better fraternal and social 

R2869 : page 279 

feeling, to protect the property of mill owners in 
cases of strikes, and for self-defense. 

The Register has been in possession of information 
for more than a week, to the effect that the idea 
has been agitated among Amalgamated men both in 
Wheeling and elsewhere. Not until yesterday, however, 
did the matter assume anything like tangible 
shape. Crescent Lodge, comprising the workmen 
employed at the Whitaker mill, held a regular meeting 
in the afternoon, during which the subject was 
broached. 

The matter was generally discussed, and several of 
the speakers were enthusiastically applauded. The 
details of the plan had previously been discussed 
among the men, and they were familiar with the subject 
when they came to the meeting. 

Crescent Lodge heartily approved the idea, and 
decided to enroll membership in the military branch at 
the next meeting of the lodge. It is expected that 
other lodges in this section will take the same course, 
now that Crescent has taken the initiative, and endorse 
the military plan. 



The discussion at the meeting evolved the following 
reasons for the organization of a military branch 
of the Amalgamation: 

First— It would band the members into closer union, 
promote fraternal and social feeling, and familiarize 
the members with the manual of arms of the United 
States army. Military organizations are regarded 
as beneficial to other bodies, and the same degree of 
benefit could be extracted by the Amalgamation. The 
opinion was expressed that no difficulty would be experienced 
in organizing companies of 100 members 
each, in nearly all the lodges in the order. In a short 
time a National military branch would be the outcome, 
and beneficial features might be added. 

Second— In cases of strikes and lockouts, the 
lodges would be in position to tender their services 
to mill owners for the protection of their property. 
It has been frequently charged, and it is claimed by 
Amalgamation men that it has been proven, that the 
lawless element has been incited to deeds of violence 
against capital, for the specific purpose of creating a 
public sentiment antagonistic to unions and strikers. 
In the discussion in Crescent lodge, it was stated that 
labor leaders have consistently contended for law 
and order, and that they have never sanctioned 
violence. 



It is expressly understood among the members of 
Crescent lodge that the military body will not be subject 
to orders from any government authority, except 
as individuals. Their position is the direct antithesis 
of that. They will not place themselves in 
positions to be called upon by State authorities in 
cases of strikes and labor disturbances, but they take 
the position that labor troubles may be obviated if 
mill owners will accept their services in the spirit in 
which they are offered. 

We cannot blame the managers of the trusts if they 
call in question the benevolence of this movement, 
and surmise that it means an eventual resort to carnage 
and anarchy between the two great companies 
of fellow creatures now being pressed into the vortex 
of strife for mastery by the inexorable laws of supply 
and demand and supported by constitutional selfishness, 
and both parties goaded on by fear. 

Temporarily the power is in the hands of wealthy 
and wise captains of industry; who, at any cost, will 
strive to hold on to all the advantages they have already 
attained; for the mills may stand idle for a time 
with only the loss of dividends, while the mechanic's 
necessities continue and his credit is necessarily small. 
Besides, by the laws of nature, his competitors are 
increasing even in his own family, not to mention the 
attractions which his employment, and hours and 



wages present to labor from other fields, which can 
soon learn to operate machinery successfully. 

Unquestionably capital must win in this contest 
under present conditions; but unquestionably also 
the ultimate result will be a grinding of the masses, 
between upper and nether millstones of supply and 
demand, until the danger point has been reached and 
the great explosion follows;— anarchy and destruction, 
born of fear and despair and not of preference or 
a love of lawlessness. "There shall be a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation."— Dan. 12:1; 
Matt. 24:21. 

Our advice to "brethren" in connection with all 
such troubles is, Yield— bend— submit to the inevitable 
as quietly and kindly and peaceably as possible. 
Seeing the outcome be "content" to let the Lord fight 
your battles. Accept whatever "rights" you can secure 
by lawful and peaceable means, and wait for the 
King Immanuel and his Kingdom of equity for the 
remainder of your "rights." Consider that you already 
have and enjoy more blessings and rights and 
privileges than your fathers, and more than as members 
of the fallen race you could justly demand; and 
be ye thankful. Additionally you can think generously 
of those on both sides of this conflict seeing 
that both are forced to the issue by present-day conditions. 
And thank the Lord for the light of his 
Word, which permits you to see matters thus in their 
true light. 

A MODERN REFORMATION. 



From the "London Daily Chronicle." 

While the attention of the British public has been 
divided between South Africa and China, events of 
far-reaching importance have occurred in France, 
Portugal, and Spain. With little comment from the 
Press, and scant notice from people not directly affected, 
laws have been promulgated or revived in 
France and Portugal that aim a dangerous blow at 
the priestly brotherhoods whose directors are in the 
Vatican, and whose ramifications extend all through 
the Latin countries. Students of Continental life 
have seen the slow approach of an anti-clerical movement 
in the countries overrun by the powerful militant 
associations of the Latin Church, but not a few 
have thought that the agitation would spend itself in 
protests. 

FRANCE AND THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS. 



In France the feeling against the religious houses 
(Jesuits, Assumptionists, Dominicans, Benedictines, 
Carmelites, and other Orders) has been growing year 
by year. 

R2869 : page 280 

It is unlikely that the full power of the Roman 
Church in matters beyond its proper jurisdiction was 
perceived by the men at the head of French affairs 
before the Dreyfus case, and then the gravity of the 
situation impressed itself upon the few strong men 
left on the side of the Republic. That the Church 
would overthrow the Republic if it could, was apparent 
to all thinking people, and in the meantime the 
Vatican's campaign was making the army unmanageable. 
It must be left to the historian to say what 
France owes to the Marquis de Gallifet and to M. 
Waldeck-Rousseau, who tempered courage with prudence 
at a very critical time, and to estimate the 
events that would have followed General Roget to 
the Elysee had he accepted the invitation of the half -mad 
enthusiast and patriot, Paul Deroulede. While 
the loudest outcry of the Nationalists has been directed 
against the Jews, at the instance of the Jesuits, 
who have never forgiven the Jewish financiers for 
breaking up the "Union Generale," it has been evident 
that the Republic is the offender in their eyes, 
the various groups that make up the National party 
finding, in hatred of the Republic, their one common 
sentiment. As the Latin Church has nothing to hope 
from the Republic, and everything to expect from 
a Pretender of the type of the Due d'Orleans, it has 
befriended the Nationalists, and sought to capture the 
power in times of crises. And it has very nearly 
succeeded. 

It is reasonable to believe that the new law for the 
regulation of Associations will be strictly enforced, 
and, unless the unexpected happens, the brotherhoods 
of the Latin Church, now working in Paris under 
orders from Rome, will become illegal communities 
by the end of the year, liable to suppression. 
Their members will be liable to fine and imprisonment. 
If M. Waldeck-Rousseau succeeds in a task 
that is well nigh completed, the Jesuits will no longer 
be able to train the young officers of the French 
Army; they will not be able to exert secret influence 
over the heads of the army, nor to evade taxes due 
upon such of their property as is not returned to 
them; they may even be unable to draw the hard-earned 
money of the French peasantry, as they and 
their brethren, the Assumptionist Fathers, have done 
so successfully in the past. Moreover, the Bill relating 

R2870 : page 280 



to Associations enables the Government to break 
up any union whose objects are deemed by the Cabinet 
to be inimical to the Republic, and thereby to 
control movements that, while they appear to be the 
outcome of the popular will, are in reality promoted 
or financed by the clerical associations through the 
medium of men of straw. 

THE PARALLEL WITH PORTUGAL. 



One of the curious points about the new French 
Law of Associations is that it is not an original conception, 
but is founded on the Portuguese law of 
1834, which abolished religious congregations in Portugal, 
confiscated their property, forbade the formation 
of new congregations, and, out of the profits of 
confiscation, pensioned the monks and nuns whose 
property was taken away. Portugal, at the time when 
the law was enacted, had been passing through a terrible 
crisis. Queen Maria Gloria, a girl of fifteen, was 
hardly secure upon the throne; Dom Pedro was dying; 
Dom Miguel, the Pretender, had been defeated 
after a sanguinary campaign; the clergy had been 
active intriguers on his behalf; and the country was 
in an uproar. The Queen's advisers saw that they 
must break the clerical power, or be content to suffer 
rebellion to smoulder in every village, whose ignorance 
responded to priestly direction. A very curious 
parallel may be drawn between Portugal in the 
early thirties and France in the late nineties, the only 
difference being that the recent civil war in France 
was waged on paper. The Portuguese law was a success 
for a few years. Associations of nuns having less 
than twelve members were dissolved, and members 
sent to other convents, for the nunneries were not 
treated as harshly as the monasteries. The nuns were 
to die out, and in Lisbon to-day is an old lady in her 
ninety-second year, relic of those troubled times, and 
the last survivor of the old regime. She saw the uprising, 
and has lived to see the religious associations 
creep back to their old places, in spite of the law. 
Monasteries and nunneries have sprung up again, 
the power of the Jesuits has waxed strong, and their 
procedure has become so unbearable that a crisis was 
reached little more than two months ago. Some 
Jesuit Fathers, of Oporto, tried to remove a young 
girl to a convent against the wishes of her parents; 
the action was made public, and served to fire the 
smouldering discontent. There were riots and bloodshed 
on a scale that alarmed the authorities. 

The popular feeling was strengthened by the regular 
clergy, whose antipathy to the foreign brotherhoods 
is very great. Queen and Cabinet have been 
on the side of the Jesuits; Dom Carlos, the King, 



alone is liberal in his views. Popular passion led to 
an unpleasant incident while the King was driving 
out in the early part of last month, and on the following 
day the Law of 1 834 was put into force once 
more, Queen, Cabinet, and Jesuits being unable to 
stem the current of the King's anger. It was a striking 
episode in Portugal's latter-day history, more 
suggestive of the Orient, than the Occident. Several 
religious houses have been closed in the last few 
weeks, and the inmates sent away to their own countries. 
The Jesuits are fighting hard, but not wisely. 
They issued a proclamation a week or two ago calling 
upon the people to petition the Throne to restore 
their privileges. These proclamations have been torn 
down in several towns; at Setubal riots and bloodshed 
were the order of the day. In the meantime the King 
has ignored the tendencies of the Government, and 
assured a deputation of Liberals that the 1 834 Law 
shall be enforced rigorously. They say in Lisbon that 
the beginning of the popular revolt may be dated 
from the exodus of the Assumptionist Fathers from 
France. Many came to Portugal, where their procedure 
served to exhaust popular patience. The Conservative 
and Reactionary Ministry of Portugal is tottering 
to its fall. 

THE JESUITS AND THE CARLISTS. 



In Spain the outcry against the clerical brotherhood 
is very strong. Throughout that unhappy country 

R2870 : page 281 

the very lowest orders of clergy seem to find a home. 
They have a comparative immunity from punishment, 
and are for the most part men of little or no education. 
So long as Carlism offered reasonable hopes 
of success, they encouraged the Carlists, by orders 
from Rome, for the presence of a Carlist King in 
Madrid would be meat and drink to the Vatican. 
The revolt against the Latin Brotherhoods is a 
very serious factor in the social and political situation 
for the time being. It is not unlikely that the Franco-Italian 
entente will spread the trouble in Italy, 
and that we shall see the movement working from Paris 
to Madrid, and from Lisbon to Naples. But while 
Governments change and Ministers pass away, Rome 
remains, and it would be unwise to rely upon a permanent 
change in the relations between Latin 
Church and Latin countries until the standard of education 
is far higher than it is to-day. In the temporal 
service of Rome, Cardinal Rampolla marshalls 
some of the keenest intellects in Europe. Rome will 
bend before the storm of popular opinion, and when 



it passes, renew her stature as of old time. Financial 
crises are within view in Portugal, Spain and Italy, 
and the Latin Brotherhoods find plenty of material 
for denunciation of irreligious Governments when 
food is at a premium and the maximum of taxation 
pursues the minimum of wages. Yet in the hands of 
unscrupulous Governments crises are a two-edged 
weapon, and many Latin Governments owe the Latin 
Church little affection. 



The above, taken in connection with the "Los von 
Rome" (away from Rome) movement, which, as already 
noted in these columns, is rapidly gaining headway 
in Austria, shows that the screws of superstition 
are being gradually loosened,— preparatory to the 
great, great political, social, financial and religious 
"earthquake" (Rev. 16:18), which is shortly to dismay 
all except those who have some knowledge of 
the final outcome of the divine plan of the ages. 



R2871 : page 281 

RESPECTING FOREIGN MISSIONS. 



WE HAVE heard from three dear sisters in 
Christ, who have been for a long time deeply 
interested in foreign missions, to the effect that they 
were greatly disappointed that in our last issue we 
quoted certain criticisms of foreign missions. They 
find no fault with our own utterances in the article; 
but think the quotations false when they refer to the 
missionaries as having taken part in the looting of 
Peking. One of the Sisters says,— "I ask you, in 
justice to the missionaries, to publish in the Tower 
the enclosed extract from an article in the May 
number of the North American Review,— by Rev. 
Judson Smith, Corresponding Secretary of the 
American Board of Foreign Missions." We give the 
extract cheerfully, following, and will explain later 



"THE MISSIONARIES AND THEIR CRITICS." 



"The efforts of the Boxers were directed especially 
against the native converts, because of their connections 
with the foreigners. These converts were 
crushed by heavy fines, were robbed, were driven 
from their homes, and, in due time, were slain by 



hundreds and thousands. When the siege of Peking 

was raised the missionaries were left with large 

bodies of native Christians dependent upon them for 

everything. The missionaries themselves were left 

without homes, without resources, with these hundreds 

of homeless, helpless people looking to them 

for aid. Chaos reigned in Peking and in the country 

around it. The missionaries of different Boards felt 

that it would be intolerable for them to suffer these 

Chinese refugees, who had helped during the siege 

and had won encomiums for the share they had 

borne in it, to perish, as they must if something 

were not done in their behalf. The case was urgent. 

They were without food and without the means of 

obtaining it. Food and shelter for the very next 

day and then for days after that, must be found. 

Delay meant starvation and death. In the absence 

of all native authority with the knowledge and approval 

of Mr. Conger and other Ambassadors, two 

colonies were established in different parts of Peking, 

in courts abandoned by their owners, and were 

supported by the resources found in these courts, 

just as the Ambassadors and all others in the siege 

had been kept alive by what they found within their 

reach from the British Legation. As to the charge 

of looting by the missionaries, besides their own denials, 

we have the explicit testimony of one wholly 

outside their number whose position gave him exceptional 

facilities for knowing the facts. Mr. R. E. 

Bredon, Deputy Inspector General for the Imperial 

Maritime customs of China, who was in Peking 

throughout the siege and remained there some time 

afterward, wrote October 3, to the North China Mail, 

I heard in the Legation, before we were enabled 

to leave it, that missionaries had taken quantities 

of loot. I took special pains to investigate the 

truth of the assertion, and found absolutely nothing 

to confirm it.'" 

LET THE TRUTH PREVAIL. 



Although we quoted the Literary Digest article as 
a whole, we had no special desire to refer to the 
"looting" practiced at Peking. The leading journals 
have had much to say for and against the conduct 
of the missionaries in this respect; but for our 
part we considered that they treated the matter too 
severely,— seeming to overlook the fact that anarchy 
prevailed, and that it was not only necessary to take 
possession of palaces as temporary shelters, but necessary 
also to procure food for the starving— either 
by seizing food or by seizing goods which could be 
turned into money wherewith to buy food. 

There is no doubt, however, that missionaries did 



adopt this plan of confiscating goods, called "looting"; 
for they have confessed it. The article by Rev. 

R2871 : page 282 

Judson Smith was called out as a defense of the 
course; and on close examination will not be found 
to be a denial of the facts admitted by missionaries 
Ament and Tewksbury. For instance Dr. Ament 
says,— 

"In explanation of anything the missionaries may 
have done in the line of looting, it is only right to say 
that a famine was predicted for the coming winter, 
that they had hundreds of people in their charge 
who were in immediate need of food, clothing, and 
shelter, and who looked to the missionaries for assistance. 
It is but justice to them to say that if in 
the ardor of their desire to provide for their people, 
they did some things that attracted criticism, they 
did it with the best of intentions." 
The New York Sun of May 4, says:— 
"In an interview at Kobe, Dr. Ament, while on his 
way home to this country in Mr. Conger's company, 
gave an amazing picture of his experience in 'selling 
stuff that did not belong to him. We are now quoting 
from the Kobe Herald of April 6: 

"The Tungchau mission, through Mr. Tewksbury, 
were selling things at Prince Yu's residence, 
and Miss Smith, of the London Mission, was selling 
off stuff from Boxer premises she had taken for her 
people. Mine was the last sale of the three. There 
were no especially valuable things on our premises 
—the owner was a broken-down Mongol prince; one 
sable robe, numbers of fox and squirrel-skin garments, 
and a large number of garments of inferior 
quality. The sale lasted two weeks." 
'"Did you have it at stated times of day, then?" 
'"No, at any time when the officers came. I had 
an experienced Chinaman put a value on the things, 
and I then charged about one-half or two-thirds of 
the value they would have brought in ordinary times. 
The officers were very glad to purchase at those 
rates." 
"Then there was no regular sale?" 
'"No, the things were marked, and the officers 
would come and go prowling around the rooms, 
bringing to me what they wanted while I was going 
on with my work, and this, as I say, went on for 
about a fortnight. When they saw what things were 
wanted, some of our Christians borrowed a little 
money and went on the streets and purchased fur 
garments from Russians or Sikh soldiers, and 
brought them in and sold them to the officers at a 
good profit.'" 

"Thus was the palace occupied in the absence of 
its proprietor, by the Rev. Dr. Ament turned into a 



receptacle and mart for stolen goods; not stolen, he 
asserts, by the 'Christians' who brought the stuff in, 
but by them purchased on speculation from the 
original looters and sold under Dr. Ament's supervision 
at a good profit. ..If the Rev. Dr. Judson 
Smith blinks the word loot, the Rev. Dr. W. S. 
Ament doesn't. We wonder whether the first-named 
divine has really read all the evidence afforded by his 
own chief witness." 



But while we thus give both sides to the looting 
matter and thus establish the truth of all we published 
in our last, that shocked some of our readers, 
nevertheless we have heretofore avoided all reference 
to the matter, feeling that considerable excuse 
should be made for departure from Christian and 
civilized usages, considering that anarchy prevailed 
and that money from other sources was probably not 
available. Nevertheless we cannot commend the 
course. It would have seemed questionable to a 
"business man" and should not have been even 
thought of by ministers of the gospel of justice are 
love. The missionaries evidently were misled by the 
worldly looting spirit prevailing in that anarchy and 
did what they would not do again, and would not 
have done then under less temptation. 

NOT MEN BUT FALSE DOCTRINES DO WE ATTACK. 



Our article was not intended as an attack upon 
missionaries, nor yet upon missions; but rather it 
was an attack upon the false doctrine which has been 
the mainspring of energy in connection with missionary 
efforts; viz., that the heathen are going into 
eternal torment by the hundreds of thousands yearly; 
—for lack of the knowledge carried to them by the 
missionaries. If Christian people desire to go to the 
people of China, Japan, India, Turkey, etc., as doctors, 
nurses, hospital-attendants, teachers of school-children, 
general teachers of morality, and illustrators 
of our Western civilization, well and good. And 
if incidentally then they get an occasional person or 
many to accept Jesus as their Redeemer and Lord 
so much the better. But it is high time that the false 
pretense, the pride and vanity bubble, of "converting 
the world" were burst, and that its baneful influence 
upon Christendom terminated. 

The missionaries know full well that it is as reasonable 
to talk of a trip to the moon as to talk of 
"capturing the world for Jesus:" neither would be 
possible without a miracle,— the interposition of super-human 
power. It is time that Christian people 



learned that the only hope of the world's conversion 
—the only hope that the Lord's will shall ever be 
done on earth as it is done in heaven— lies in the 
promised second coming of our Lord Jesus, to be 
earth's King, and to set up the Kingdom of God 
which we are assured will triumph over Satan and 
sin and every evil, and scatter blessings to every 
creature, and make possible to all a full return to divine 
favor and life-everlasting. 

PREACH THE GOSPEL TO EVERY CREATURE. 



"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations."— 

Matt. 28:19. 
"Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to 

every creature."— Mark 16:15.* 
"The gospel which ye have heard, and which was 
preached to every creature which is under heaven."— 
Col. 1:23. 
"This gospel of the Kingdom shall be declared in all 
the world, for a witness unto all nations; and then shall 
the end [of this age] come."— Matt. 24:14. 



*This verse is not found in the oldest Greek MSS. 
They end with verse 8. Thus the basis of the Christian 
Science, and Christian Alliance, and Mr. Dowie's Christian 
Catholic systems falls.— See Revised Version, margin. 

R2872 : page 283 

If the expectation that the world is to be converted 
by missionary effort, before the Lord comes 
a second time, is a mistake, how shall we understand 
the foregoing Scripture statements? 

We reply, that nothing in the above passages of 
Scripture or any others say one word about the 
world's conversion as the result of the preaching. 
On the contrary, the general tenor of Scripture is to 
the effect that this age will end as did the Jewish 
age— with a great time of trouble— because of the 
"tares" out of accord with the Lord and his Kingdom 
of righteousness. 

The Lord's words here are to be viewed in the 
light of his previous instructions to the same apostles. 
He had told them to "Go not into the way of 
the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter 
ye not;" explaining that for the time his mission 
was exclusively to the Jews, "the lost sheep of the 
house of Israel" (Matt. 10:5,6; 15:24). Now he 
would give them to understand that the Jewish favor 
was drawing to an end, and that ultimately they 
would be privileged to tell the good tidings to all 



that have an ear to hear— to Gentiles, all nations, 
as well as to Jews. 

That this is the correct view of the commission is 
evident from the third text quoted above. The 
apostle announces that the time had come when the 
gospel privileges were open to every creature under 
heaven who had "ears to hear" and a heart to appreciate 
it. To interpret his language otherwise 
would be to charge him with falsehood; for neither 
then, nor since, has it been a fact that even one in ten 
of the human creatures under heaven have heard the 
gospel. 

The key is in the last of these texts. It points out 
distinctly that the mission of the gospel is not to convert 
the world, but to "witness" to it. The true converts 
under this witnessing will be in all but a "little 
flock"; but to these "elect, according to the foreknowledge 
of God, through sanctification of the spirit 
and a belief of the truth," God proposes to give a 
share with Christ in his Kingdom;— his agency for 
uplifting humanity and blessing all who, after being 
enlightened, seek a blessing— even unto life 
everlasting. 

Anyway, it is the "Gospel of the Kingdom" that is 
to be preached in all the world, and not "another 
gospel"; and we fear that very few of the missionaries 
know much about the Kingdom gospel. Nevertheless 
the "gospel of the Kingdom" is clearly set 
forth in the Scriptures, which are now published in 
all the languages (not dialects) of earth. Furthermore, 
the Watch Tower literature is in the hands of 
all the missionaries in every quarter of the world; 
and through some of these— we know not— God can 
and will find the true "wheat" for his "garner." 



One Sister inquires, Should not we carry to the 
darker parts of the earth our superior ideas respecting 
health, cleanliness, care of the sick, civilization, 
etc.? 

If by we is meant the Lord's consecrated people, 
our answer would be, No. God's commission to us 
through Jesus and the apostles is restricted— "The 
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he hath 
anointed me to preach the gospel to the meek,"— the 
teachable. "He that hath an ear to hear, let him 
hear!" We are not to force the gospel of the Kingdom 
upon any, by sword and gun, or in any other 
manner. Thus the Apostle Paul witnesseth for Jesus 
and the resurrection and the Kingdom to come, 
seeking only so many as the Lord our God had 
called. He gave special attention to the instruction 
of these few, to the intent that they might be made 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light— the 
Kingdom. He never dreamed of general conversions 



and taking the world for Christ, knowing that 
such was not the divine plan,— except through the 
Kingdom. 

As to whether the world (nominal Christendom) is 
doing well or ill for the heathen, is an open question. 
The fact that we, born and reared under Western 
civilization, would be miserable if obliged to live 
along the lines of Eastern civilization proves little; 
for so far as we can discern the people of China and 
India prefer their own methods, customs, etc. A 
canary bird, reared in captivity, may greatly enjoy 
its gilt cage with its swing, bath, etc., so as to feel 
lost indeed if deprived of them; but would the bird 
reared under other conditions, be happier in such a 
cage? We know that it would not. And may it not 
be so with different races of men, accustomed to different 
ideals and methods? Will the Chinaman be 
happier in a European cut of coat, shoes, shirt, collar 
and tie? Are we certain that the Chinawoman 
will be happier with larger feet, and shoes of our 
pattern and with corsets and Paris fashioned gowns? 

Ah! you say, it is not these alone we would take 
them. We would supplant their Joss houses with 
what we term churches; and their weird musical instruments 
with our organs, and we would give them 
Jesus instead of Brahm and Buddha. 

Even so ! are we quite certain that this would increase 
their happiness? Are there not millions, in 
Europe and America, who have these very blessings, 
who are among the most discontented and unhappy 
people in the world? Are these foreign heathen 
either better or worse in God's sight than many in 
so called Christian lands who attend "church" regularly, 
wear fashionable clothing, etc., of whom the 
Lord says, "This people draw near me with their 
mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have 
removed their heart far from me, and their fear toward 
me is taught by the precepts of men."— Isa. 29:13. 
Let us not forget the Lord's words to some 
very zealous for mission-work in his day;— "Ye compass 
sea and land to make one proselyte; and when 
he is made, ye make him two-fold more the child of 
Gehenna than yourselves."— Matt. 23:15. 

"Even as many as the Lord your God shall call," 
said the apostle; and accordingly God's people, realizing 
that the chosen will be few, should seek to labor 
in harmony with the Lord's callings. Eighteen 
centuries show us that while no nation under heaven 
is refused or discriminated against, and some out of 
all have been called, nevertheless God's favors have 
been chiefly toward the white or Caucasian race. 
If we have done all we know how to do in this the 
Lord's special wheat-field, then by all means let us 

R2872 : page 284 



go into other fields. But if through the delusions of 
Satan the "gospel (?) of damnation" has been substituted 
for the "gospel of the Kingdom," so that 
the majority of those who profess the name of Christ 
have no knowledge of this gospel, then, by all means, 
let us who do know of it, bend all our energies to 
labor in this field which is "white already to the harvest," 
and its harvest work rapidly progressing. 



R2870 : page 284 

THE WATERED LILIES. 



The Master stood in His garden, 

Among the lilies fair, 
Which his own right hand had planted, 

And trained with tend'rest care; 

He looked at their snowy blossoms, 
And marked with observant eye 

That the flowers were sadly drooping, 
For their leaves were parched and dry. 

But the Master saw, and raised it 
From the dust in which it lay, 

And smiled, as He gently whispered, 
"This shall do My work to-day: 

"My lilies need to be watered," 

The Heavenly Master said; 
"Wherein shall I draw it for them, 

And raise each drooping head!" 

Close to His feet on the pathway, 

Empty, and frail, and small, 
An earthen vessel was lying, 

Which seemed no use at all; 

"It is but an earthen vessel, 

But it lay so close to Me; 
It is small, but it is empty,— 

That is all it needs to be." 

So to the fountain He took it, 
And filled it full to the brim; 

How glad was the earthen vessel 
To be of some use to Him! 

He poured forth the living water 

Over His lilies fair, 
Until the vessel was empty, 

And again He filled it there. 



He watered the drooping lilies 

Until they revived again; 
And the Master saw with pleasure 

That His labour had not been vain. 

His own hand had drawn the water 
Which refreshed the thirsty flowers; 

But he used the earthen vessel 
To convey the living showers. 

And to itself it whispered, 

As He laid it aside once more, 

"Still will I lie in His pathway, 
Just where I did before. 

"Close would I keep to the Master, 

Empty would I remain, 
And perhaps some day He may use me 

To water His flowers again." 



R2872 : page 284 

QUARTERLY REVIEW.--SEPT. 29. 

Golden Text:— "The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting 
to everlasting, upon them that fear him."— Psa. 103:17. 

OUR TEXT is a forceful reminder of our studies 
in the past quarter. It was a lack of reverence 
for the Lord that permitted mother Eve to be deceived 
and to become the first transgressor. It was 
a lack of reverence for the Lord that led our father 
Adam into disobedience, into practical suicide, because 
of his love for Eve, and because he had not yet 
learned the proper reverence for God which would 
have led him to be obedient and to trust the results 
of Eve's disobedience to divine wisdom. It was lack 
of reverence for the Lord which operated in Satan to 
an evil ambition, and thus to his fall. It was lack of 
reverence for the Lord and for his rules of government 
that permitted the angels of the first dispensation 
to leave their own condition, and thus to get into 
sin with humanity. It was a lack of reverence for 
the Lord on the part of the world in general that 
caused the world to be full of violence and ready for 
destruction in the flood. 

It was a proper reverence for the Lord that controlled 
Noah and his family, and kept them separate 
from the evil of their time, and that brought to them 
ultimately the divine blessing and preservation 
through the flood. It was a proper reverence for the 
Lord that enabled Abraham to forsake home and 
country in response to a divine promise, and that 



guided him throughout his pilgrimage and kept him 
separate from the Sodomites and the evil influences 
of that time. Similarly, on Isaac's part, it was reverence 
for the Lord which kept him in his father's 
footsteps; and we have just seen how fully Jacob was 
imbued with this reverence for divinity, and for all 
the gracious promises by which the Lord represented 
himself to him. We have seen the hand of the Lord 
with all those who had this reverence, and that even 
though they passed through numerous and severe 
trials, difficulties, etc., they were not forsaken, but 
upheld. 

On the other hand, we have seen Lot's insufficiency 
of reverence, which permitted him to associate with 
evil-doers, and which ultimately brought upon him 
a share of their trouble. We have seen Ishmael's lack 
of reverence, and Esau's lack of reverence, and how 
these though not injured of the Lord, nevertheless 
missed greater blessing which a different course 
might have brought to them. 

The lesson for us is that which Joshua expressed 
to Israel later, saying, "Choose ye this day whom ye 
will serve; as for me and my house we will serve the 
Lord." (Josh. 24:15.) Let others reverence whom 
and what they will; we, who have tasted that the Lord 
is gracious, we, who have come to know him through 
his Word, and through his providences, and through 
the power of the spirit by which we are begotten 
again to newness of life— we can do naught else than 

R2873 : page 285 

reverence our God; and reverencing him we must 
trust him implicitly; and trusting him implicitly we 
will gladly walk in whatever way he may mark out for 
us; and thus trusting, and thus walking we are content, 
whatever lot we see, since 'tis his hand that leadeth 
us. And let us be assured that following the true 
Shepherd after this manner, we shall ultimately reach 
the heavenly fold. In these assurances we have joy 
and peace and blessing of heart, even in the house of 
our pilgrimage, before we reach the heavenly city. 



R2873 : page 285 

INTEMPERANCE. 

PROV. 23:29-35. -SEPT. 22. 

Golden Text:— "Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, 
and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise."— Prov. 20:1. 

INTEMPERANCE is one of the most dreadful 
curses afflicting humanity, and even those who 



are its slaves will admit the force and truth of our 

text. It would appear that everyone coming under 

its baneful influence becomes more or less its slave— 

the more so in proportion as he has become weak 

through the fall, and the six thousand years of increasing 

loss of physical and mental strength and 

vigor. Only those who realize that inherited weakness 

has much to do with drunkenness, can sympathize 

with a fallen one, or rightly appreciate why intoxicants 

have so much stronger influence over some 

than over others. But while pity and sympathy are 

properly called for, they must be exercised in moderation, 

if we would benefit the fallen and the weak. 

None are so weak, so degraded, as to be without some 

base of character; and our aim should be to strengthen 

and build up character, and encourage and stimulate 

resistance to these weaknesses, rather than too 

freely to condone them. 

The weak and degraded should be encouraged to 
know that they have a will-power which will greatly 
assist them in the cultivation of character if they will 
but use it. But they and all should know that the 
greatest strength and stimulus to character comes 
from above; and that the weakest as respects depravity 
of the flesh, may obtain such help of heart and of 
intellect from the promises, exhortations, admonitions 
and encouragements of the Lord's Word as will make 
them strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might. We need power and strength of our own wills 
every day in overcoming the weaknesses of our fallen 
condition; but we need more than this,— we need 
"grace to help in every time of need;" and we need 
to learn whence it is to be obtained, and how to approach 
the throne of heavenly grace with confidence, 
so as to obtain the needed blessing. 

Here comes in the necessity for an appreciation of 
the doctrines of Christ— to assure us that our weaknesses 
are understood and sympathized with by the 
Lord in every proper sense, and that his provision in 
Christ is such that he can be just and yet justify believers 
in Jesus;— that he can be just, and yet forgive 
us our sins and grant us needed strength and help in 
overcoming. 

To those who have friends or neighbors addicted 
to intemperance, over whom they desire to exercise 
a helpful influence, we advise that they appeal to the 
will, to the self-respect, and to the rewards of temperance 
and intemperance, viewed from a worldly and 
social standpoint: but we advise that they go further, 
and urge that in view of the weakness of their own 
wills, as manifested by their intemperance, they 
should recognize that while all men need the Savior, 
and the help which he alone can give, yet the weaker 
the will the greater the need. When we are weak 
in the matter of self-reliance, and are thereby led to 
make a covenant with the Lord, and to lean upon his 



strength, then we are strong.— 2 Cor. 12:9,10. 

We will make this lesson a short one, since we have 
no reason to believe that any particular number of our 
readers are slaves to intemperance; indeed, we know 
that whom the Son makes free is free indeed; and 
we urge upon all that the greater freedom which we 
receive in Christ, through a clear knowledge of the 
divine plan, should lead us more diligently to bring 
every talent and power of mind and of body into full 
subjection to the divine will, and into the service of the 
divine plan. And those who are imbued with this 
thought will surely realize that they have neither mental 
nor physical powers to dissipate— that they belong 
to the Lord, and are to glorify him in their bodies and 
their spirits, which are his (1 Cor. 6:20). They will 
perceive that they are merely stewards, and that any 
misuse of talents, either through intoxication or otherwise, 
would be a misuse of their stewardship, and 
lead surely on to that condition in which the Lord 
could not say to them, "Well done, good and faithful 
servant." 

But while disposed to encourage temperance, and 
to discourage intemperance in respect to intoxicants 
of every kind, we feel that the special lesson needed 
by the Lord's consecrated people is in respect to the 
intoxicating influences of the world, as they come to 
and affect us as "new creatures." There is an intoxication 
in wealth, in luxury, in ease, which tends to 
say to the soul, "Take thine ease; forget they covenant 
of sacrifice— to walk in the footsteps of Jesus, 
and be dead to the world and its aims with him." 
There is an intoxication of pleasure, of fashion, of 
pride and fond desire, which appeals to the "new 
creature" very strongly, through various avenues of 
the mortal body, and seeks to intoxicate, to stupify, 
the new mind, to make us dull of hearing as respects 
spiritual things, to make us lax as respects our zeal 
for the Lord, for the truth, and for the brethren; and 
to make us covet the things that would be approved 
by the world, and pleasurable to our own flesh, and 
harmonious to the wishes and exhortations of our 
friends. To all of these intoxicating allurements the 
answer must be, No; we have sworn off, we have 
covenanted our lives that we shall henceforth be dead 
to earthly interests and alive toward God. Our joys, 
our pleasures, our intoxications, must be of the spiritual 
kind. We must become so enthused, enraptured, 
with the heavenly things, with the joy and 

R2873 : page 286 

peace and blessing which accompany the eating and 
drinking at the Lord's table, and being filled with his 
spirit, that the intoxications of earthly joys will have 
less and less attraction for us.— Eph. 5:18. 



"My soul be on thy guard; 

Ten thousand foes arise: 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard 

To draw thee from the prize." 



R2873 : page 286 

INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE RANSOM. 



Question.— Is an understanding of the philosophy 
of the ransom essential to justification? 

Answer.— Justification is the name for that standing 
in the sight of God in which He can accept us and 
deal with us no longer as sinners but as perfect human 
sons. This relationship or standing has been 
accounted to the friends of God ever since the day 
of Abraham, surely, and evidently to some others previously. 
Neither Abraham nor David nor Samuel 
nor the prophets understood the philosophy of the 
ransom. They could not understand it, for it had not 
yet been revealed in any sense or degree: it had merely 
been hinted at in types and through indefinite 
promises. 

But they could and did have faith in God, and the 
Apostle Paul (Rom. 4) shows that it was that faith 
that justified them. They had faith to the full of the 
revelation of God's will and plan made to them. The 
extent of the knowledge of God possible to be possessed 
has increased considerably since Abraham's 
day. In Rom. 4:24, the Apostle makes faith in God 
the basis of our justification as it was the basis of their 
acceptance, though now faith in God includes faith in 
the Lord Jesus as our Redeemer. It was impossible for 
any to believe on Him of whom they had not heard; 
but Abraham believed God in His statement that in 
his seed (afterward shown to be Christ) all the families 
of the earth should be blest. Abraham's faith 
was reckoned as justifying him in God's sight. It was 

R2874 : page 286 

such an active, obedient faith as would have accepted 
Christ personally, as it accepted the promises concerning 
him. In due time his faith shall be perfected 
—at our Lord's second advent. 

Coming down to the first advent of our Lord: His 
teaching evidently brought a great light to them that 
had the eyes of their understanding opened, and he 



declared the ransom. We have no reason to suppose 
that even those who heard our Lord speak in dark 
sayings and parables grasped the philosophy of the 
ransom; and so through the Gospel age to the present 
time. We must therefore suppose that in God's 
wisdom it was quite sufficient that his people should 
believe the fact which his Word does clearly state, 
that Christ's death paid the penalty for the sins of the 
whole world somehow or other, not understood. 

The ransom was necessary, so far as God was concerned, 
as the basis of our justification. But so far 
as we were concerned, the thing necessary was to "believe 
God" and to accept God's statement, that 
through the death of Christ the reconciliation for the 
sins of the whole world was effected, for all who would 
believe it and act accordingly. 

The philosophy of the subject is needful in our day, 
and is "meat in due season;" now, because we have 
come down to a time when there is in progress a special 
sifting and testing in connection with Christ and 
his sacrifice, and when it is necessary to have the 
philosophy of the subject in order to be able to appreciate 
and hold on clearly to the fact that we were 
redeemed by the precious blood. 

It will be noticed that the prophet declares that all 
the tables of Babylon are full of vomit— rejected 
things. They had some very good things upon their 
tables, among others the doctrine of the ransom; but 
failing to be in the right condition of heart now, the 
Lord is rejecting Babylon; and those of his people in 
her are called away from her tables to the meat in due 
season, while her tables, served by those who are rejected 
from being the Lord's mouth-pieces ("I will 
spue thee out of my mouth"), are in the light of the 
dawning day being despised; and even the good 
things from the Lord's Word (the ransom, etc.), 
which once yielded them refreshment, are now defiled 
in their eyes along with the rejected nonsense 
of the dark ages. 

THE TEMPLE OF HIS BODY. 



Question.— What did the Lord mean when he said 
(John 2:19), "Destroy this temple, and in three days 
I will raise it up?" 

Answer.— A suggestion as to his meaning is found 
in verse 21— "But he spake of the temple of his body" 
—the Church, he being the head of the Church. 

A day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a 
thousand years as one day. The first advent was in 
the beginning of the fifth day or thousand years (over 
four thousand years being past, and the fifth thousand 
begun). During the fifth and sixth days his Church 
has been selecting, and early in the seventh (the Millennium), 



the third day, his body, the Church, will be 
perfected with him— the spiritual temple. He himself 
was raised from the dead "on the third day," literally, 
but it was not by his own power— God highly 
exalted him. The words of the text can not, therefore, 
refer to our Lord's personal resurrection. 

"WHOM NO MAN HATH SEEN NOR CAN SEE.' 



Question.— Do you believe that the restitution class 
will ever enter heaven, and "see the King in his 
beauty"? 

Answer.— No, we have no reason whatever to expect 
that any of the restitution class will ever enter 
heaven, or ever see spiritual beings. It would be entirely 
contrary to their nature; man is adapted to the 
earth, as a fish is adapted to the water. If man were 
taken out of the earth into heaven he would be like 
the fish out of water— out of his element. Nor is 
there any suggestion in the Scriptures of any change 

R2874 : page 287 

of nature; human nature being perfection on its own 
plane, so designed by the Creator; and those perfect 
on the human plane will be just as satisfied with 
their perfection as will the perfect on the angelic 
plane, and those on other planes of being. They will 
see the King in his beauty in the same sense that we 
now see the Lord when we are "looking unto Jesus." 
More than this, when mankind is perfect they will see 
in each other the very image of God; and all through 
the Millennial Age they will see in the princes who 
will be in charge of their government, the likeness of 
God, for these princes or ancient worthies will be 
perfect human beings. 

THE CHRISTIAN ALLIANCE. 



Question.— How far are the Christian Alliance 
views correct? 

Answer.— In our opinion not very far. They look 
for the second coming of the Lord, but mistakenly, as 
do many friends in the various denominations. They 
hold nearly all the false doctrines held by nearly all 
denominations. In our understanding many of the 
Christian Alliance people are earnest, and probably 
as a whole, a more holy people than most of the denominations; 
but this is about all that we can say for 
them. We must consider their system as a branch 
or ward of Babylon, and would warn all to come out 
of her, that they be not partakers of the woes that 



are shortly to come upon her, and that they be upon 
the Lord's side and accounted worthy to see further 
light of present truth. 

Question.— What is your understanding of the call 
and work of a minister or preacher, as taught in God's 
Word? 

Answer.— (1) That in a general sense all Christians 
are anointed of the spirit to be preachers, and 
are such in proportion as they exercise their talents 
in spreading the truth. 

(2) That any Christian (man), having knowledge 
and ability as a herald, who feels drawn to devote all 
his time to the spread of the truth, an open door being 
seen, is justified in changing his field of labor 

from temporal to spiritual, in part or in whole, giving 
more and more of his time and energy to his direct 
vocation of an ambassador for God and less and less 
to his avocation earthly. 

(3) That these heralds shall trust in God to supply 
their needs; and receiving only free will offerings 
from the brethren and others should "labor" for 

the things needful, accepting these conditions of the 
Lord's providence. 

(4) That when one of these finds every door of 
opportunity closed, he shall accept it as an evidence 
of work done in that field and should seek to know 
whether for some reason his service is not acceptable 
longer or whether the Lord has another field for 
him, or whether all the work is done. In any case, he 
should recognize that his vocation is that of an ambassador 
for the truth, and that earthly affairs are only 

his avocations, and should seek to prosecute as best 
he can the ministry of the Word, through evil and 
good report, through trials and encouragements, 
through sorrows and joys. 

WHAT WAS JEPHTHAH'S VOW? 



Question.— What attitude are we to assume toward 
the account of Jephthah's reckless vow which brought 
death to his daughter? Is there any redeeming feature 
in the incident? 

Answer.— We are to accept the scriptural statement 
that Jephthah was amongst the faithful— acceptable to 
God. As such he must also be acceptable to us. In 
respect to his offering his daughter in sacrifice our 
conclusion must be that the divine arrangement then 
and now differs materially. We may say, however, 
that as Abraham was about to offer his son Isaac, not 
willingly, but through obedience to what he understood 
to be the divine will, so did Jephthah with his 
daughter; and he was not hindered by an angel from 
the Lord. I do not know if the lamentation has any 
significance. 



Answer.— A totally different view of this matter is 
possible, and we merely suggest it; namely, that the 
vow was one of full devotion to the Lord— one of 
chastity and sanctity— seclusion from society, deadness 
to the world as a priestess. The daughter's request 
for time for lamentation, and the subsequent 
annual celebration by the virgins, would agree well 
with this view. The chief objection to this view is 
the statement respecting "a burnt offering," and this 
seems almost insurmountable. 

"WHOM NO MAN HATH SEEN NOR CAN SEE.' 



Question.— In what sense can the statement in Job 19:26 
be true, since we understand he will not have 
power to "see God" as a human being? 

Answer.— The passage might be understood in two 
different ways: (a) As an expression of Job's trust 
in the Lord that notwithstanding the serious disease 
with which he was afflicted, and the apparent utter 
destruction of his skin, by a loathsome disease yet he 
hoped for recovery and that he should yet praise the 
Lord in the flesh and in health. Or (b) it may be 
understood to refer to a future life and Job's confidence 
that tho his sickness should result in death, 
complete dissolution, yet it did not mean in him an 
everlasting extinction. As previously stated, God 
would call and he would answer in his flesh. His seeing 
God in the flesh should not be understood as that 
which is impossible, of which our Lord says, "No man 
hath seen God at any time," and of which the Apostle 
says, "Whom no man hath seen nor can see." It 
should be understood in the way in which it is commonly 
used today, viz., that God's people see him in 
his works, as we sometimes say, "I see God's hand in 

R2875 : page 287 

this." And again, we are informed that "all flesh 
shall see the salvation of God." And again, "Look 
unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth." 



page 288 

PUBLIC MINISTRIES OF THE TRUTH 
UNDER THE AUSPICES OF THE 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY. 



THESE SERVICES ARE WITHOUT CHARGE, AND NO COLLECTIONS ARE TAKEN UP. THE 

FRIENDS AT EACH 

PLACE GENERALLY PROVIDE THE MEETING PLACES AND ARE PLEASED TO ENTERTAIN 

THE 

LORD'S SERVANTS (AND NOTHING UNUSUAL OR ELABORATE IS EXPECTED.) 



THE CLEVELAND CONVENTION. 



Our general Convention for the year is appointed 
for Cleveland, Ohio, commencing Thursday, Sept. 12 
at 2 P.M., closing Sunday night, Sept. 15. 

Special rail-road rates can be obtained;— on western 
roads as low as 1 cent per mile— account "G.A. 
R. Encampment"; but those using such tickets must 
reach Cleveland some time before midnight of Sept. 12. 

Special arrangements have been made by the 
Cleveland friends for our comfortable entertainment 
at one dollar per day, each, for food and lodging (one-half 
what we had expected). And further, they kindly 
offer free entertainment to such as cannot afford this 
small price. Send us word, at once, if you decide to 
attend, that arrangements may be made for your party. 
The city will be crowded and accomodations hard to 
find at the time. State married couples and whether 
the others are males or females, for of course separate 
rooms, etc., could not be had for each at the price. 

A VERY INTERESTING PROGRAM IS BEING ARRANGED. 

We are looking for a large attendance from all 
parts of the country and from Canada. However, we 
are still more anxious for the Lord's spirit to be with 
us than that the numbers should be large,— tho there 
is an enthusiasm and inspiration in numbers also. 

The general testimony is that each of these yearly 
conventions out-does all of its predecessors. We hope 
it may be so this time also. Why should it not be so 
if, as the Lord's people, we are continually growing 
in grace and knowledge and love? Come, seeking to 
bestow as well as to receive a blessing. "He that 
seeketh findeth." "To him that knocketh it shall be 
opened." "Your heavenly Father is more willing to 
give [increasingly] the holy spirit to them that ask 
[seek] it, than are earthly parents to give good [earthly] 
gifts unto their children." 

FT. WAYNE, IND.-AUG. 25. 

Morning session, specially for the interested, will 
be a Convention Welcome and Rally, at 10:30 a.m. 



Afternoon session, specially for the public, at 3 p.m. 
In the evening at 7:30 the discourse will be specially 
for the household of faith. 

All meetings will be held in Knights of Columbus 
Hall, Lau Block, Cor. Calhoun and Washington Sts. 

Friends from near-by places are cordially invited; 
and all in introducing themselves are requested to 
mention their home address, that we may the better 
identify them. Come praying the Lord's blessing- 
seeking to receive a blessing, and to be used as a channel 
of blessing to others. 



ROCHESTER, N.Y.-SEPTEMBER 29. 
RICHMOND, VA.-OCT. 12, 13. 
Particulars in due season. 



page 289 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. SEPTEMBER 15, 1901. No. IS 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 291 

The Outlook— War and Prosperity 292 

"Finally, Be All of One Mind" 294 

Fighting the Good Fight of Faith 295 

Faith and the Messages Essential 297 

The Blessed Inheritance for which 

We are Being Prepared 298 

"Hated Without a Cause" 298 

Poem: Pass Under the Rod 301 

Words of Cheer and Encouragement 301 

Public Ministries of the Truth 304 

Our Special Edition Linear Bible 290 

page 290 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 



MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R2877 : page 290 

OUR SPECIAL EDITION LINEAR BIBLE. 



We have received a sufficient number of orders for the 
new Bible to warrant us in proceeding with its publication. It 
is to be printed from the regular "Linear Bible" electroplates 
with special DAWN and WATCH TOWER references in the one-inch-wide 
margins. Additionally we will add a Topical Index 
giving Scripture references as well as DAWN and WATCH TOWER 
references. These were prepared by two sisters in Los Angeles, 
California. 

Our readers are aware that these Bibles are being prepared 
at considerable trouble, for their convenience and spiritual assistance 
and not for financial profit: indeed we run the risk of 
losing something. We do not wish to urge any orders, but feel 
sure some who do not order will be greatly disappointed when 
they see the books in the hands of others and think of what 
they have missed. The price is only about one-third that of 
the same book without the wide-margin references which will 
so greatly add to its value among WATCH TOWER readers. See 
the illustration of type in our issue of July 15. Two bindings, 
$2.00 and $3.00 post-paid. We advise the better bound one to 
all who can afford it. 

Orders may be sent in at these prices during September; 
but not later. Some will be printed, extra, for a party who believes 
they will be in demand at much higher prices. 



page 290 

THE LEATHER-BOUND DAWNS 

are sold only in sets— 5 volumes. This insures correspondence 
in shade of leather, finish, etc. 



R2875 : page 291 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A WRITER in the Advance facetiously points 

out the antagonism between the Bible and 

its true friends on the one side, and the Higher Critics 

on the other. But he does not seem to realize that 

the followers of these higher critics are in most of 

the pulpits and in the most influential pews of Christendom; 

—that the secret of the prevalent skepticism 

and indifference of professing Christians is doubt. It 

is not the loud and foul-mouthed infidelity of a century 

ago; but much more insidious and dangerous, 

because it has a "form of godliness"— much more deceptive 

to such as are sincere truth-seekers. The 

writer says:— 

"Beyond any question some unknown writer 
gathered up the legends of his time and used them to 
describe a hero, whom he named Abraham. A later 
writer used the same legends, but he called his hero 
Isaac. Without doubt all these stories were invented 
to account for the supremacy of Israel over Edom." 
So said a Rev. Dr. in his 'lecture' to some fifty ladies 
of his church a few days since— in a Congregational 
church not far from Boston! At the close of the lecture, 
among others this question was asked: 'Doctor, 
do you believe that any such persons as Abraham 
and Isaac ever lived?' 'Well, I don't know,' replied 
the Doctor. It is quite possible that persons bearing 
those names have lived, but probably these names 
represent nations or tribes. I should say that the 
weight of best modern scholarship is against the theory 
that any such persons as Abraham and Isaac actually 
lived.'" 

Being from the backwoods and not familiar 
with the "best modern scholarship," I was wont to 
exclaim, "Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; 
it is high, I cannot attain unto it!" 

What a pity that Isaiah could not have heard a 
course of lectures like these before he prophesied! 
Then he would have been spared the mortification of 
making such a reference as we find in his prophecy- 
Chapter 41:8: "But thou, Israel, art my servant, 
Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my 
friend." And another blunder worse than the first: 
"Look unto Abraham your father, and unto Sarah 
that bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him 
and increased him!" But it may be that "the best 
modern scholarship" will discover, if indeed it has 
not already proven, that no such prophet as Isaiah 
ever prophesied or lived even! This would do much 
in clearing the way for a solid foundation for our 
faith! 



It is a great pity also that Matthew could not 
have heard or read a few lectures concerning the 
"higher criticism" before he wrote his book; for he 
would have omitted the first chapter which has deceived 
so many ignorant souls since his time! A 
great many people have lived in times past and "fell 
on sleep" believing that in some way Jesus was 
descended from Abraham! Alas, what ignorance! 
Why could not the wise men of the East have discovered 
this new knowledge ages ago? 

Moreover, what a help it would have been to 
Jesus if He could have known the "last word of our 
best modern scholarship!" He would not have been 
deceived, nor would he have deceived others by quoting 
from those "old legends," as He did in Matt. 22:32: 
"I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, 
and the God of Jacob!" Nor would He have said: 
"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and 
he saw it and was glad. I say unto you before Abraham 
was I am." John 8:56,58. Then think of 
the unfortunate Stephen! Had he only known the 
results of "the best modern scholarship" he never 
would have spoken as he did in Acts 7:5— and so 
might have saved his life! If he was ignorant or 
so foolish as to rehearse as true a lot of "legends" 
about people who never lived, why should not the 
multitude gnash on him with their teeth, stop their 
ears, run upon him with one accord, cast him out of 
the city and stone him to death! James too was deceived 
and quoted as a fact a passage from those same 
"old legends": Jas. 2:23. 

R2875 : page 292 

But the most deluded of all those poor, ignorant 
men, who lived and worked in the first century was 
Paul! How unhappy he must be even in heaven (if 
there is any heaven), if he now knows the "last word 
of best modern scholarship!" His ignorance first 
appears in quoting the same "old legend" that fooled 
James in his letter to the Galatians— 3:6. He repeats 
the myth in his letter to the Romans— 4:1-4. 
But worse than this, in the ninth chapter he digs up 
and palms off onto the innocent and unsuspecting 
Romans a whole string of "legends!" 

Ah me! Four years of preaching and working 
does not seem to have brought any more light into 
his benighted mind! for then he wrote that strange 
epistle to the Hebrews ! Who can read the eleventh 
chapter of that epistle in the light of "the best modern 
scholarship," with any degree of allowance for the 
ignorant writer? 

Poor Paul!— To think of the sermons written 
and spoken from the "legends" quoted by Paul in 
that chapter is enough to give a man spiritual nightmare! 
And the preachers have believed those stories 



to be true, and so have deceived their flocks. "The 
blind leading the blind!" These deluded preachers 
have cited Abraham for an example of faith, living, 
saving faith, lo, these centuries past! And yet Abraham 
never lived! To buttress their sermons on 
prayer, these same preachers have quoted again and 
again Abraham's petitions as found in the "legends" 
recorded in Gen. 15, 17 and 18! What a debt of 
gratitude we owe to the "higher criticism," that our 
eyes have been opened and that with the very beginning 
of this glad new century "the best modern scholarship" 
has brushed away the myths and "legends" 
of the ages and given us a "new theology" founded 
upon the latest researches of "the higher criticism!" 



The serious feature of the matter is, that Christian 
people in general are but "babes" as respects a knowledge 
of God's Word, and hence liable to lose their 
little all of faith; especially when the doubts are suggested 
by their leaders, to whom they have been 
taught to look too implicitly for guidance in matters 
of faith. 

The Word of God clearly shows us that so great a 
falling away from the faith is to be expected here, in 
the end of the age, as will justify our Master's 
words,— "When the Son of Man cometh [is present] 
shall he find faith on the earth?" (Luke 18:8.) These 
are the "perilous times" mentioned by the Apostle, 
and of whose deceptions our Lord said,— "If it 
were possible [if they were not divinely aided] the 
very elect would be misled by them."— Matt. 24:24; 
compare 2 Thes. 2:10-12; 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 

The only safe-guard for the Lord's people now is 
the "present truth" with which the Lord is so bountifully 
supplying the "table" of his fully consecrated 
people. God has so arranged the outward evidences 
respecting the Bible that the world and all who have 
the spirit of the world can find plenty to cavil at and 
stumble over. The Lord's intention was and still is 
that only from the inside can his Word and plan be 
seen in their true beauty and strength. He intends 
it to be "sufficient, that the man of God may be thoroughly 
furnished unto every good work." But who 
are genuinely men of God, is the question. The difficulty 
is that many professing to be men of God are 
men of their own— not consecrated: and many of the 
consecrated are consecrated to a particular work or 
theory or sect instead of to God. Now the "hour of 
trial" has come which will show the real standing of 
each one professing godliness. God is now making 
it quite possible for every "man of God" to be thoroughly 
furnished, fully equipped, at the same time 
that he is permitting the Adversary to bring in error 
like a flood.-Isa. 28:2,18-20; 59:19. 



In view of these conditions let all whose eyes are 
open, all who see where we are and what is coming, 
be alert first for themselves that they may be of the 
"brethren" who will see and be delivered, by giving 
the more earnest heed to the things which God has 
shown us, lest we let them slip; and secondly, for all 
who give any evidence of being "brethren," to assist 
them as much as lieth in us. Thus we may make 
our own calling and election sure, and minister grace 
to all with whom we come in contact— 2 Pet. 1:10; 
Eph. 4:29. 

THE OUTLOOK-WAR AND PROSPERITY. 



As our readers are aware, we credit the prosperity 
of the world during the past three years very largely 
to their wars, which have put hundreds of millions 
of dollars into circulation among the people, and 
stimulated manufacturing, shipbuilding, etc., at a cost 
of an increase of public debts, which, being put into 
the shape of negotiable bonds, is practically an increase 
in the world's circulating medium— money. 

Our principal reason for looking for a further period 
of prosperity and inflation is, that in our judgment 

R2876 : page 292 

there is scarcely time enough to permit a panic 
and period of general prostration and then another 
period of prosperity and inflation and another panic, 
etc., by the time which we think the Scriptures indicate 
as the time for the great cataclysm of trouble; 
by which the present institutions of Christendom are 
all to go down in anarchistic chaos. The culmination 
of the trouble in October 1914 is clearly marked 
in the Scriptures;* and we are bound therefore to 
expect a beginning of that severe trouble not later 
than 1910;— with severe spasms between now and 
then. 

Should the severe trouble come in 1910 we may 
infer that it will be preceded by a period of gradual 
financial and social disturbances, similar to those of 
the past, and leading on toward the condition of desperation 
then, or sooner, to be reached. For these 
reasons we expect the present wave of prosperity to 
roll on a little while: and since it could not do so 
without war, or something of the kind, to put more 
money and more bonds into circulation— therefore 
we look for war, possibly numerous small wars, possibly 
great ones. It is a time for wars and rumors of 
wars, and of crying Peace, Peace; but the end is not 
yet,— a more pronounced federation of Protestantism 
is first to be expected, and a consequent persecution 
of such as will refuse to worship it. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. II. , III. 

R2876 : page 293 

In harmony with the foregoing, read the following 
extract from that very conservative London journal, 
"The Spectator:"— 

"THE LITTLE CLOUD." 



"One grand difficulty of the past, the insufficiency 
of useful products, is being rapidly obviated. The 
world is being searched for more pleasant things, and 
with the new facilities for intercommunication the 
search is well rewarded. As regards food, indeed, 
always the first of human preoccupations, the world 
has been pooled, and where absurd laws do not interfere 
bread is now so abundant and so cheap that the 
age-long ascendency of those who by owning the soil 
controlled its production is threatened, and will probably 
disappear. It is more than probable that the 
speed of human transit, and the inherent power of 
the instruments used by man to lighten toil, will be 
enormously increased— a new and lighter accumulator 
of electricity would effect that at once— while it 
is possible that the fertility of the earth itself, the 
locked treasure-house of all things, may be materially 
increased. The energy of white mankind, relieved 
of many superincumbent weights, has been developed 
beyond precedent, and the highest men of science 
see dimly that even man's power of thinking may be 
enlarged by a comprehension of laws as great as 
gravitation which are still hidden from his ken, but 
the filmy veil of which shows an inclination to disappear. 
The "rolling back of the heavens" in the 
fifteenth century, on which thinkers and rhetoricians 
have so often dilated, would hardly expand man's 
conceptions more than an accurate and fairly full 
comprehension of the nature and properties of the all-pervading 
though invisible substance which we have 
agreed to call the ether. 

"In the midst of all these facts and prospects men 
remain silly, and a new and serious danger bewilders 
all who can think. The white world may fling its 
future away for the gratification of its spites and 
greeds. The nations have become conscious of each 
other, and they snarl. The fierce jealousies, the fiercer 
greediness, the distrusts fiercest of all, which 
in history are seen to have divided the dynasties, 
now divide the peoples. Each is as angry when it 
sees another gain anything as a dog when it sees a 



bone in another dog's mouth. Each thinks itself injured 
when another is enriched, and, what is worst 
of all, each believes in its heart that every other is 
plotting astutely and carefully to deprive all rivals of 
that which they possess. 

"The new hunger for comfort, the new knowledge 
of the external world and the riches it contains, unite 
with the new freedom and rapidity of intercommunication 
to produce a hatred of rivals at least as strong 
as the ancient hatred of races or religions. Great 
nations are ready to fight to the death for transmarine 
acquisitions, for privileges of trading, and 
above all for profitable monopolies. Governments 
are forced to "interfere," usually with menace, to secure 
concessions for their subjects. The popular papers 
are full of profits about to be pilfered away. The 
more popular the representative the more angrily he 
pleads for objects which, in plainer language, are 
large profits to be reaped by his constituents. If the 
State buys anything abroad he is furious; if it is indifferent 
to a foreign tariff he is in despair; if it does 
not prevent a rival railway he asserts, and almost 
believes, in treachery in his rulers. It is impossible 
for him to believe that the claims of others may be 
well founded, and the imputations in which he indulges 
resemble nothing so much as those of priests 
against heretics, or scholars against each other in the 
Middle Ages. 

In short, while the Governments are tranquil the 
peoples hate each other to the point at which the 
maintenance of peace becomes daily a more difficult 
performance. The spirit infects all countries alike, 
even Great Britain, usually so free in her inner pride 
from any impulse either of envy or apprehension; 
and if it cannot be allayed there will in the end be war. 
And war in England or with America now fully included 
in the circle of jealousies, would mean the disappointment 
for half the century of all the hopes with 
which it begins, the waste of the new resources upon 
competitive and skilful killing, and the diversion of 
all powers of thought from conquests over Nature 
to conquests over each other. Everything, in fact, 
in the time is propitious except the nature of man, 
which in its new freedom from the pressure of suffering 
is allowing the freest play to some of his meanest 
instincts. So far as safety and progress are concerned, 
the world has gained little by the exchange 
of royal ambition as the driving force in politics for 
popular jealousy and greed." 

WHAT OTHERS ARE COMING TO SEE. 



The "Grocer's Criterion" (Chicago) commenting 
on the fruit and vegetable scarcity resulting from the 



general drouth of the past Summer points out that 
this means deprivation to the poorer classes, and 
high prices for life's necessities, etc. It then 
concludes,— 

"The cost of living everywhere will be enormously 
increased all over the country. With the coal trust 
putting up the price of coal and other trusts advancing 
the cost of the necessaries of life, the outlook 
for the masses is not very encouraging. The labor 
situation has not improved and there is a growing 
feeling of discontent among the poorer classes in 
every manufacturing locality. 

"We have been enjoying a long period of prosperity, 
but over-reaching greed will soon result in bringing 
about an industrial revolution. Success has 
turned the heads of ambitious promoters, and they 
desire to control and monopolize the business of the 
world, which will eventually end only in universal 
disaster. We believe that the beginning of the end 
of the present era is at hand. We look to see want, 
misery and suffering in the near future. We expect 
to hear of outbreaks, riots and bloodshed at almost 
any time, and the conditions are ripe for a bloody 
conflict between capital and labor. 

"The long drought will tend to aggravate the 
parties to the present struggle. 

"We can not reasonably expect the difficulties now 
existing to be soon amicably or justly settled. Greed 
is apparent and uppermost and is crushing labor with 

R2876 : page 294 

an iron hand; labor is struggling for its very life 
with a fair prospect of being overcome— yet there are 
no immediate signs of a panic. There may be a 
slumbering volcano beneath us, but it has not yet 
burst into fiery eruption. Business men everywhere 
are entrenching themselves to meet the emergency 
when it comes, and to this conservative policy we 
may attribute the present calmness in the commercial 
world and the absence of anything like a panicky 
feeling among business men." 

Watch Tower and Millennial Dawn readers have 
seen the above conditions for these many years in 
the light of the divine Word. The Editor has been 
proclaiming these things for nearly thirty years. It 
is an evidence of the ripening of the matter when the 
worldly can see them without the secret light of 
God's Word,— clearly discernible only by the "royal 
priesthood" in the "holy" place, in the light of "the 
golden candlestick." But our sorrow for the world 
in view of its coming catastrophe is mitigated by our 
knowledge of the grand results to be thus brought 
about under the administration of the coming Kingdom 
of Messiah. Praise God then even for "the day 
of wrath ! " 



PALESTINE'S MINERAL WEALTH. 



COMMERCIAL AWAKENING OF THE HOLY LAND PROMISED 
UNDER THE TURKS. 

Washington, Aug. 6.— The Department of State 
has received from Ernest L. Harris, Consular Agent 
at Eibenstock, a report on the mineral treasures of 
Palestine. The report says: 

"Valuable mineral treasures have recently been 
discovered in Palestine, so it is safe to say that the 
industrial awakening of the Holy Land is no longer 
a dream. It is true that the greater part of the once 
flourishing country is a barren desert. The lines of 
communication are miserable, and traffic is unsafe, 
aside from the one railroad from Yafa to Jerusalem. 

"The newly discovered mineral deposits lie on 
both sides of the Jordan and the Dead Sea. The salt 
deposits of the Dead Sea could be developed into an 
industry. The most important of all the deposits is 

R2877 : page 294 

phosphate. At present the phosphate mines of Florida 
almost supply the world's demand. The immense 
fields of phosphate to the east and west of the Jordan 
need only better means of traffic and communication 
in order to insure the development. This, it would 
seem, is not far distant, as the Turkish Government 
is planning a continuation of the Yafa- Jerusalem 
Railroad, and steamboats are already plying the Dead 
Sea." 



R2877 : page 294 

"FINALLY, BE ALL OF ONE MIND." 



"Finally, be all of one mind [harmonious— in accord], having compassion 

one of another; love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous; not rendering 

evil for evil, or railing for railing; but contrariwise 

blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should 

inherit a blessing."— 1 Pet. 3:8,9. 

HARMONY does not mean alike-ness. Rather it 
signifies unity with diversity: and this is the 
meaning of the Greek word translated "of one mind" in 
our text. The Lord's will respecting his people does not 
contemplate exact sameness, wholly ignoring individual 
characteristics and peculiarities; on the contrary, 



a diversity with harmony is more desirable than a 

sameness; as, for instance, it is the harmonious union 

of the seven colors that constitutes the beauty of 

the rainbow. So also in music: one strikes a chord 

on the piano or the organ and the result is harmony, 

oneness, union— the variety of the notes gives a melody 

which could not be obtained from any one of 

them, or from a sameness of equal volume. This is 

the thought the Apostle's words give us in respect to 

God's people; they are of various natural temperaments 

and dispositions and peculiarities, and the divine 

alchemy by which the human is transmuted into 

the spiritual, the old mind into the new mind, does 

not wholly destroy, and is not intended to destroy, 

the elements of character and disposition; but is intended 

to take from each one its dross and imperfection 

and discordancy, and thus to permit all 

eventually to unite in and develop into a harmonious 

whole. 

The Lord does not expect, however, that this condition 
of complete harmony, will be attained by his 
people the instant of their consecration. On the contrary, 
as the Apostle indicates in our text, this attainment 
of harmony is the result, the glorious consummation, 
—rather than the beginning of the work 
of grace in the Lord's people: he says, "finally," not 
primarily, we are to be all of one mind— harmonious. 
It requires long years, generally, in the school of 
Christ, for his disciples to so grow in grace and in 
knowledge and in love,— ere they reach the glorious 
condition expressed in our text, even "finally." 

The Apostle Paul intimates that we are to continue 
so to grow in grace and in knowledge, and in love, 
as to attain in heart, in will, the stature of a perfect 
man in Christ. The "babe" in Christ has not the stature 
of a "man," and requires first the milk of the 
Word, and subsequently the "strong meat," that it 
may grow thereby, and finally attain to the ideal condition 
represented in our text,— a condition of harmony 
with the Lord and with each other, which indicates 
that the work of grace has well progressed— 
that the mark of perfect love has been well attained 
in the heart, even though it be not possible still to 
fully express it in every word and act of life. 

The Apostle Paul describes this transformation of 
life, this growth, saying, "Be ye transformed by the 
renewing of your mind;" but while it requires only 
a short time to give this instruction, and does not 
require long to agree to follow the instruction, it does 
require patient perseverance in well-doing to comply 
with the instructions;— to fully attain to the transformed 

R2877 : page 295 

conditions even in our hearts— so that we will 
aright, however difficult it may be for us to always 



do right. And here arises a difficulty: many do not 
clearly see just what are the requirements, and hence 
go through life in a maze, in perplexity, in doubt, in 
fear, lacking the rest and peace and blessing which 
should come from a proper understanding and a consistent 
endeavor. 

No doubt all have been struck with the fact that 
those who manifest the deepest interest in the divine 
plan are not always the most smooth and most 
agreeable people in the world: frequently they are so 
combative as to be continually distressing both 
themselves and their friends by their unwisdom or 
their disposition to wrangling and contention. The 
very quality which the Apostle mentions in this text 
as like-mindedness or harmony is peculiarly lacking, 
naturally, in the disposition of the majority of those 
who become deeply interested in present truth. And 
some have been inclined hastily to condemn the doctrines 
and to say, This is not the peaceable spirit of 
Christ. Where the spirit of Christ is there should be 
love and harmony. So says the Apostle: "Finally, be 
ye all of one mind." And this should be borne in 
mind as being the final result of discipline and instruction 
in the school of Christ; by our attainment of this 
disposition to harmony (while at the same time loyal 
and courageous for the truth), we may safely gauge 
our growth in grace, knowledge and love. 

We want to suggest an explanation as to why it is 
that so many of the Lord's people are combatively 
disposed. A wrangling and contentious disposition 
is the result of large combativeness— misdirected— 
unwisely exercised. Combativeness itself is not a 
bad quality. On the contrary, it is a good quality, 
—a quality actually indispensable to the attainment 
of the prize set before us in the Gospel. Those who 
lack combativeness, lack backbone; lack the ability to 
walk an upright life, under present conditions; they 
are like a boat on the river which has neither oars nor 
wheel nor screw-propeller. They can do nothing 
but float with the current, for they lack the apparatus 
necessary to stem it. There are many goody-goody 
people who lack firmness, lack character, lack combativeness, 
and who could not think of anything else 
than floating with the popular current; and these frequently 
are mistaken for "saints" when they are nothing 
of the kind. They are not even of the kind of material 
that the Lord takes to make "saints" out of. 
They are unfit for his purposes under the present call 
of this Gospel age; for all who are called now to be 
of the elect Church are called to be "overcomers;" 
called to be victors; called to stem the popular tide; 
called to fight a good fight of faith and obedience; 
and such as are totally lacking in firmness, in combativeness, 
in character, cannot possibly comply with 
these conditions, and are not in the race. 

So then, if any of those who have grasped the truth, 



and who have been grasped and drawn by the truth 

to consecration to the Lord, have at times felt the 

perversity of their natural dispositions— their combativeness, 

contentiousness and wrangling disposition, 

and felt discouraged on this account, let them thank 

God and take courage. Let them realize that this 

very disposition constitutes one qualification for enlistment 

and service under the Captain of our salvation; 

—although such a service will mean the bringing 

of this contrary disposition into accord with the 

spirit of love, which, in the end, will mean that the 

wrangling disposition will be subdued, and the combativeness 

be properly turned to good account in another 

direction. 

But while taking all the encouragement we can 
from the thought that the Lord is wishing and is seeking 
and calling out a fighting class of "conquerors," 
who could not be conquerors unless there were something 
to conquer, and who could not conquer unless 
they possessed something of the conquering or combative 
disposition, let us nevertheless, promptly take 
ourselves in hand, realizing that the good quality of 
combativeness has in every instance been misdirected, 
and that from the moment we enlist as soldiers of 

R2878 : page 295 

the Cross of Christ our combativeness is to be turned 

into new channels. We are to learn, first of all, that 

our combativeness is not to be exercised toward the 

Lord, that we should resist his will; but that, on the 

contrary, we are to make a full surrender to him of 

our thoughts and words and conduct. We are to remember 

that combativeness is not to be used toward 

the brethren; for to fight against the brethren is to 

fight against God, against the truth, against the fellow-members 

of our own brigade. Instead of fighting 

against the brethren, we are to love them, and to 

fight for them, even as we are to fight for the Lord 

and for the truth. We are to remember, too, that our 

combativeness is not to be exercised against our 

friends, our neighbors, or the world in general. No; 

all of these have plenty to contend against without 

having our opposition. On the contrary, they need 

our sympathy, they need our help, they need our encouragement, 

they need whatever we can render them 

in the way of uplift. 

FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT OF FAITH.-l TIM. 6:12. 



How, then, and against what shall we exercise our 
combativeness, that it may be well directed to the 
Lord's pleasement and in the service of his cause? 
We answer, that our combativeness is to be turned 



against sin, and that its first exercise must begin 
with ourselves: the battle with self is the greatest 
battle, and we have the Lord's Word for it that he 
that "ruleth his spirit (his own mind, will) is better 
than he that taketh a city," because he has to that extent 
learned to exercise the combativeness of a true 
character in the right direction, in self-control. It is 
after we have had considerable experience in battling 
with sin and selfishness in ourselves, in casting the 
beam out of our own eyes, in subduing anger, malice, 
hatred and strife in our own hearts and flesh— it is 
then, and by means of this severe battle and experience, 
that we will be prepared to assist the brethren, 
and to assist our neighbors in their difficulties— to 
help them to overcome their besetments and 
weaknesses. 

Whoever starts out by fighting even the sins of 
others before he has made a vigorous campaign 
against his own weaknesses and errors, is making a 
mistake. He needs humility and sympathy to assist 
the others to fight their battles, and this he cannot 

R2878 : page 296 

gain without first battling with himself and learning 

to appreciate how strong is the foe to be contended 

with, and how thoroughly entrenched is sin and selfishness 

in all the avenues of the flesh. He even needs 

to be worsted in some of his battles with self in order 

to have a clear appreciation of his own inability to 

overcome and to force him to go to the throne of the 

heavenly grace to obtain mercy and find grace to 

help. He needs this because, as the Apostle says, 

it is when we are weak that we are strong; and when 

we are strong in our self-confidence, and therefore 

neglect to go to the Lord, then we are weak and liable 

to make failure in the battle, and to be overcome 

by the enemy-Sin. -Heb. 4:16; 2 Cor. 12:10. 

All those who have had any experience in the matter, 
and who have learned how and where to direct 
their combative energies, find that there is full scope 
for the exercise of every particle of combativeness 
he possesses. (1) In himself, continually; as the 
Apostle expressed it, "I keep my body under, and 
bring it into subjection; lest that by any means, when 
I have preached to others, I myself should be a castaway" 
(1 Cor. 9:27). O, how much of energy and 
how much persistency in fighting the good fight of 
faith, and of loyalty to the Lord, is needful in the conquering 
of self— "bringing every thought [and so far 
as possible, every word and act] into captivity to the 
obedience of Christ" (2 Cor. 10:5). Plenty of room 
here for combativeness; plenty of room for all the 
contention and wrangling we want;— contention with 
sin and self-will, wrangling with the will of the flesh 
and opposing it at every step— mortifying it, killing 



its affections and desires. No wonder the Apostle 
speaks of these present experiences as a fight; no 
wonder he tells us that we must be prepared to endure 
hardness as a good soldier of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

(2) As soon as the victory over self has been 
gained, and as soon as the new mind has put a garrison 
in every quarter of the conquered body, to guard 

it from rising in insurrection, to hold it in subjection 

to the King of kings and Lord of lords— forthwith all 

the remaining energies that can be spared from self-control 

will find ample opportunity for usefulness in 

battling for the Lord, battling for the brethren, battling 

for the truth, battling against error, battling 

against all the wiles of the devil, "for we are not ignorant 

of his devices," as the Apostle declares. 

(3) As the eyes of our understanding get opened, 
wider and wider, we see the great conflict that is 
progressing throughout the world between righteousness 
and sin, between our Lord and the god of 

this world and his blinded representatives, who ignorantly 
think that they are doing God service and are 
often found fighting against the truth and against the 
true soldiers of the Cross, their brethren, even as in 
the case of Paul. We remember how he, as Saul of 
Tarsus, persecuted the Church, mistakenly misusing 
his combativeness in a wrong way. We remember 
how the Lord called to him in the way, "Saul, Saul, 
why persecutest thou me?"— Why are you fighting 
against God, opposing the truth and his cause? In 
Paul's case we see how that as soon as the eyes of 
his understanding were opened he became a most valiant 
soldier of the cross, hesitating not to lay down his 
life in the service of the Lord and the brethren, who 
once he had ignorantly opposed. 

It was the same combativeness which made Paul a 
violent persecutor that subsequently made him the 
most valiant of the apostles in the defence of the 
truth. And so it was also with others of the apostles. 
Those who had the largest amount of combativeness 
naturally, when it was turned into the proper 
channels, became thereby the strongest and most valiant 
for the truth. Peter, for instance, full of combativeness, 
and at first seriously impeded by it, ready 
in defence of the Lord to smite off the ear of the high 
priest's servant, was very valiant subsequently in the 
use of his talents to the Lord's praise. James and 
John, two others specially favored and recognized of 
the Lord, and specially used in the service of the 
truth, were of combative dispositions, so much so that 
they were known as the "sons of thunder;" and it was 
these two who were so incensed at the Samaritans who 
refused to receive our Lord into their city, and who 
were so full of love and zeal for the Master that they 
inquired, "Lord, wilt thou that we call down fire from 
heaven to consume these men and their city?" They 
had the combativeness, they had the courage, they 



had the zeal; but they had not yet learned how to direct 

it, and so the Master intimated, when he said, 

"Ye know not what spirit ye are of. The Son of Man 

came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them." 

By and by, when they were anointed with the holy 

spirit at Pentecost, and had learned gradually what 

spirit they were of (what spirit the Master was of, and 

what spirit they must be of as his disciples), they understood 

better how their combativeness and zeal 

were to be used. And hence we find them loyal soldiers 

of the cross, shunning not danger, enduring 

hardness as good soldiers of the Lord Jesus, even unto 

death. 

It was this natural combativeness consecrated to 
God, and rightly directed through the spirit, that led 
Peter and one of the others, when threatened, and 
charged straitly by the Sanhedrin that they should 
preach no more in the name of Jesus, to courageously 
withstand this illegal restraint upon their liberties and 
rights as Jews, under the Law, and to be obedient to 
the voice of the heavenly call, and to declare, "Whether 
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you 
more than unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but 
speak the things which we have seen and heard" 
(Acts 4:19-20). The Lord knew whom he was choosing 
for his apostles, and we see clearly that weak, 
vacillating, nerveless men would not have served the 
cause as did these whom Jesus chose. And it is but 
reasonable that we conclude that the Lord similarly 
throughout this age, is seeking for and choosing 
strong characters, those who dare to do right; who 
dare to incur the frown of the world and its slights 
and sneers, its scoffs and its jeers, its persecution because 
of fidelity to the Lord and to the brethren. 
This is overcoming;— and to whatever extent any 
realize that they are deficient in these qualities let 
them cultivate this combativeness in this proper direction 
—to combat weakness, combat sin, combat 
subserviency to those things which are contrary to 
the Lord and his Word. 

R2878 : page 297 

FAITH AND THE MESSAGES ALSO ESSENTIAL. 



But combativeness alone would not be sufficient. 
It needs proportionate faith, in order to use the combativeness 
aright. Hence we hear our Lord's word, 
"This is the victory that overcometh the world, even 
your faith." Faith in the Lord must be the power that 
will move his people and energize them. Not faith 
in creeds, nor faith in men, nor faith in ourselves, but 
faith in the Lord and in his exceeding great and precious 
promises. As the steamboat wheels represent 



its combativeness, by which it battles against and 
pushes the water, and thus is enabled to go upstream, 
so its steam-power, through the engine, represents 
faith, which must be behind the combativeness, 
to exercise the combativeness— to lead us to 
endure hardness, to direct us in fighting the good 
fight and to hope for the rewards to be attained. 

Similarly the fuel and the boiler generating the 
steam represent the Word and providences of God, 
which produce in us the cause, the power of the faith 
which energizes us in stemming the current. The 
exceeding great and precious promises of the divine 

R2879 : page 297 

Word were given to us as the basis of faith,— as the 
fuel to produce the power in us to will and to do God's 
good pleasure (Phil. 2:13). And hence these gracious 
promises must not be neglected; they must be 
continually used and must continue in us to energize 
us. And the energy must be applied, and we must 
progress proportionately against the course of this 
world, if we would attain to the glorious conditions to 
which we have been called. 

While we should ever remember (lest otherwise we 
should be discouraged), that the attainment of a control 
of our own spirits, our own minds, and the bringing 
of these into full accord, full harmony, with the 
Lord and, so far as possible, into accord with all of 
the Lord's people who are in accord with him, is to 
be "finally," nevertheless we are not to delay our endeavor 
to reach that final and grand development to 
which the Apostle exhorts us in our text. We are 
to have it continually before us as the standard, the 
ideal, the aim, and although we may fail time and 
again, if we are rightly exercised in the matter we 
will be stronger as the result of every failure; for 
each failure will show us more clearly than we discerned 
previously the weak points of our characters, 
naturally resulting from the fall. And if each weak 
point be carefully noted and guarded against as respects 
the future we will come by and by, by the 
grace of God and under the direction of our great 
Teacher, by his Word and example, and providential 
leadings, to that subdued condition, that harmonized 
condition, which would accord to the expression of 
the text. And to such, looking back, even the failures 
which subsequently recognized led to greater 
fortification against the wiles of the Adversary and 
the weaknesses of the flesh, may be seen to have been 
overruled by the Lord for our blessing according to 
his promise that all things shall work together for 
good to them that love him. 

As we finally, in larger and larger measure, attain 
to harmony— to the subduing of our natural dispositions 
toward contention, gradually getting these combative 



tendencies into accord with the Lord and his 

Word and his Spirit, and into accord with those who 

are his, our fellow-soldiers in this battle for the right, 

our condition will be what the Apostle here describes; 

viz., we will have compassion one of another. We 

will expect to see and will see "the brethren" striving 

for the mastery over self and we will be sympathetic, 

compassionate; so that if they err through 

weakness of the flesh, we will be glad to restore such 

in the spirit of meekness, remembering ourselves also 

lest we should be tempted (Gal. 6:1). We will love 

them as brethren ought to love— heartily, thoroughly 

—such a love and such a sympathy, such a compassion, 

as would lead us to do everything within our 

power for their assistance;— especially along the lines 

of spiritual assistance, in the conquering of sin, and 

in growth in grace and knowledge and love;— but, 

nevertheless, also in temporal matters as we have opportunity, 

as may be possible to us. 

This compassion and brotherly love amongst the 
spiritual brethren, even as respects temporal matters, 
cannot surely be less than it would be amongst natural 
brethren. Indeed, inasmuch as the spiritual relationship 
is the higher, the nobler, the grander of the 
two, without detracting anything from the love and 
affection and obligations toward the fleshly brotherhood, 
it would imply that the spiritual would appeal 
to us still more strongly, so that we would do all for 
a brother in Christ in a temporal way that we would 
do for any earthly brother— and more abundantly. 
The Apostle sets this standard, saying, that we are 
to "do good unto all men as we have opportunity, 
especially to the household of faith." 

This of course does not mean that we are to be 
negligent of those of our own immediate households 
and our special responsibilities to these; but it does 
mean that aside from these, the spiritual brethren 
should have the first place in our hearts and in our 
sympathies and in our love, and in all that this would 
imply in the way of sharing with them both the spiritual 
and the temporal good things which we enjoy, 
according to their necessities. Those who have 
reached this condition of heart-harmony with the 
Lord and with his gracious plan will have had such 
an experience in attaining to this position themselves 
that it will make them pitiful of others,— sympathetic 
in the difficulties and trials of others; and it will make 
them "courteous," polite, "gentle toward all." 

In a word, according to the Scriptural standard, the 
elect Church of Christ should be the most polished, 
the most refined, the most polite, the most generous, 
the most kind, of all the people in the world;— and 
should be all these in the most absolute sense; not 
in the mere sense of an outward form and appearance 
of kindness, gentleness, etc., so common in the world; 
but a gentleness, a kindness, proceeding from the 



heart, proceeding from an appreciation of the Lord's 
spirit and the spirit of the truth, the spirit of love, 
and the spirit of justice, also. It is a great matter 
that we learn to be thoroughly just, and in all of our 
affairs to do unto others as we would wish them to 
do unto us,— that we accord them the same liberties 
that we ourselves would wish to enjoy. Truly, the 
law of God is a wonderful law, and truly the people 

R2879 : page 298 

who are taught of the Lord and trained in harmony 
with the divine will, must be a peculiar people, zealous 
of good works. 

Combative people will always (while in the flesh) 
feel a disposition to retaliate; but those who have 
learned of the Lord the lesson of self-control, and who 
have developed meekness and brotherly-kindness 
and pity, will thereby be prepared to fulfil the demands 
of our text,— to not render evil for evil, or 
railing for railing. And looking to the Lord as the 
pattern they will see how it was with him, that "When 
he was reviled he reviled not again." Not because 
his enemies had found in him something that could 
properly and justly be reviled and evil spoken of;— 
nor because his enemies were so nearly perfect that 
he could find nothing in them to revile and speak evil 
of; but because he was so full of submission to the 
divine will that he was enabled to take the scoffs and 
railings of the people, and to bear these humbly and 
patiently, and to remember that even hereunto he was 
called, that he should endure patiently and learn the 
lessons, and prove himself faithful, and develop and 
demonstrate his true character, and feel and manifest 
his pity for the people, in their blindness and ignorance, 
and his love for them. 

And so it must be with us as we grow in our Lord's 
character-likeness. We also will be less disposed to 
rail at those who rail, and to revile those who revile 
us. We also will be ready to suffer the loss of all 
things, and to do so with cheerfulness; yea, even to rejoice 
in the trials and difficulties of this present time, 
knowing, as the Apostle declares, that these are working 
out for us a far more exceeding and an eternal 
weight of glory. We note here the harmony between 
Peter's statement of this matter and our Lord's 
statement of it: "Bless them that curse you; bless 
and curse not" (Phil. 3:8; 2 Cor. 4:17; Matt. 5:44; 
Rom. 12:14). So the Apostle says we should rather 
render blessing. If we have not yet attained to this 
high standard which is at the end of the race, the 
mark of perfect love, where we love our enemies and 
are ready and willing and anxious to bless them, to 
help them, to desire their uplifting out of darkness 
and degradation, and to wish and do all that we can 
in harmony with this, the divine plan, let us not be 



discouraged; but let us press onward, that as soon 
as possible we may reach this point, which is the 
mark of perfected character. For, as the Apostle 
says, "even hereunto we were called, that we might 
inherit a blessing." 

THE BLESSED INHERITANCE FOR WHICH WE ARE 
BEING PREPARED. 



We were called to be the Royal Priesthood, under 
Jesus, the Royal High Priest of our profession. 
We are instructed in the Scriptures that this royal 
priesthood is to be God's agency during the Millennial 
age for bringing blessing to the world of mankind, 
and "hereunto we were called" that we might 
be fitted for this priesthood. The Apostle tells us 
that in the preparation of our Lord Jesus and his testing 
as to fitness for the position of high priest, it was 
necessary that he should be tempted, tried, and 
caused to suffer, in order that he might be a merciful 
and faithful high priest when the time should come 
to exercise the authority and power of his office. 
Similarly it is necessary that all who would be of this 
Royal Priesthood should have such experiences now 
as would develop in them also these principles of 
truth, righteousness— such experiences as would lead 
them to love righteousness and to hate iniquity— such 
experiences in battling with self and in gaining control 
(at least so far as the mind, the will is concerned), 
as would constitute them victors and develop in them 
these graces of the spirit mentioned by the Apostle, 
brotherly kindness, pitifulness, compassion. All 
these qualities will be requisite in dealing with the 
world during the Millennial age. They will be merciful 
and faithful high priests, because they will know 
how to sympathize with the poor world in its fallen 
condition, and how to make allowances for them in 
their various efforts toward regaining the standard of 
perfection then to be established through restitution 
processes. 

We will be kings as well as priests then. As kings, 
we will be endued with power to control the world. 
This will be a further proper use of combativeness; 
but we are not fitted and prepared to so control the 
world in the present time; and therefore the Lord directs 
his people to wait, and long for, and pray for 
his Kingdom to come, and his will to be done;— to 
be enforced with heavenly power and authority. 
These "very elect" kings and priests will be fully 
qualified to exercise their power in moderation, for 

R2880 : page 298 

then they will have the new bodies in perfect accord 



with the new minds;— the new minds which are now 
being developed, disciplined and brought to that standard 
of perfect love, which is full of pity, compassion, 
brotherly kindness and harmony. How necessary, 
dear brethren, that we learn these lessons, if we would 
be prepared to be used in the glorious service of the 
Kingdom so shortly to be established. 



R2880 : page 298 

"HATED WITHOUT A CAUSE." 

-GEN. 37:12-36.-OCT. 6.- 

Golden Text: "The patriarchs, moved with envy, sold 
Joseph into Egypt: but God was with him."— Acts 7:9. 

RACHEL, the dearly beloved wife of Jacob, 

was dead, but her first-born son, Joseph, 

was beloved by his father above his ten older half-brothers. 

And from the narrative it is not unreasonable 

to assume that this love was not merely on his 

mother's account, but that Joseph himself had a kindness 

and nobility of character which specially commended 

him to his father, and drew forth his affection. 

As a son of his old age, Jacob was inclined to 

favor Joseph in various ways, and amongst others 

procured for him an expensive robe, of a kind peculiar 

to that time, samples of which have recently 

been found in Egypt, in the tomb of Beni-Hassan,— 

"long, richly embroidered robes in various patterns 

and colors, which seem to have been produced by 

R2880 : page 299 

sewing together small pieces of different colors. 

Herodotus describes one sent as a present by the 

king of Egypt, which 'had a vast number of figures 

of animals interwoven into its fabric, and was embroidered 

with gold.'" 

Jacob probably did not realize to what extent 
his partiality was cultivating in his other sons a feeling 
of enmity and envy against Joseph; and, indeed, 
we may question if it would have been to Joseph's 
advantage, as respects development of character, to 
have remained at home under such conditions; he 
would probably have been a spoiled young man, just 
as grandparents are very apt to spoil grandchildren 
by too much petting and partiality, developing in the 
favored child a spirit of pride, to plague and injure 
it for the remainder of life. 

The envy of his brothers over his father's partiality 
was intensified by two dreams which Joseph 
had, and which he told them of, apparently with all 



simplicity and innocency. In the one dream he saw 

twelve sheaves in the field, one for each of the sons 

of Jacob, and the other eleven sheaves bowed down 

to his sheaf. In the other dream he saw the sun, 

moon, and eleven stars bow down to him. His brothers 

were incensed at any thought of his ultimate 

superiority to them, who were his elders; and even 

his father repudiated the thought that the dream 

could have any meaning, since it would imply that 

Joseph would be greater than his parents, as well as 

greater than his brethren. We are not to account 

for these dreams as the work of the boy's imagination 

and ambition, altho such may be the case in 

respect to many dreams; rather we are to understand 

that those dreams were prophetic: that God was foretelling, 

foreshadowing the future— to the intent that 

Jacob and Joseph and his brethren might all eventually 

discern that the Lord's hand was connected 

with all the peculiar circumstances of his life;— that 

God foreknew and overruled them in the manner 

in which they ultimately resulted. This forestatement 

would make the lessons many times more weighty, 

when they would be understood, just as prophetic 

declarations respecting our Lord and his experience, 

are the more convincing on this account. The dreams 

were fulfilled later on, when Jacob and his family 

presented themselves before Joseph, a prince in 

Egypt, and made obeisance to him as to a king. 

Well does the Apostle class envy as one of the 
works of the flesh and the devil. (Gal. 5:19-21.) It 
is a seed which thrives rapidly in any heart where it 
takes root, and who can tell what bitter fruitage it 
will produce? So rank had been its growth in the 
hearts of Joseph's brethren that when he came to 
them in the field at Dothan with a message from his 
father, their envy overflowed all bounds, and they 
premeditated murder. Subsequently, at the instance 
of Reuben, one of their number, his life was spared, 
and he was merely put into a pit, a dry cistern, to die 
of starvation; Reuben, however, premeditating his 
deliverance. Subsequently, at the instance of his 
brother Judah, his life was spared from the pit, and 
he was sold to some traveling merchants as a slave 
for the Egyptian market, where shortly afterward he 
was installed as a servant in the house of Potiphar. 
How hard must have been the hearts of these brethren, 
and how sore and affrighted the heart of Joseph, 
the favored child of his father! The narrative tells us 
nothing respecting his tears, his entreaties, and the 
refusal of his brethren, but an account of this is given 
us elsewhere (Gen. 42:21), for the guilty brethren, 
when in trouble themselves, exclaimed, "We saw the 
anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we 
would not hear; therefore is this distress come upon 
us." 

Whoever finds envy, hatred or malice in his heart 



in any degree should know that he is harboring an 
enemy; a spirit which, under certain circumstances, 
might quickly develop into a spirit of murder. The 
Apostle, therefore, urges all who have become new 
creatures in Christ Jesus to mortify, to kill, to bury, 
to put away, the spirit of evil, of hatred, of strife, of 
envy, and through the transforming influence of the 
Lord's spirit to put on more and more, day by day, 
the spirit of love, the spirit of Christ. We can see a 
lesson in the experience of Joseph's brethren; and 
even tho envy never led us thus far, it should be an 
illustration to us of its tendency, and we should hate 
it and proportionately eradicate it from our hearts. 

The chief point of this lesson is its illustration 
of divine providence. It reminds the children of God 
of this Gospel dispensation of the promise of the 
Lord's word, that "all things shall work together for 
good to those who love God." It teaches us how 
implicitly we may rely upon divine power and wisdom 
and love, even when all things seem to be against 
us; and also how futile are all the powers of our enemies 
to do us real injury if God be for us. (Rom. 8:31.) 
Apparently the spirit of murder was in the nine 
brethren, and apparently had the Lord not so led the 
matter about, some of them would have killed Joseph 
quickly. But we are not to suppose that it was the 
only way God could have adopted for bringing Joseph 
into Egypt, and ultimately (Gen. 41:40) to its 
throne, to be the life-giver (bread-provider) for the 
Egyptians in their famine, and also for the Israelites, 
and thus to lead on to the captivity of the whole nation 
of Israel in Egypt, and to their discipline and 
education in the arts known to the Egyptians, and 
ultimately to cause their deliverance, as he did. We 
are to remember that the All-mighty is All-wise as 
well as All-powerful, and that he could have selected 
any of many ways to accomplish his purpose. The 
lesson illustrates, however, God's wisdom, by which 
he is able, not only to circumvent the machinations 
of evil men, but also to use their evil deeds to serve 
his purposes, to carry out his designs, and to bless 
those whom he is leading. Would that all of God's 
consecrated people, spiritual Israelites indeed, might 
obtain a great impetus to faith from this lesson, and 
henceforth rely more strongly and fully than ever 
upon the Lord and the power of his might. What 
a peace, what a joy, what a comfort it brings, to be 
able by faith to realize that the Lord is at the helm 
in respect to all of our interests and affairs, temporal 
and spiritual! 

Those who can plan murder, and who are full 
of envy, malice and hatred, will not hesitate to support 
their evil way by fraud, deception, lying. And 

R2880 : page 300 



so it was with the ten brethren. They took the coat 
of many colors, they draggled it in blood, and sent 
it to their father Jacob, probably at the hands of a 
messenger. Never doubting them, Jacob assented 
at once to the proposition that his beloved son had 
been cruelly devoured by a wild beast, and he 
mourned his loss, apparently for years;— his other 
sons vainly endeavoring to comfort him, and, no 
doubt, suffering to some extent anguish on account 
of their deeds. Perhaps this experience with evil 
was beneficial ultimately both to Jacob and his sons. 
Indeed, the subsequent narrative seems to imply this. 
And there is a lesson here for us, to the effect that 
those who yield to evil influences may subsequently 
learn valuable lessons therefrom, and that we may 
entertain hope for their recovery to righteousness. 
This is a part of our hope respecting the world in 
the coming Millennial age— that present experiences 
with sin, envy, hatred and strife will prove valuable 
to them by and by, when they shall have experienced 
some of the retributions and have learned a more excellent 
way, under the judgments of that time. 

As Joseph was hated by his brethren, and that 
without a cause, and figuratively killed, when sent 
to them by his father, so Jesus came to his own 
brethren, the Jews, came in their interest, as the representative 
of the Father, was hated without a cause, 
and was actually put to death, murdered. Nevertheless, 
in the Lord's providence this very hatred will 
ultimately bring him to the throne of earth, and to 

R2881 : page 300 

the place of power, and give him control over all the 

food, the "bread of life," and thus indirectly make him 

the life-giver, not only to the world of mankind, represented 

by the Egyptians, but also to his brethren, 

the Jews— to as many as will receive the bread of 

life upon the generous terms and conditions then laid 

down. 

And "as he was, so are we in this world"— as 
members of his body— as his fleshly representatives 
now, and, if faithful, to be his joint-heirs in the throne 
by and by, and with him to dispense life to the dying 
world. 

We are not to be surprised, therefore, if we find 
ourselves hated of the world; for, as the Master said, 
they shall say all manner of evil against us falsely 
for his sake. Let us remember his words, "If the 
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it 
hated you. If ye were of the world, the world would 
love his own; but because ye are not of the world, 
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the 
world hateth you."— John 15:18,19. 

As our Master was hated without a cause, so let 
it be with us, so far as possible, that the hatred, 



malice, envy and murder which may be poured out 
against us may be wholly unmerited by us— that our 
lives shall be as nearly pure as possible; that so far 
as possible our thoughts and words and deeds may 
show forth the praises of our Lord, and speak of our 
love for all men, especially for the household of faith. 
By and by, when the Church shall have been glorified, 
and a new dispensation inaugurated, those who hate 
us now, largely because they are blinded by the Adversary 
and misled, will bow before us, as the Lord's 
anointed, and we shall have the great pleasure of 
lifting them up, blessing them, encouraging them and 
forgiving them; and assisting them back to the full 
image and likeness of God. 

In our Golden Text let us note the significant 
statement,— "But God was with him." Success in 
life may be viewed from different standpoints. To 
some the successful lives are those represented by 
Alexander the Great, and Caesar, and notable kings, 
emperors and generals; or by its money accumulators 
—Croesus, Carnegie, et al. But we write for such 
as have different conceptions of greatness from 
these;— to those who, without disdaining the merits 
and charities of any, have accepted the divine standard 
of greatness as delineated in the Bible;— Abraham, 
Joseph, Moses, Job, David, the holy prophets 
and apostles, and above all our Lord Jesus. And the 
secret of the success of each of these was,— "God was 
with him." 

The same principle holds true to-day, in all 
matters connected with the divine service,— "Without 
me ye can do nothing." God's favor during the Jewish 
age was manifested in earthly prosperities; but 
not so in this age, when spiritual prosperity alone indicates 
God's favor, and when not many rich or great 
are called, but chiefly the poor of this world, rich in 
faith, heirs of the Kingdom. And, if God be with us 
and for us, who can be against us? What will their 
opposition amount to? They may indeed cause us 
pain or inconvenience, but they cannot harm us or 
injure our highest interests; because the Almighty 
has given assurance that "All things shall work for 
good to those who love him, to the called ones in his 
purpose." 

But what must be the character of this class 
whom God is with and for; and for whose blessing 
he intervenes in all of life's affairs? 

Ah! they are a peculiar people— zealous of good 
works— zealous for righteousness— zealous for God 
and his favor— zealous for his service and the smile 
of his face— faithful, trustful, meek. "Beloved, now 
are we the sons of God"; now we have these assurances 
of God's favors which will surely continue with 
us if we seek earnestly to follow the footsteps of our 
dear Redeemer— walking not after the flesh, but after 
the spirit. Let us, therefore, remember to purge 



ourselves of envy, malice, selfishness, including self-conceit; 
that we may be vessels unto honor and meet 
for our Master's service. 

R2881 : page 301 

PASS UNDER THE ROD. 



You said to your heart on life's golden morning: 

"How bright is the sky and how happy the hours!" 
The rich blood of youth through your pulses was throbbing, 

The path at your feet was all radiant with flowers; 
And life's golden chalice that brimmed with joy's wine, 

Sparkled bright in the sunshine most temptingly sweet; 
You raised it to quaff with delight from its depths, 

But it fell! and its fragments lay strewn at your feet. 

Its red wine was spilled and it stained all the flowers, 

Like blood drops that ooze from a bosom of snow; 
And the sun that so brightly had shone o'er thy pathway 

Seemed suddenly robbed of its brightness and glow. 
And night's gloomy shades seemed to gather about thee, 

And through the deep shadows, the dark form of Pain 
Loomed up, and his gaunt fingers clutched at thy heart-strings 

And laid their cold grasp on thy shivering brain. 

Ah, then did despair like the billows of ocean 

Sweep over thy soul, oh, poor heart, sore distressed? 
Did you cry out in anguish with tears and with sobbing, 

With quivering hands o'er thy bleeding heart pressed? 
Ah, yes, and the days dragged so weary along 

Till they grew into months and at last into years,— 
Till you learned to look up to the Father above, 

And at last see the rainbow of hope through your tears. 

And you learned that the truest and best of life's lessons 

Are gained through the travail and pain of the soul; 
That the rarest of graces bestowed on God's children 

Oft grow where life's billows tumultuously roll. 
And you saw that the stars in the blue vault of Heaven 

Shine only when night's sable curtains enfold; 
You learned that the fierce furnace heat of affliction 

Is needful to sever from dross the heart's gold. 

'Twas a wonderful lesson borne into thy spirit,— 

This grand truth to know, though a fruit of thy pain; 
It taught thee to soar where before thou hadst grovelled, 

And the heart that had broken learned a heavenly strain. 
O, thrice blessed sorrow that drives us to Jesus, 

To find in His love a continuous peace— 
A joy, that abides though all earthly hopes wither, 

And brings from the nights of despair full release. 

O, Heavenly Shepherd, how wise are Thy dealings— 



Thy thoughts— far beyond human wisdom to know; 
Thy rod and thy staff sure will guide and sustain us, 

Held close in Thy love while we tarry below. 
So we patiently wait while we bide in the shadows, 

Our eyes looking up through the gloom of the night, 
'Till the shadows shall lift, and the dawn of the morning 

Of Heaven's full glory shall burst on our sight. 
A. G. James. 



page 301 

WORDS OF CHEER AND ENCOURAGEMENT. 



Dear Brother Russell:— To my mind the Oakland 
convention is the best I ever attended, due perhaps 
in some degree to the fact that it was in the 
country, amid nature's surroundings, God's own handiwork, 
instead of being in a city; and again, due 
largely to the fact that it was at Bro. Weber's home. 
We have much to be thankful for to the family who 
did so well by us all, and to the Lord be the praise 
for his "goodness and mercy (which) shall follow us all 
the days of our life." I cannot find words to express 
my gratitude in having been privileged to assemble 
with those of like precious faith on this blessed occasion. 
One brother remarked to me, "Surely this 
is a foretaste of how it will be in the Millennial age,— 
such brotherly love everywhere manifest." Did ever a 
company of worldly people or even nominally Christ-professing 
people come together and mingle with 
each other as cordially and confidentially as if members 
of one household, leaving their valises and handbags 
open and their room doors unlocked? And did 
ever so many men, entire strangers to each other, 
sleep in one room on the floor and not tuck their valuables 
carefully away under their pillows? Why, such 
a thing was not thought of on this occasion, much 
less put into practice. Each brother recognized that 
in the other a change of heart had taken place— a 
heart that thinketh no evil, a heart that delights in 
giving rather than in receiving. 

Again, there was no going out after meals to 
indulge in "a quiet little smoke." No tobacco here 
in evidence at all, not an unkind word heard. Truly, 
this was brotherly love according to the Scripture 
presentation of what brotherhood should be. Everybody 
had a glad smile for everybody, each recognized 
the other as one of the family of God, a member of 
the body of Christ. Surely all attending this convention 
gained a good appreciation of how matters will 
be when all shall know the Lord from the least to 
the greatest, and when the knowledge of him shall 



cover the earth as the waters cover the mighty deep. 

I want to tender you a word of thanks for the part 

you took to make this an occasion ever to be remembered 

with joy. The Lord grant we may have more 

such joyful gatherings, and finally meet to part no 

more. Your brother in hope, 

J. A. Bohnet,— Washington. 



Charles T. Russell, 

Dear Sir and Brother:— A small package of tract 
matter is at hand, containing the views of "Bill Arp" 
(a personal friend of mine) on Millennial Dawn. They 
are being distributed, mostly in letters; I can use a lot 
of them. I am often tempted to write you, but the belief 
that your time is too valuable in the Lord's work 
to read personal letters deters me. The seed is being 
constantly sown hereabouts by the few dear 
brothers who have been blest with sight; but though 
interest is stirred up in a few, no genuine results have 
been thus far noted, yet we keep steadily at it. We 
think that things are ripening fast enough to satisfy 
the most impatient, and the daily papers in their reports 
of lawlessness confirm us. God's work and 
Word are marvelous in our eyes. 

Gratefully and sincerely yours, 

Robert Ranson,— Florida. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Your kind letter came to 
hand to-day, and my wife said when she read it, "That 
is like a pastoral visit." It has made her feel much 
better. Since we received a letter from our old (Lutheran) 
pastor, stating that the Book of Daniel is not 
a prophecy, but a kind of religious fiction, her faith has 
had a hard test; but we have gone to God's own 
Word and studied it out for ourselves, and now she 
says she has a firm foundation for her faith. And so 

page 302 

the way is growing brighter day by day, and it is the 
earnest prayer of our lives that we may be guided into 
such a knowledge of the truth as will lead us into 
that perfect childlike submission of ourselves and all 
we have and are,— that we may fight a good fight 
and finish our course, as did the grand apostle Paul. 

We have our little meetings regularly every Sunday 
at 3 p.m., only five, but the room always seems 
full, for we have one in our midst who is all in all. 
Oh! the blessedness of having our Elder Brother to 
guide and lead us by the power of his Holy spirit into 
all truth. How precious the dear Bible has grown! 
How as it possible for us to live so long in blindness? 



We can never thank you enough for your 
gracious teachings which led us to God's Word, and 
unfolded the beauty of it all to us. We pray daily that 
God will continue to use you, in his own way, to 
spread the truth. 

Trusting that we may be used in God's hands 
in the spread of his truth we remain, Yours in Christ, 
A. W. Goodrich and wife,— Pennsylvania. 



Watch Tower, Bible & Tract Society: 

I am very lonely here at present, having no 
friend in the truth thus far. I hope though to get 
some interested before a great while, although the 
majority of the people here in the north of Ireland 
are very "set" in their ways. 

I am still rejoicing in the truth and giving diligence 
to make my calling and election sure. 

The Watch Towers never were more appreciated 
than they are by me at present. They are all good 
and helpful in building me up in the faith and knowledge 
of the Lord. I am thankful I ever came under 
the influence and power inspired by the literature 
from the "Tower" office. I pray the Lord daily to 
continue to bless Bro. Russell and all his co-laborers 
as well as all those who have espoused the Truth in 
sincerity and godly reverence. 

With best wishes for spiritual prosperity in the 
harvest-field of this dispensation, I remain your 
brother in the one Hope, 

James Bright,— Ireland. 



My dear Brother Russell:— I have long purposed 
to write you a letter concerning my coming into the 
Truth, but something always came to hinder me when 
I thought of it. Some 6 or 7 years ago two colporteurs 
came to Greenwich to sell Millennial Dawn. A 
friend of mine had a conversation with them and 
learned something of their doctrine, and the Colporteurs 
asked him to allow them to have a meeting 
in his office (he is a dentist) on the next Sunday; but 
he being a good Methodist would not hear of such a 
thing. He told me of this, and I was rather displeased 
with him, because he did not grant permission 
and invite me to be present, so that I might tear 
their newfangled doctrine to pieces. I was just foolish 
enough to think that I could do that, but I did 
not get the opportunity. However, a night or two 
after I had the conversation with my friend, I met 
one of the Colporteurs in the postoffice and went for 
him rather roughly, but when I saw we were going 
to attract a crowd I desisted. 

I paid him for 3 vols, of Millennial Dawn and 



asked him to leave them in the office of my friend, 

which he did. He and his companion left for another 

town a day or two after, and I never have seen 

either of them since to my knowledge. At the first 

opportunity I got the books and began reading them 

for the purpose of condemning the teaching they contained, 

but had not read far before, to my astonishment, 

I was carried away with their Scriptural teaching, 

and found before I had the first volume half read 

that instead of condemning the teaching I was condemned 

myself and had such a blessing and uplift 

as I continued to read that but those who have had 

a like experience know how to appreciate. 

I was convinced that I was reading the truth, 
and that it was not in harmony with the doctrine of 
the church of which I was an official member. At 
that time I was a class-leader and Superintendent of 
the Sunday-school in the M.E. Church. I had received 
the very best of treatment in the church, and 
had a great many friends in it whom I esteemed highly. 
How I was ever going to cut away from them was 
a problem that gave me a great deal of anxious 
thought, but to remain where I was was impossible. 
Finally I made up my mind to go to my pastor and 
tell the whole thing; and ask him to drop my name 
from the church register. But he would not hear of 
such a thing: he told me I had a perfect right to hold 
any views I chose and persuaded me to remain in 
the church: After a while I got relieved from being 
superintendent of the Sunday-school and took my 
place in the Bible class, of which the pastor was 
teacher. In the course of the lessons we had some 
pretty warm discussions in a friendly way, and while 
in the class I got some of the members down on me. 

After a time the pastor decided to have a different 
class, and another teacher was appointed in his 
place. While the new teacher remained, I tried to 
avoid discussion as much as possible, but he left town 
after a few weeks, and the class was without a teacher. 
So they insisted that I should become the teacher. 
I demurred, but after some talk I consented on condition 
that I would teach what I believed to be the 
truth, to which they assented. I had the class for 
about a year and got along very well with it on the 
whole, considering that I did not hesitate to teach the 
truth, as I understood it in the lessons. Some, of 
course, were very much displeased, and did not come 
at all after I became teacher; others liked to hear the 
truth, but did not accept it. I am glad to say, a few did 
accept it. Things went along in this way till the pastor 
was changed and another took his place, who, to 
use his own words, was "determined to have a clean 
church if there was nothing left but the walls when 
he got through." The second Sunday he was here 
he fired a volley or two, but I thought it had come 
to him spontaneously, for he is somewhat of an 



orator, and I thought he was not long enough here 

to understand the state of affairs. I took my medicine 

feeling that I deserved to get it, and said very 

little until more shots were fired, and then I concluded 

that I, with some others, were the targets 

aimed at. 

As soon as I arrived at that conclusion, I determined 
to hand a withdrawal letter to the pastor. This 

page 303 

time I had my mind fully made up to be out of the 
M.E. Church, no matter what it cost. So when the 
pastor came to see me, I was prepared to take my 
stand, and I did it, and have never seen the day since 
when I was sorry for it. I have enjoyed more real 
spiritual life since than I ever did before; besides I 
have a more exalted idea of God than I ever could 
have, had I remained in the darkness and confusion 
of "orthodoxy." I am thankful to the Providence that 
ever put Millennial Dawn literature into my hands; 
and I hope to follow in its teaching as long as life 
here shall last. I will try to help the truth as long 
and as well as I can. 

Pardon me for taking so much of your valuable 
time. I thought it was in order to write this before 
leaving this country, for the sole purpose of 
showing how the Lord is using your efforts to bless 
many who are desirous of doing his will. I pray that 
Heaven's richest blessing may accompany your labor 
of love for the Master's cause till he calls you to receive 
the reward of well doing. I enclose a donation 
for the "Good Hopes" fund. 

Your brother in the faith once delivered to the 
saints. James Bright,— New York. 



Dear Brother:— I thank you for your kind 
words; be assured the "Tower" is a welcome visitor 
to me; enclosed find $1.00 for one year's 
subscription. 

Last Sunday the church people here were supplied 
with the pamphlet "Food for Thinking Christians," 
by some friends from Lynn, who stood near the 
churches and passed them to the people as they came 
out. Just about a year ago a Tower was handed 
to me as I came out of church, and what a change 
has been wrought in my thoughts since then! God 
helping me I shall remain in his hands to be taught 
and purified. Yours, 

John W. Goodwin,— Massachusetts. 



Dear Watch Tower Friends:— It is with pleasure 



I enclose the little I can spare for "Good Hopes"; I 
pray it may help to bring the good news to some hungry 
soul. Not a day passes that I do not think of you, 
and long to see your kind faces. Pray that I may be 
faithful even unto death. The more I read and study 
God's plans the more I love my Saviour, and I thank 
him all the time that I was found worthy to receive 
the true gospel. 
Yours in our blessed Lord and Redeemer, 
Mrs. O. F. Boyer,— Illinois. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I don't wish to worry 
you with a long letter, but must tell you that we now 
have a "Dawn Circle" of seven, and more are interested. 
On the fifth Sunday I spoke where a debate 
between "Christadelphians" and "Campbellites" had 
just closed. There were five preachers present to 
listen to "Ransom and Restitution," and some of 
them gave close attention;— "Bless the Lord, O my 
soul"! God will gather his sheep— precious thought! 

Bro. H. has the work started in Kerrville by 
making a special trip over there, and the Campbellite 
preacher, through the solicitation of some, has tendered 
me his day— fourth Sunday— and we anticipate 
a glorious time. 

All my Sundays are occupied, and I can't fill 
the calls that come, for I must attend to my office duties. 
I will preach long enough to get the people interested, 
and to give the "sheep" a chance to come 
into "green pastures," and then I may close that part 
of my work;— the "Dawns" are all any one needs. 

So far God has blessed my efforts; some are 
much interested, and a general Bible reading is going 
on in many homes. Some who have not entered 
the race for the prize say that what they have heard 
has blessed and helped them to live better lives. Pray 
for me. May God keep you to feed us! 
J. A. Currie,— Texas. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Although I have been 
interested in the Harvest Truth for nearly two years, 
I have never expressed my gratitude to you, the channel 
through whom this great blessing has reached me. 

I was first attracted to this message by my sister, 
Mrs. Lee,— whom we believe now to be with our 
Lord— and since her death I, too, have given all I 
have or hope for respecting earthly things for joint 
heirship in God's Kingdom. 

I do thank you for the helpful words and sound 
doctrines found in the columns of your journal. My 
prayer is for you to obtain grace, wisdom and 
strength to feed us unto the end of the Church's journey 



through the wilderness of sin. 

I have much faith in the prayer of a righteous 
man, therefor ask you to remember me at the Throne 
of Grace that our Father may guide my every step 
and make me faithful unto death. 

Enclosed please find my "Good Hopes" offering 
for this month. With Christian love I remain, 
Gratefully yours, 
K. M. Day,--California. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Allow me to thank you 
with all the earnestness of my heart that by the grace 
of God you were enabled to give us meat in due season. 
The Millennial Dawn series has been to me a 
well in the desert. I cannot tell the joy, the blessing, 
the light and the strength it has been to me, a 
poor, hungry, struggling soul; and I am just as if I 
had not got through rubbing my eyes in wonder yet. 
It was in March Brother Bright put the books into 
my hands. For quite a while before that I had been 
perplexed and troubled because I felt I did not understand 
the Word. I have been praying to God to 
help me; to give me just the right light; and that He 
would make me ready when He came. My prayer 
was answered, far above what I could ever have 
asked or thought. My Lord is now,— "More dear, 
more intimately nigh, than e'en the sweetest earthly 
tie." It is far easier, now, to walk in the "narrow 
way." Dear brother, do not forget to pray for me 
that I may be kept faithful; it is such blessed thought 
that God does not judge us according to our weakness, 
but according to our spirit and mind. 

May God abundantly bless you in your work for 
our King. 

Mrs. Bessie Keyes,— New York. 



page 305 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. OCTOBER 1, 1901. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 

Views From the Watch Tower 307 

The Jews and their Prospects 308 

Hatred Against Jews in Gt. Britain 309 

To Abolish Prayer Meetings 310 

The Costly Pearl 310 

Cleveland Convention Echoes 31 1 

The Impending Industrial Crisis 31 1 

Momentous Project of Men Arming 312 

In the School of Adversity 313 

"For God was with Him" 315 

Words of Cheer and Encouragement 318 

Motto Cards for Home Embellishment 306 

page 306 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MOTTO CARDS FOR HOME EMBELLISHMENT. 



For several years we have realized the blessing accruing 
to the Christian home from a liberal supply of Scripture Text 
Cards and mottoes displayed upon its walls— as reminders of 
faith and patience and love and perseverance in the narrow 



way of life. They should greet the eye in the parlor, dining-room 
and bed-room as Holy Spirit messages. 

We have supplied these to the friends practically at cost 
for several years— from time to time reducing the price as our 
purchase of larger quantities enabled us to secure lower prices 
from the publishers. Very generally our supply has been short 
of the demand, so this year we have ordered early and in large 
quantities from the London publishers and have secured prices 
which will permit us to supply our subscribers below American 
wholesale rates. 

These are mostly printed in silver on dark red and green 
glossy cards with cord hangers; but some are on light cards 
embellished in choice colorings and designs. The majority of 
course are such as are usual and never grow old; but each season 
adds a few new and choice ones and these we have up to 
date. In ordering state if you have had any of our $1.00 packages 
and how many. Then we can know about what assortment 
you already have, and can pretty surely supply you such as 
you have never yet had. 

This year we will put up $1.00 packages such as ordinarily 
would amount to $2.00 purchased elsewhere: and we will prepay 
postage. We aim to do all in our power for the spiritual 
strengthening and encouragement of the Lord's flock. These 
prices are open to all. 



R2881 : page 307 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



ECCLESIASTICAL FEDERATION. 



THE EVIDENCES looking toward a federation 

of the various Christian sects are multiplying; 

—city federations, county federations, and state federations 

are announced from time to time in 

the daily press, and thus the way is being prepared, 

the idea is being hatched. In England the movement 

seems fully as far advanced as here; there the Church 

of England is the preponderating power, and, as the 

Scriptures indicate, will have much to do with effecting 

the union whenever it comes. 

The Protestant Episcopal Church has always 
held aloof from other Protestant bodies; claiming (as 
do the Catholics) that there can be no true and authorized 
ministers competent and authorized to 
preach the Gospel without Episcopal ordination;— that 
all others are fraudulent pretenders. They are willing 
to fellowship as "clergymen" any Protestant ministers 
of good character who will submit to re-ordination 
at the hands of an Episcopal bishop, but no 



others. 

In the light of these facts the following cablegram 
will be read with interest:— 

"WAITS ON ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY." 

ENGLISH ARCHBISHOP HESITATES IN SENDING 
DELEGATES. 

"London, August 29.— Will the Archbishop of 
Canterbury, officially or otherwise, send a representative 
to the Ecumenical Methodist conference which 
opens Wednesday? This question, according to 
Bishop J. W. Hartzell, is attracting the attention of 

R2882 : page 307 

many of the delegates who are in London to attend 
this most important church meeting. 

"The question is important," said the bishop, "because 
of the meaning which the outside world will 
place on the archbishop of Canterbury's action. Invitations 
were extended to all the churches to attend. 
Acceptances have been received from the Baptists, 
Congregationalists, Presbyterians and the Salvation 
Army. The primate of all England, alone, has not 
been heard from. We anticipate that the conference 
will have an important bearing upon the future growth 
of the church. It ought to tend to increase fraternity, 
dissipate the remnants of antagonism and organize 
into unions the smaller bodies of the different 
continents. The aggressive propagation of Methodism 
will be carefully considered by the gathering." 

The conference will sit for 12 days, and Bishop 
C. M. Galloway will preach the opening sermon. 
The American and Canadian delegates, who are here 
to attend the conference, number 300, while the English 
delegates number 200. Chile, Brazil and Mexico 
are represented in the conference for the first time. 

On September 5th, the Archbishop of Canterbury 
replied to the invitation to the effect that he 
hoped soon to see all Methodists united to the Episcopal 
Church. The Conference refused to take any 
notice of the reply, or even to permit it to be read in 
conference; the reason assigned being that the Archbishop 
had ignored the Council in toto, in that he addressed 
his reply not to it, but to a newspaper editor. 
No doubt this was intentional— the Archbishop's position 
is such that to address the Council would be to 
recognize Methodism as "branch" of the Church of 
Christ, a thing which Episcopalianism has never yet 
done officially. However, this may raise a point to notice 
the settlement of which will solve the federation 
problem. 



SCIENTISTS DUPED BY CLEVER TRICK PLAYED YEARS AGO. 



MYSTERY OF FAMOUS PLIOCENE SKULL CLEARED BY 
PREACHER'S CONFESSION-BURIED AS A HOAX. 

Los Angeles, CaL, Aug. l.-The Rev. W. H. 
Dyer, an Episcopal clergyman of this city has confessed 
that the celebrated mystery of the human skull 
found in a gold mine in Calaveras County, CaL, in 
1866, about which antiquarians have wrangled for 35 
years and which inspired Bret Harte's poem, "To 

R2882 : page 308 

the Pliocene Skull," was buried as a joke to puzzle 
the men of science. Dyer says he was one of a 
coterie of jokers who knew of the scheme and who 
were greatly astonished at the noise it made in the 
scientific world. According to the story, R. C. Scribner, 
who kept a store in the camp, now Los Angeles, 
got an old Indian skull, went to the bottom of the 
shaft while the miners were away and buried the skull 
deep in the auriferous gravel. It was soon found and 
he assisted in having it sent on East to be submitted 
to geologists and authorities on the birth of the human 
species. 

The result of the examination of the skull at 
Harvard University caused a great stir in the scientific 
world. The problem it presented was taken up 
by the Government, through the geological survey, 
and all the scientific publications gave columns of 
space to the speculations of the scholars. 

Bret Harte declined to regard the discovery as a 
serious matter, and wrote the famous poem ridiculing 
the craze it had caused. 

Scientists deserve our pity if not our sympathy. 
They have established scores of theories relative to 
the formation of the earth and of man upon it; and 
of course reject totally the Bible account of the creation 
of Adam in God's image six thousand years ago. 
They are on another track; they will read only the 
rocks, etc., and from them will get the truth. And 
they will accept as truth only such things as agree 
with their preconceived opinion, viz., that God did 
not create man in his own image— that he was evolved 
from a monkey by a "law of nature" which operates 
whether there is a Creator or overseer or not; 
and they greatly doubt if there is a personal God, and 
of course there could not be an impersonal one. 

God's people need continually to remember the 
Bible's testimony, that although all the upward tendencies 
operating in the world to-day are of God and 
through more or less godly channels, yet "The world 



by wisdom knows not God." "The ox knoweth his 
owner, and the ass her master's crib,"— but the natural 
man, if a "scientist," seems to know not his 
Creator. His self-confidence hinders his seeing 
the truth. Only "the meek will he guide in judgment 
and teach his way"— "the wise are taken [entrapped] 
in their own craftiness"— they are too wise to learn, 
too great to be "taught of God" through his word. 
Psa. 25:9; 1 Cor. 3:19. 

The finding of an old bone some time ago created 
quite a stir. It was surely a proof of pre-adamite 
man— so gullible do scientists become in their search 
for the proofs to contradict the Bible. Of course a 
scientist with keen imagination could allow for certain 
abrasions and erosions, and could proceed to 
make an entire anatomy to conjecturally fit with the 
wonderful bone. The matter was quickly dropped 
afterward when the explanation came that it was 
found in a long abandoned wooden sewer leading 
from a butcher's place, and that it was the bone of an 
old sheep. 

Likewise the finding of the skull above referred to 
was "wonderful!" Its owner must have lived thousands, 
if not millions of years before Adam's day; and 
this skull found embedded in the gravel of the Pliocene 
division of the Tertiary Period was absolute proof 
sufficient to tickle scientists. Surely if these great 
men could and would search as diligently and reason 
as astutely to uphold and corroborate the Bible's simple 
statements, they would be taught of God. 

But their school will open by and by— during the 
Millennial reign of Christ and the church, who will be 
their instructors. Mark the great teacher's words: 
"I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, 
that thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even 
so Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight." Let 
us, as the Apostle urges, "humble ourselves under the 
mighty hand of God that he may exalt us in due 
time. "-Luke 10:21; 1 Pet. 5:6. 

THE JEWS AND THEIR PROSPECTS. 



Mr. Zangwill, a Jewish writer of note, forecasts 
the future of fleshly Israel in considerable harmony 
with the prophetic delineation; but he fails utterly to 
recognize the divine power which, operating in and 
with Messiah's Kingdom, shall take hold of "Jacob" 
and lift up that people and use them as beacon-lights 
for the world. "Thus all Israel shall be delivered 
[from blindness], as it is written: There shall come 
out of Zion the Deliverer [the Christ— Jesus the head 
and the church his body] and shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob. For this is my covenant unto 



them when I shall take away their sins. ...For 
God hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he 
might have mercy upon all."— Rom. 11:26-32. 

Mr. Zangwill says in part:— 

"I am not a prophet with a definite vision of the 
future of the Jews. No man can forecast the precise 
directions their activity will take in the twentieth century. 
I can only point out what the position of the 
Jews has been for the last nineteen centuries and 
some powerful forces which have just arisen and 
which will undoubtedly mold them during the present 
century. 

"One thing seems increasingly probable— that 
the Jews will return in increasing numbers to Palestine, 
their old and never-forgotten home. By the year 
2000 A.D. I don't see why there shouldn't be 2,000,000 
Jews inhabiting the land, transforming it into a 
garden of beauty and fertility and supplying it with 
harbors and railways, with a government of their 
own, which will be the model government of the 
world. I am firmly convinced that the mission of 
the Jews is this: To be a people set on a hill— Zion's 
Hill— whose social, political, agricultural and religious 
condition will be the moral beacon light of the 
world. From the laws of that community other nations 
will learn to govern wisely. From her social 
condition other nations will learn the science of sociology. 
From her spiritual supremacy other nations 
will learn the real meaning of religion. In 
short, I believe the hope of humanity lies in the development 
of the Jewish race after its return to 
Palestine. 

"From the time of Christ until about this generation 
the outside world knew practically nothing of 
the life and work of the Jews. For long centuries the 
Jew was persecuted by Christian and Pagan in every 
country, and this very fact led to the preservation of 

R2883 : page 309 

his individuality. Frowned upon everywhere, the 
Jews grew closer to one another, intermarried among 
themselves, and had comparatively little intercourse 
with the outside world. And this was their salvation. 
"Recently, however, the absolute freedom granted 
them in almost all civilized countries has tended to 
destroy their identity as a race. They are no longer 
bound to one another by the strongest ties in the 
world— those of persecution— but have mingled with 
the general community, and the Jew is to-day seeking 
his own interests, financial or social, largely forgetful 
of his fellow Jews. The common idea that all 
Jews work unselfishly for each other is no longer 
true. They have imbibed the paganism of your so-called 
Christian nations, and every man is trying to 
get the better of the other. Five years ago this condition 



was absolutely alarming. It appeared as 
though the Jewish race would shortly become merged 
with other races and disappear altogether, after its 
wonderful preservation during 3,000 years. 

"My hopes for the race lie largely in the Zionist 
movement, whether in its direct or indirect effects. 
Under the enthusiastic guidance of Dr. Herzl, it is 
making steady progress. Its first object is to raise 
sufficient money to obtain the Land of Palestine from 
the Sultan, under whose suzerainty the movement 
would be carried out. Already about a million dollars 
has been contributed to this fund, and every city 
and almost every village in the world has its band of 
enthusiastic Zionists. 

"This money has not been contributed by the 
rich Jews generally, but by the poorer classes of Jews. 
The rich take little interest in the scheme. They are 
often men who have the bent for mere money-making 
and have largely lost their patriotism. They stand 
at the top of the social ladder in the world's chief centers 
of activity; their position is secure; they have 
nothing to gain by reclaiming Palestine, and seem to 
care little for the plan. This, however, does not in 
the least dampen the enthusiasm of the ardent Zionists. 
Money is fast coming in from every quarter of 
the globe, and it is believed that in a few years there 
will be a sufficient sum to accomplish our desires. 
Then, having gained possession of the land, we should 
not be so foolish as to rush great numbers of uneducated, 
unskilled Jews into the country, but would use 
Jewish shrewdness in sending skilled agriculturists, 
carpenters, merchants and men and women generally 
who, under the guidance of practical idealists, would 
form a sound basis of the model community that is to 
be. 

"Finally, I think the world is daily coming round 
to the Jewish conception of life. Christianity has 
proved a failure. Look at the Christian nations to-day 
warring against one another like savages. What 
a spectacle is presented by the allied armies in China! 
The battle of the future is between the old Judaism 
and the new paganism. A sense of justice is what 
the world needs to-day— such justice as was preached 
and foretold by the great Jewish prophets; and I believe 
it will be left to the Jewish race— whether as a 
model community in Palestine or as a spiritual army 
scattered over the world— to supply this need and to 
make justice supreme in the hearts of men." 

HATRED AGAINST THE JEWS IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



In every nation of Europe except Great Britain 
the Jews have suffered persecution, and labor under 
more or less restriction of privileges. As we have already 



pointed out from the Scriptures, fleshly Israel 
is to suffer yet more— "the time of Jacob's trouble" 
is to last up to the very close of the "day of 
vengeance" when they shall be delivered by the setting 
up of the Kingdom. This persecution, we believe, 
will extend to all nations— our own included— 
and will tend to still further cause the Jews to long 
for the Land of Promise and the good things foretold 
for them under Messiah's Kingdom. We quote 
a cablegram as follows:— 

"London.— Anti-semitism is on the verge of 
open and widespread outbreak in England, according 
to Isaac Suwalsky, editor of 'The Jew,' an influential 
East End Yiddish newspaper. He asserts that daily 
attacks are made on poor Jews in the streets of the 
Whitechapel district, and that symptoms of hatred 
toward the Jews exist even among the highest political 
and social classes in the kingdom. 

"He says that unless this feeling is promptly and 
forcibly bridled Judaism in Great Britain is threatened 
with persecution outrivaling anything in Russia, 
France, Austria or Germany. 

RACIAL PREJUDICE PLAIN. 

"The symptoms to which the editor refers have 
become alarmingly common in the London Ghetto. 
During the last three months the Whitechapel police 
courts have been regularly called upon to punish 
persons for assaults on Jewish peddlers and householders. 
Several 'Jew hunts' have lately occurred 
on the highways in this district. Testimony in most 
of the cases proved that racial prejudice was the sole 
cause of attack, the victims being industrious, law-abiding 
residents, frequently inoffensive youths. 

"When the outbreaks fail to take the form of injury 
or robbery the persecution assumes a terrorizing 
character. The policemen who guard the crossings 
are kept busy rebuking truck drivers and 'busmen 
guilty of hounding Jews with brutal taunts and of 
making deliberate attempts to run them down. 

BOTH PARTIES ACCUSED. 

"Anti-semitism is aggressively intrenched in the 
United Kingdom. It reaches from the slums to the 
Whitechapel office of the prime minister. Both political 
parties are deliberately pledged to it. The conservatives 
espouse it under the guise of immigration 
reform. The liberals employ it when they persistently 
and venomously charge that the Boer war is being 
waged at the behest of Hebrew capitalists. Jewish 
candidates belonging to both political parties in all 
parts of London were fought throughout the late 
general election by means of placards petitioning the 
people, 'Don't elect a Jew.' 



'"When anti-semitism gains full momentum in 
England there will be sad hours for the Jews in this 
country, where liberty of action and speech are so 
pronounced that the passions of the populace can 
only be controlled with difficulty. 

R2883 : page 310 

SENTIMENT OF RICH AND POOR. 



"There is at present more hatred of Jews in the 
West End of London than in the East End. The 
roughs of Whitechapel are Jew baiters for amusement. 
The cultured people of Downing street and 
Park Lane are anti-semites by conviction. 

'"Down here the Jews are suffering from the 
country's excessive patriotism. Because most of us 
wear beards we are called 'Kruger' by the Hooligans 
of the neighborhood. I am ashamed to confess that 
some highly placed personages of our own faith are 
largely responsible for the coming crusade. They 
are so wrapped up in the pursuit of titles that they 
have little time for and less interest in the amelioration 
of the condition of their pauperized brethren in 
the East End. 

'"There has as yet been no bloodshed in Whitechapel 
on account of the race animosities inspired at 
present by distinguished supporters. However, anti-semitism 
in London may soon reach that stage.'" 

TO ABOLISH PRAYER MEETINGS. 



The pastors of the Christian churches of Kansas 
City, at a meeting recently, adopted a resolution, 
declaring it to be their sense that the mid-week prayer 
meeting, as it is conducted in a majority of Protestant 
churches, has outlived its usefulness, and appointed a 
committee to prepare and report a program for such 
meetings which shall be more modern in its character 
and better calculated to meet the needs of present day 
church people. 

Dr. George H. Combs, pastor of the Prospect 
Avenue Christian Church, who brought the subject 
up, and at whose suggestion the committee was appointed, 
declared that he thought the age had outgrown 
the old-fashioned prayer meeting. He said: 
"The prayer meeting was perfectly adapted to the 
needs of the time which brought it into existence, but 
that time has long been past. The best men's lives 
have now become so full of other things that they 
cannot be induced to come out and spend an evening 
in prayer." 



No minister who took part in the discussion that 
followed this somewhat advanced statement dissented 
from any part of it. The remarks of each indicated 
that he had only been waiting for an opportune moment 
to so express himself. 

The above is a significant sign of the times. The 
Christian that neglects prayer cannot live the 
Christian life— cannot "walk as He walked"— the narrow 
way to glory, honor, and immortality. And 
congregations composed of praying people could 
neither desire nor afford to abandon prayer meetings, 
which perhaps more than any other kind of meetings 
have been blessed of God to the keeping alive of the 
spiritual few among the cold and dead nominal professors 
of Babylon for lo these many years. 

Yet it is a good movement— it will work out 
blessings for those who really love the Lord; for it 
will open their eyes to the deadness of Babylon and 
lead them to give closer ear to the Lord's message, 
"Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins and receive not of her plagues"— soon to 
come in a great time of trouble.— Rev. 18:4. 

On the contrary we urge that amongst those 
who read this journal and are interested in the harvest 
message, prayer and testimony be given an increasingly 
prominent place— such as it held in the 
primitive church. The injunction to watch and pray 
lest ye enter into temptation, is applicable to each individual 
Christian, but specially applicable to them as 
a company, as a church, as we are entering the hour 
of temptation that shall test all that dwell upon the 
whole earth.— Rev. 3:10. 

The Allegheny church has six such meetings 
every Wednesday evening in the homes of the friends 
in different parts; and it is specially noticeable that 
those who love and attend these meetings, while probably 
no less tempted and tried than others, are much 

R2884: page 310 

less likely to fall into the snares of the Adversary than 
those who neglect them. Usually at least four prayers 
are offered and most of the time devoted to hearing 
testimonies respecting the Lord's providences 
and their experiences during the week (up to date 
testimonies) especially along the lines of the previous 
Sunday afternoon's discourse at Bible House chapel. 
These are so profitable that we wish all might enjoy 
them. They are open to all, but though none are 
urged, nearly all take part and thus both give and receive 
a blessing. 

Recently we have adopted the plan of having one 
meeting each month devoted almost exclusively to 
prayer and praise— voluntary prayers being called for 
by the leader, two at a time, until all present have had 
full opportunity to address the throne of grace— interspersed 



with praise, and with opportunity for two 

or three short testimonies in the middle of the meeting. 

The results are excellent. Whoever addresses 

the Lord from a sincere heart is sure to have a 

blessing. 

Brethren, let us watch and pray, in the congregations 
of the saints and in private, more zealously 
than ever, as we approach the dark hour of earth's 
great trial. No other ground is safe. This has the Master's 
approval and example. 



R2890 : page 310 

THE COSTLY PEARL. 



The pearl of greatest price I sought. 

Alas! I sought, but found it not. 

The hours of work and sleep were wasted, 
The fruits of pleasure passed untasted, 
And still with eager zeal I hasted, 

The charms of fortune to entice 

With some new gift or sacrifice. 

Until, one sad, discouraged day, 
A spirit, meek and quiet, lay 

Upon my brow a hand restraining, 
It smoothed away my lips complaining, 
Upon my brow a hand restraining; 
And while I joyed in perfect rest, 
I held the gem, of all the best. 

R. B. Henninges. 



R2884: page 311 

CLEVELAND CONVENTION ECHOES. 



EVEN AT the risk of seeming repetition we must 
say that this last General Convention quite 
surpassed all of its predecessors;— in numbers, interest 
and enthusiasm. 

About 500 WATCH TOWER readers met, many for 
the first time, and the feast of soul was delightful. 
Nine of the "Pilgrim" brethren were present and, with 
the Editor of this journal, delivered most of the fifteen 
addresses, to most attentive hearers. The Convention 
was in constant session from 8 A.M. to 10 P.M., except 
intermissions for refreshments, from Thursday 
noon, Sept. 12, to Sunday night, Sept. 15. It closed 



with a love-feast at which seven Pilgrims and five brethren 
representing the Cleveland church in one hand presented 
a broken loaf, shared symbolically, while with 
the other they received and gave parting greetings as 
the congregation filed past them. 

It was good to be there. Those present will probably 
never forget its spiritual joys and uplifts. The 
principal attendance was at the Sunday afternoon session, 
when some one who counted reported 823 in attendance. 
The next largest attendance was on Saturday 
at 3 P.M., when after a discourse on baptism— its 
proper form and real significance— twenty-five brethren 
and forty-one sisters (total 66) symbolized full consecration 
by water immersion;— the ages of the participants 
ranging from 22 to 70 years. The occasion 
was a deeply impressive one, both to participants and 
witnesses. 

Those in attendance came from every quarter;— 
from Nova Scotia, Ontario and Montana on the north, 
to Florida, Tennessee and Arkansas on the south, and 
especially from the intermediate States— about sixteen 
in all being represented. 

A colporteurs' meeting showed 23 in attendance, 
while about 30 new ones expressed the intention of 
giving all, or a portion of their time hereafter to colporteuring, 
and took lessons from expert brethren and 
sisters in an ante-room. This is one of the features 
of this harvest work which the Lord has been pleased 
to specially bless in leading his people out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. The meeting indicated a 
renewed zeal along this line of the service. Others 
may be contemplating such service and we invite correspondence 
respecting methods and territory; say 
what territory you would prefer. 

Our hope is that the considerable expense entailed 
by such conventions (railway fare, etc.) will 
be more than compensated for in the spiritual blessings 
which will surely go with those in attendance to their 
neighborhoods, and especially to the various smaller 
congregations of the saints. May the Lord add his 
blessing to the efforts put forth by the Cleveland 
Church and by all in attendance. 



R2884: page 311 

THE IMPENDING INDUSTRIAL CRISIS. 



JOHN SWINTON, widely known as a writer upon 
labor conditions and prospects, sums up his recent 
cogitations in an article in the New York Herald. 
We make some quotations that will be of interest to 
all who have read Millennial Dawn Vol. IV. He says, 



under the above caption:— 

"We may have stormy times in our country before 
the twentieth century has gone far. We may 
see some apocalyptic illustrations of the workings 
of that industrial Revolution which is now transforming 
our body politic into "something new and 
strange" and which is bringing about organic changes 
in our Republic, our Commonwealth, and our social 
system, by means both visible and invisible, 
through agencies containing the 'promise and potency' 
of a kind of development not to be foreseen. We 
may yet see that gigantic modern power called Capital 
and those immeasurable latter day forces 
grouped under the name of Labor engaged in performances 
of large interest and concern to the American 
people. 

"Already there are signs and omens not to be 
disregarded, and more of them are coming in sight 
all the time, as we whirl along. 

"There are other things than the great labor revolts 
of our time, so numerous, so continuous, so disquieting 
and so portentous, which prompt me to 
write these words. 

"Those of the readers of the Herald who can recall 
the years that immediately preceded the election 
of Mr. Lincoln will be able here to make comparisons 
of a suggestive character. They do not 
need to be told in how far the passions, the contentions 
and the menaces of that portentous period resemble 
those that have come into existence of late 
years through the discord between the great wielders 
of capital and the millions of workers for wages, and 
through the ceaseless strain of both parties in the 
strenuous struggle. As forty years ago each party 
declared that it would 'never submit or yield,' so now 
again the defiant words are heard in the contentious 
camps. 

"But I shall refrain from further suggestions in 
this line, as I recall the passions and the events that 
stirred our country forty or more years ago and that 
led up to the other years, never to be forgotten. Let 
warning be taken while yet it may. And let it be 
said of the present writer in days to come that he was 
an 'alarmist' at the opening of the twentieth century, 
as was another man in the year 1859, when he 
wrote 'The Impending Crisis,' a crisis for slavery 
which came so unexpectedly in less than two years 
after Mr. Helper's book was printed. 

"The magnitude of the labor revolts that have 
broken out within a year has never been paralleled 
in any other time or country. I need not speak of 
those of the many building trades, the coal miners, 
the machinists, the San Francisco unions, the factory 
hands, the clothiers, the steel workers, or a hundred 
lesser industries. By the estimate of an expert, 
who has kept count as nearly as possible, it would 



seem that not far from a million wage workers have 
'gone on strike' during the last twelve-month; and 

R2884: page 312 

this, of course, signifies that a much greater number 
of other people have been disturbed or have suffered 
in consequence. 

"No wonder that a foreign writer, in reviewing 
the situation, gives his essay such a headline as 'The 
Industrial Anarchy in the United States.' The importance, 
the gravity, the passionateness and the significance 
of some of the strikes have been very great. 
They have affected business, trade, Wall street, the 
markets, politics, and the daily life and welfare of 
large masses of our people. They have brought 
heavy losses to many of the parties concerned in 
them; they have rent many schemes and crippled 
many enterprises; they have caused bankruptcies; 
they have been the source of woes unnumbered; they 
have wrecked lives and broken hearts; have sent 
men and women to the poorhouse, the madhouse 
and the graveyard.... 

"Notwithstanding the magnitude and the multitude 
of the convulsing strikes, it is altogether likely 
that they will become yet greater, more numerous 
and more convulsing as the industrial and financial 
powers advance in their development. The forces 
now in operation by which they are promoted are 
very sure to increase in strength and momentum as 
time goes on. A generation ago but a few hundred 
men used to take part in a strike; some time afterward 
thousands of men would go out on strike; nowadays 
hundreds of thousands of men join in a strike, 
and, moreover, a score of different trades in as many 
States sometimes 'back up' one trade during a strike, 
while the great body of organized workers sympathize 
with the strikers, even if they do not always 
enter into a 'sympathetic strike.' Looking at the 

R2885 : page 312 

growth of labor unionism everywhere, and in nearly 

all industries, it is not difficult to make forecasts, applicable 

to the years that are not far off. 

"The domination of unlicensed capitalism and 
the existence of labor unionism are at stake in these 
contests. 

"It is to be remarked here that the many and 
great strikes of recent times have been almost wholly 
free from violence or riotous conduct on the part of 
the workmen, though the militia have sometimes 
been called out in the name of the law, as at Buffalo 
and Troy. The strikes may be properly characterized 
as 'peaceful revolts.' Passion has run high in 
some cases at times, but self-restraint has kept it 



within safe bounds. Every organization, when its 

members go on strike, always declares that its desire 

is to secure success in a peaceful and orderly 

manner; and there can be no doubt that this desire 

is sincere, for its sincerity has been made manifest 

by circumstances beyond enumeration. Any suggestion 

of offering resistance to law is sure to be denounced, 

as are any unlawful means of gaining an 

object. Were this otherwise the formidable labor revolts 

of our day would be a terror indeed. 

MOMENTOUS PROJECT OF MEN ARMING. 

"A short time ago, however, when the great 
strike of the steel workers got under headway, the 
Herald startled the country by printing a despatch 
from West Virginia that the first military company 
ever formed by a labor union had been organized at 
Wheeling by Crescent Lodge, Amalgamated Association. 
Here, at last, it looked as if there were occasion 
for both alarm and amazement. One seemed 
to catch sight of armed and uniformed hordes of steel 
workers in full array, stalwart men, twice a hundred 
thousand of them, three times stronger than the regular 
army of the United States. It is true that the 
report, after telling that the labor soldiers were 'not 
to be in any way under the control of the State,' said 
that they were organized only for self-defence and the 
protection of property; but that could hardly be regarded 
as consoling by those people who hold their 
property under the protection of the State which the 
Amalgamated Military Company had refused to recognize. 
There seemed to be something like amalgamated 
humor in the Crescent report from Wheeling. 
But soon after the appearance of the first despatch 
the Herald printed another, which gave the 
information that, on account of the excitement created 
by the first report, Crescent Lodge had resolved 
to postpone the organization of the military company 
till the steel strike was ended. 

"The interest in the original report, however, 
has not been diminished, for it is now known that the 
Crescent Lodge, at Wheeling, is not the only one 
that has taken the subject under consideration, and 
that other labor organizations in different parts of 
the country have done likewise. They claim that the 
'right of the people to keep and bear arms' is guaranteed 
by the constitution, and that, as the working-men 
are the 'bone and sinew of the country,' the constitutional 
right cannot be denied to them. 

"It would be foolishness to ignore such things, 
since the publication of the startling Wheeling despatch 
in the Herald. The news, however, does not 
convey a menace to any man's rights. It is quite 
undisturbing; not at all dangerous in a democratic 
republic. 



"The members of workingmen's organizations 
are often trained and disciplined to some extent, after 
the manner of the militia, as may be seen on Labor 
Day. They drill for their parades; they are proud 
of their appearance on the march; they follow their 
flags; they pay honor to the union that makes the 
best show, and they are also to have experience in 
athletic exercises. 

"At this point it may be mentioned that a good 
number of trade unions, especially of those in the 
Western States, have recently prohibited their members 
from joining the regular State militia, under pain 
of expulsion, and the reason given for this action is 
that the State troops are used 'in the interest of capitalism,' 
against the labor element, and in the suppression 
of justifiable strikes. It is a fact, nevertheless, 
that, at least in Pennsylvania and Illinois, the 
State militia have, on several occasions, suffered from 
the charge of being unduly sympathetic with labor 
in the case of a strike.... 

"Before closing my remarks, I would make note 
of one thing that undoubtedly has an influence in 
disturbing the mind of the commonalty in these 
times. I refer to the oft repeated public reports of 

R2885 : page 313 

the stupendous incomes of certain great trusts, flamboyant 

millionaires, banking institutions, big corporations, 

stock speculators, market riggers and indescribables. 

To go no further back than the current 

month, we have had in August such figures of the 

dividends of the Standard Oil Company, and the revenues 

of the billion dollar Steel Trust, and the 'earnings' 

of at least one of our banks, and the incomes 

of some of our heavy investors or operators; such 

figures, I repeat, as might well 'make humanity stagger' 

and cause Croesus to take to the woods. 

"To the ordinary mind, these reports, even when 
trustworthy or official, are inexplicable, incomprehensible 
and bewildering. Never before, in all time, 
did the golden stream, the millions and the billions, 
roll so rapidly as now, rolling into treasuries so vast 
that they could not be compassed in a day's march by 
all the labor unions in America. The ordinary mind 
is apt to become excited in reading about them every 
day, and to ask why it is necessary to cut down anybody's 
wages, even if he gets two or three dollars a 
day, and joins a union to keep them up. 

"The news of the latest dividend of the billion 
dollar Trust was printed simultaneously with other 
news of strikes, more strikes, and yet other strikes. 
Can any one be surprised that even thoughtless people 
are led to indulge in thinking? 

"I am asked to make a guess as to the outcome 
of all these big passionate and ominous labor revolts, 



which are constantly growing in magnitude, momentum 

and force. I can't do it. I cannot see how they 

are to be prevented or put down without a change of 

circumstances so great as to be unthinkable, or without 

a change in bodies of men who are beyond reason, 

or without some kind of change in the relation 

between capital and labor. It is possible that there 

may be something in the theory of 'spontaneous generation,' 

and that it will work out all right in the end, 

regardless of the lesser movements of either of the 

belligerents. I can't tell, nor can Mr. Morgan. It 

would certainly be bad business to use the regular 

army or the State militia against masses of men striking 

for life. It would certainly be poor policy to carry 

'government by injunction' further than it can be 

enforced. It is surely folly to abuse and threaten organized 

labor in the interest of organized capital at 

periods of storm and stress consequent upon an industrial 

and social transformation, when our country 

is passing out of the old into the new and the 

unknown." 



R2885 : page 313 

IN THE SCHOOL OF ADVERSITY. 

--GEN. 39:20-40: 15.-OCT. 13.- 

"For God was with Joseph, and showed him mercy." 

AS THE FAVORED child of his beloved wife, 

Rachel, Joseph was no doubt esteemed by his 

father as the special inheritor of the Abrahamic 

promises. He remembered his own experiences, 

and how the divine favor had come to him, making 

him an heir of that promise; and doubtless he had, to 

a greater or less extent, communicated these hopes 

and promises to all of his sons, and especially to Joseph, 

his favored one. Joseph's dreams, which so angered 

his brethren, must have appealed to him and to 

his father as rather an intimation on God's part of his 

pre-eminence. It must therefore have caused great 

disappointment and chagrin to Joseph, first to find 

himself in the pit, and his strong cryings and tears unheard 

both by his brethren and the Lord. It must 

have been a source of bitter disappointment and chagrin 

when he found himself sold to the Ishmaelites, 

to be a slave. But however disappointing these circumstances 

we can see that they were profitable experiences, 

tending to develop in him a proper character, 

if rightly accepted— to develop patience, obedience, 

trust. 

There are good lessons in Joseph's experiences 
for all who are hoping to be heirs of the spiritual features 



of this same Abrahamic covenant,— joint-heirs 

with Jesus Christ our Lord. (Gal. 3:29.) The promise 

is sure, and the privilege of inheriting is ours; but in 

order that we may be prepared for that service and its 

responsibilities it is needful that we should learn lessons 

of humility, patience, faith, endurance. Our 

Lord, the head of this "Seed of Abraham," endured 

such contradiction of sinners, and trials and testings, 

and learned obedience to the Father's will even unto 

death,— although he was perfect, holy, harmless, undefiled, 

separate from sinners. Much more does it 

seem necessary that we who are called to be "members 

of his body" should pass through severe testings 

and trials, to be fitted and prepared for the glory that 

shall follow. 

Arrived in Egypt, the Lord's blessing was upon 
Joseph in a remarkable manner, in that he was sold 

R2886 : page 313 

as a slave to a wealthy master. We have little insight 
into Joseph's previous history, but apparently he 
was a remarkable boy when he entered Potiphar's 
house at seventeen years of age. His manliness and 
sedateness and faithfulness to duty and quick intelligence 
were a good inheritance from his father, who 
had earnestly desired his birth;— which was, indeed, 
in answer to prayer. He evidently inherited considerable 
of his father's faith, benevolence and executive 
ability, and as a result rose rapidly in Potiphar's 
house to a position of great responsibility, to have 
charge over all his master's affairs. We cannot doubt 
that the boy's mind frequently reverted to his father 
and brethren, and his dreams, and to the Abrahamic 
covenant. Unquestionably he believed in those 
promises, and doubtless often wondered how they 
would be fulfilled,— what would be the leadings of 
divine providence in his affairs. His faith in God, 
his trust in the promises, served to separate him from 
the evil influences connected with that sudden transfer 
of his life from the pasture fields of Canaan to the 
busy scenes and luxuries and pleasures and sins of 
one of the greatest cities in the world at that time, a 
capital of the most renowned nation in that day. 

So it is with every life; there is need of an ideal, of 
a hope, of a good ambition, to act as a ballast and to 
keep the life steady in the midst of the divers winds 

R2886 : page 314 

and currents of the present evil world. The boy or 

the girl who has had a proper training by godly parents, 

especially in respect to the hopes set before us 

in the gospel, has much advantage every way over 

youthful companions who have no specific object and 

motive in life, who lack the ballast of the divine promises, 



and are driven hither and thither by the changing 
winds of time, generally into folly and often into 
sin, in search of satisfaction, which all crave. Christian 
parents who have been derelict of duty toward 
their children cannot too quickly correct the fault and 
help them to settle their minds upon the only things 
that can bring them true peace and joy and satisfaction, 
and balance, in the storms of life. 

But if Joseph thought he had learned all the necessary 
lessons of experience, and that his course 
henceforth would be one of prosperity, he was mistaken. 
Divine providence had marked out for him 
a higher station than that of chief overseer of the 
household affairs and business of General Potiphar; 
and if his station was to be a higher one, likewise also 
he must receive further lessons in a still severer 
school, in order to be prepared for the still greater exaltation 
in due time. Suddenly, while evidently enjoying 
his master's confidence and his mistress' favor, calamity 
came upon him, and that through no fault of 
his own, but really because of his faithfulness to his 
master. He was falsely accused by Potiphar's spited 
wife. He was cast into prison; and this expression, 
"prison," meant and still means something entirely 
different in Egypt and all eastern countries from what 
it means in Europe and America. There prisons were 
dark, loathsome, terrible places; and prisoners were 
frequently horribly mistreated, bound in iron fetters, 
etc. That this was Joseph's treatment, at first, seems 
evident from a reference to the matter in Psalm 105: 18: 
"Whose feet they hurt with fetters; he was laid 
in iron." This must have been a severe trial to Joseph, 
a doubly bitter experience by reason of the 
hopes he had been entertaining respecting divine favor 
and future exaltation. 

And so it is with the spiritual heirs of the Abrahamic 
promises: sometimes, while in the discharge 
of duty to the best of our ability, and when apparently 
we have the Lord's blessing and favor upon us and 
our affairs in a most marked degree, suddenly trouble 
may arise, adversity come, the powers of darkness 
seem to triumph, and for the moment we may be apparently 
culprits in the judgment of our fellow-men, 
and apparently forsaken by divine providence. The 
only consolation in such conditions is that we have 
suffered wrongfully— "as deceivers, yet true." Such 
experiences, doubtless, are needful to us; for though 
we may sing:— 

"I would rather walk in the dark with God, 
Than go alone in the light," 
yet this might be but an empty boast unless we were 
put through the trying experiences which would develop 
such faith, such a trust, as would hold to the 
Lord's hand, and trust divine providence in the darkest 
hour. We are to learn to walk by faith, and not 
by sight, to trust our Lord where we cannot trace 



him. 

Joseph's faith evidently stood the test, and his 
nobility of character shone out even under those adverse 
conditions; and this became a sign to the master 
of the prison that the Lord was with Joseph, that 
he was a peculiarly exemplary and wise young man- 
now twenty-seven years old. The warden of the prison 
was anxious to have such a faithful servant to 
assist him in his work. Indeed, there is always room 
in this world for efficient men and women, and the 
most efficient are those in whom is the spirit of the 
Lord, and who have "the wisdom which cometh from 
above— first pure, then peaceable, easy to be entreated, 
full of mercy and good fruits." (James 3:17.) 
The prison keeper doubtless was actuated by selfish 
motives to favor Joseph and put him in charge of the 
prisoners. But no matter for this; it was the operation 
of divine providence, nevertheless, and not merely 
Joseph's abilities that secured for him the position. 
However, we are to note that those whom God specially 
favors, and specially uses, must have character. 
A rough diamond may not look better than an ordinary 
pebble, but it has something of firmness 
and purity about it that ordinary pebbles do not 
have, that justifies the cutting and polishing 
and ultimate mounting as a gem. So we are 
to remember that while all our blessings are 
of the Lord and through Christ, nevertheless we have 
something to do in the matter of "making our calling 
and election sure"; we must have the love, the devotion, 
the zeal for God and for righteousness; and not 
only must we have this character, but we must have 
the submission which will enable us to accept and 
profit by the various trials of faith and patience which 
divine providence sees proper to permit us to experience 
for the trimming and polishing of the jewel. 

Not only were Joseph's experiences as a slave 
and as a prisoner calculated to give him a sympathy 
for those in adversity, but additionally he was learning 
lessons of experience and wisdom, educational 
in their character, which would prepare him in time 
to stand before King Pharaoh and to be made his 
Prime Minister. Some of these experiences he gained 
in the prison, as related in this lesson. The prisoners 
at that time were not all culprits, but sometimes 
the subjects of the king's displeasure. Two such persons 
high in Pharaoh's household (the "butler" or 
cup-bearer to the king, being one of the highest officers 
in honor and trust, and the baker, the manager of 
the king's culinary department, and general steward 
of the household) were cast into the same prison with 
Joseph because of having in some manner offended 
the king; and as Joseph had by this time chief charge 
of the prisoners he must have come frequently and 
into intimate contact with these men, so well versed 
in the affairs of the kingdom. And under the circumstances 



they would undoubtedly be communicative to 
Joseph, as we may be sure he was receptive to all the 
information obtainable. They must have thought 
him a very different sort of prisoner from others of 
that time when he even noticed so small a matter as 
sadness upon their faces, and enquired considerately 
respecting the same. So all of the spiritual heirs of 
the Abrahamic promise, while passing through the 
trials and difficulties needful to their preparation and 
polishing for the future glory, must learn to be compassionate. 
"Blessed are the merciful; they shall obtain 
mercy." Their own experiences help to mollify 

R2886 : page 315 

their hearts, and make them tender-hearted toward 
all who are in trouble. All of the Lord's people should 
be peculiar in these respects— "full of mercy and good 
fruits." 

Joseph's expression of sympathy soon brought 
from the prisoners an explanation of their sadness— 
they had each dreamed on the previous night, and 
each was troubled, thinking that his dream foreboded 
evil. Joseph was blessed by the Lord with some intuitive 
understanding of dreams, and promptly gave 
their interpretation— one of the officers would in a 
short time be released, while the other would be executed; 
and having sympathized with the one who 
would suffer, and having congratulated the one who 
would be released, Joseph made request of the latter 
that in his coming days of prosperity he would remember 
him and his kindness, and if possible secure 
his release through the king's mercy. 

Joseph's two dreams, and now these two dreams 
of the butler and baker, and two subsequent dreams 
by Pharaoh, all give evidence of having been in some 
manner divinely inspired, and intended to exercise 
certain influences and to bring about certain results. 
In our accepting these for all that they were, we are 
not to be understood as endorsing the thought that 
every dream is of the Lord, or is to have a special 
prophetic or providential fulfilment. Quite to the contrary, 
we believe that the majority of dreams are mental 
fictions, the result frequently of disordered stomachs 
and of the brain being partly asleep and partly 
awake, producing often unreasonable and absurd images, 
without special meaning except as warnings for 
better care in respect to our eating. We may even 
go further than this, and say that we feel sure that 
there is still a third kind of dreams,— dreams of a still 

R2887 : page 315 

different origin— neither inspired by the Lord nor by 
indigestion, but by evil spirits, for the purpose of 
misleading the dreamer. To make sure that our 



dreams are not the inspiration of evil we must make 
sure that we are not the children of the Evil One, but 
that having renounced sin and fled for refuge to the 
hope set before us in the Gospel, we have, through 
the redemption that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, obtained 
adoption into the family of God, and thus obtained 
relationship to him and protection from the 
power of the Evil One, and his delusions as respects 
our affairs; and come under the gracious promise that 
"all things shall work together for good" to us because 
we love God and have been called according to 
his purpose. In the dreams mentioned in this connection 
we are to notice that those of the butler and 
baker and Pharaoh were not the dreams of God's 
people, but nevertheless were evidently inspired of 
him, and that the purposes of these dreams were not 
specially in the interest of the dreamers, but largely 
in the interest of Joseph. 

As respects the Lord's people of to-day, there is 
much less necessity for dreams than in olden times. 
We have the Word of God— God's testimony bearing 
upon every subject needful to us. This message is 
so complete that the Apostle could say that by it the 
man of God might be thoroughly furnished unto 
every good word and work. (2 Tim. 3:16,17.) This 
should not hinder us from recognizing a dream as 
from the Lord, provided it would stand the tests of 
the written Word— provided the dream was not in 
any sense in conflict with God's revelation in the 
Scriptures. If the dream be in conflict with the 
Scriptures we are to reject the dream. If we find it 
in harmony with the Scriptures we are to accept it 
because of that harmony, and merely allow it to draw 
our attention more particularly to the Scriptures with 
which it accords. But whether by dreams or walking 
by faith entirely, and not by sight or dreams in 
any particular, the true child of God, the heir of the 
spiritual promises to Abraham, is to look for, to expect, 
to find, to realize, more fully even than our 
Golden Text says of Joseph, that "the Lord was with 
him, and showed him mercy." If the Lord be with 
us and show mercy toward us, no matter how he may 
do this, we are to take his favor with grateful hearts, 
and to show forth the praises of him who hath called 
us out of darkness into his marvelous light, and who 
eventually will bring us out of the prison-house of 
death into the glories of the everlasting Kingdom, to 
joint-heirship with his Son. 



R2887 : page 315 

"FOR GOD WAS WITH HIM. 
GEN. 41:38-49.-OCT. 20. 



"Them that honor me, I will honor."— 1 Sam. 2:30. 

DIVINE FAVOR was the secret of Joseph's 
success, as it has been the secret of the success 
of all who have attained true greatness 
in the world. In previous ages true success was more 
or less identified with earthly prosperity, riches and 
power; but during this Gospel age— the spirit dispensation 
—true success and divine favor stand related to 
spiritual prosperity, attainments and usefulness, as 
exemplified in our Lord Jesus, in the Apostles, and 
in the less prominent servants of the Cross from their 
day until now. The principle is the same, though the 
mode of operation is different. Adversity is still the 
school in which the chief lessons in character-building 
are to be learned— in which the correct ideals of life 
are to be formed, and ultimately to be crystalized into 
fixed character. The story of Joseph's experiences, 
which in this lesson culminate in great advancement 
and blessing, illustrates the fact that God has to 
do not only with the shaping of national affairs, but 
also with the individual affairs of all who are "called 
according to his purpose," and who are seeking to 
live up to the requirements and conditions of that 
call. 

It was probably because Joseph had some basis 
of character that the Lord chose to use him to prepare 
the way for his family to come into Egypt, etc. 
And we may be sure that had he proven neglectful of 
the lessons and experiences through which he passed 
the Lord would have changed or modified his dealings 
accordingly. As it was, the Lord's favors and 
blessings were evidently bestowed upon a worthy 
character, which, so far as we may judge from the 
record, responded obediently and trustfully in every 
trial. That Joseph's faith in the Lord was the basis 

R2887 : page 316 

of his strength of character, fidelity to duty and to 
principle, there is no reason to question. Had he 
doubted the Lord's providence in his own case, as 
foreshadowed in his own dreams, he would have been 
inclined to say to his two princely prisoners, when 
they related their dreams, as recorded in the last lesson, 
that they should have no confidence in dreams, 
for he had proven their unreliableness to his own bitter 
chagrin, having dreamed of power and influence, 
and having received, instead, degradation, slavery, 
and imprisonment. But he evidently still believed 
in his dreams, still expected release in some manner, 
and believed that the Lord was overruling in his 
affairs. 

Such a trust and confidence in the Almighty 
Ruler, as our Heavenly Father, is still more appropriate 



in us, the spiritual heirs of the Abrahamic promise; 
because we have much advantage every way over 
Joseph and others of our predecessors, who were 
heirs of only the natural blessings. Those who lived 
before Christ, no matter how high their station, at the 
very most were members of the "house of servants," 
while we of this Gospel age are freely recognized of 
God as sons, members of the "house of sons," of 
which our Lord Jesus is the Head. The sons not only 
are granted, through the holy spirit, deeper and clearer 
insight into the divine plan, but much advantage 
every way over the house of servants and over the 
world in general. Yet as with Joseph and the typical 
throne of Egypt, it is not sufficient that we should be 
favored of God and called to joint-heirship in the 
Kingdom of earth; but it is necessary that we shall 
prove submissive and tractable under his disciplines 
and instructions; that we may be "meet for the inheritance 
of the saints in light." It is necessary especially 
that our faith should be strong, and to this end 
that it should be tried, that it may be to the praise 
of his glory who has called us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light. 

Joseph's confidence in his ultimate deliverance, 
and the fulfilment of God's promise, did not hinder 
him from doing all he could in a proper manner to 
effect his own deliverance. We notice how, after 
kindly treating the imprisoned butler, explaining his 
dream for him, and rejoicing with him in the prosperity 
intimated, he solicited that when the prince would 
again be in royal favor he would kindly remember 
that his comforter, Joseph, was still in prison, and if 
possible secure the royal pardon for him. It was 
proper that he should thus take reasonable steps toward 
his own liberty, and no doubt the two years 
longer that he remained in prison brought testings 
of his faith, of his trust in the Lord; for the butler 
seems to have forgotten him entirely when his prosperity 
returned. However, in all this, as we can now 
see, the Lord was caring for him. He was learning 
the lessons of patient endurance, of suffering for 
righteousness' sake, of faith in the Lord. Had he 
been released by royal decree and set at liberty, he 
might have gone back to hunt up his father and his 
brethren in Palestine; or he might have gotten immersed 
in business of some kind in Egypt; but under 
divine providence he was kept safely in prison, learning 
necessary lessons, until he was thirty years of age; 
and it was at this time that Pharaoh the king, having 
had two remarkable dreams, which seriously impressed 
themselves upon his mind, and having consulted 
the wise man of Egypt, could find no satisfactory solution 
for them. It was then that the butler bethought 
him of his own dream while in the prison, 
and of the wonderful young man there who had interpreted 
it so accurately, and whose kindness he had 



so quickly forgotten. Here was an opportunity of 
serving the king and serving his prisoner-friend; so 
he mentioned Joseph to Pharaoh in most complimentary 
terms. Thus we see illustrated the fact that 
kindnesses done to others, even though they seem to 
be quickly forgotten, may possibly return in blessing 
on our own heads later on, and be used of the Lord as 
channels of blessing. 

Pharaoh called for the prisoner, and the explanation 
of his dreams was so thoroughly satisfactory 
that he could not doubt their truthfulness, and corroborated 
by the testimony of the butler, he concluded 
that Joseph's ability as an interpreter resided in the 
fact that God was with him; that God was using him; 
and that in some manner or other the God who had 
given these dreams, and such an interpretation to so 
remarkable a young man, would be pleased to bless 
and to use his servant still further in connection with 
the precautions to be taken to avert the severity of 
the famine predicted. Pharaoh was possessed of autocratic 
power, and was at liberty to exalt whom he 
would to authority in his kingdom, and very wisely 
he concluded that none could be more safe to trust 
than the one whom the Almighty trusted and made 
his friend;— the one to whom and through whom he 
revealed the secrets of knowledge. There is a lesson 

R2888 : page 316 

of wisdom here for the Lord's people and for all— to 
the effect that although the Lord's people may not 
be perfect, it is safer, in an emergency, to trust those 
whom the Lord has trusted than any others. 

Joseph was at once made what we to-day would 
call Prime Minister of Egypt. He was the representative 
of Pharaoh, and as such had greater power 
than any monarch or Prime Minister of Europe, except 
the Czar of Russia and the Sultan of Turkey or 
their representatives. Many have inclined to doubt 
the possibility of such an exaltation from prison to 
second place in the throne; but such are not sufficiently 
familiar with the customs of eastern countries. 
A story, for instance, is told of the Sultan of Turkey, 
that one day having a severe toothache, and his usual 
dentist being absent from the city, his servants 
were sent to get any dentist they could find. They 
found one in comparative poverty, clothed him suitably 
to be presented to the Sultan, who, after he had 
performed the service, gave him the title and emoluments 
of Pasha, with both a city and a country residence, 
wealth, etc. Joseph's experience was not 
much more extreme than this. Doubtless, though 
the narrative does not show it, some explanations 
were offered respecting his previous character as 
Potiphar's servant, and as the trusty overseer in prison; 
satisfying Pharaoh's mind that he was an honorable 



man, worthy of confidence and trust, besides the 
attestations of divine favor. So there is likely to be 
in all of our affairs a time of change, in which, if we 
have been misunderstood and misrepresented, the 
truth will ultimately be brought forth, as the Lord 

R2888 : page 317 

declares, "He shall bring forth thy righteousness as 
the light, and thy judgment as the noonday." (Psa. 37:6.) 
We are to wait patiently for the Lord, and to 
take patiently such experiences as his providences 
may mark out for us, questioning not the wisdom, the 
love and the power of him with whom we have to do 
—of him who has promised that all things shall work 
for our everlasting welfare, if we abide faithful to him. 

Pharaoh's ring was a signet ring. In ancient 
times royal commands were not signed and sealed, 
as at present, but sealed only, the monarch having a 
peculiar seal which, wherever it went, was recognized 
as his, and to have counterfeited which would have 
been gross felony, punishable with death. It was this 
seal that was given to Joseph, that by and through 
the authority expressed in it he might issue such 
commands as he pleased in respect to the accumulation 
and building of granaries and storing in the same 
part of the surplus crop of the seven years of plenty. 

The honor and distinction of Joseph as next to 
Pharaoh seems well to illustrate the glorious exaltation 
of our Lord Jesus (in which the church, as his 
body, will soon share). Our Lord was tested, yet 
notwithstanding his faithfulness he went into the 
great prison-house of death; on the third day was delivered 
and raised up to power and great glory, and 
to be next to Jehovah God in the throne of the universe. 
The divine signet was given to him, and the 
proclamation was that "All men should honor the 
Son, even as they honor the Father," and that nothing 
should be done except at his command— that all power 
in heaven and in earth was committed unto him. 
(John 5:23; Matt. 28:18.) The faithful members of 
the elect body of Christ, the Church, the overcomers, 
must also be tried in various ways, and for righteousness' 
sake must suffer in the present time, be misunderstood, 
misrepresented, etc. These also must go 
into the prison-house of death, and be therein parts 
of three great days (thousand-year days), a part of 
the fifth thousand, all of the sixth thousand, and early 
in the seventh thousand years, or third thousand-year 
day, their resurrection is due; that they may become 
joint-heirs with Christ their Lord and Head, in the 
glorious things of the Kingdom. All this was well 
marked by the parts of three years which Joseph 
spent in prison, and his subsequent exaltation. 

The meaning of the new, Egyptian, name given 
to Joseph is rather in dispute, Canon Cooke claiming 



that it means "Bread of Life." It was appropriate 
in view of the great work which Joseph accomplished 
—the accumulation of a great store of wheat during 
the years of plenty,— sufficient to supply the necessities 
of the whole people during the seven years of 
famine. In this respect again we are reminded of 
Christ, who called himself the "Bread of Life." We 
are reminded, too, that it was through a work which 
he accomplished that the living bread is provided, for 
the whole world of mankind typified by the Egyptians; 
and that through him also the bread of life 
comes to his brethren, typified by Joseph's brethren 
and Jacob. As there was no life for all the people 
there except through Joseph and his work, and as 
Joseph did his work as the agent or representative of 
Pharaoh, so we see, as an anti-type, that there is no 
life for anyone of the world except in and through 
Christ Jesus our Lord, and that his work is accomplished 
in the name of, and as the representative of 
our Heavenly Father, the supreme ruler of the 
universe. 

Some are always ready to make objection and to 
find fault, rather than to make reasonable explanations, 
and some such object to Joseph's course in collecting 
one-fifth of the harvest of the plentiful years, 
and using it later on to strengthen the authority of 
Pharaoh and his control over all the people of his 
realm. We might say that even the one-fifth of the 
crop increase might not be considered an unreasonable 
tax, as it is the usual amount of rental charged 
in that vicinity to-day, and even more than that is 
frequently charged here and elsewhere in civilized 
countries; but we do not know that the one-fifth was 
exacted from the people as a tax. We do not know 
that Pharaoh's purse and bank account were not 
drawn upon for the purpose of this storage-wheat at 
the low price which would prevail during a period of 
such great surplus. We shall presume the latter, in 
the absence of any information to the contrary; and 
as for using this to strengthen the authority of the 
throne, and the contrariness of this from all democratic 
ideas, we have nothing to say except that it 
remains to be proven that a republican form of government 
is in all respects the best for fallen humanity. 
The Lord does not propose as a remedy for present 
ills, social, political, moral, etc., to introduce a Millennium 
along the lines of a republic; but he does propose 
its introduction along the lines of a monarchy— 
an absolute monarchy, in which his Son, who redeemed 
the world, will reign to bless the world by the exercise 
of autocratic power; for the subjugation of evil; 
for the bringing of all mankind into full appreciation 
of the principles of righteousness, and, so far as they 
will, into full accordance with the great supreme ruler, 
Jehovah— that they shall be his subjects forever, as 
the people of Egypt typically became the perpetual 



servants of Pharaoh. 

As Pharaoh gave to Joseph a wife, named 
Asenath (signifying "Favor"), and she became Joseph's 
associate in honor and dignity, and co-laborer 
and helpmate with him in his work of blessing Egypt, 
so Jehovah God proposes a bride for his exalted Son, 
our Lord, and she also will be a favorite. It has required 
all of this Gospel age for her betrothal and 
preparation for the marriage, and the time is now 
nigh at hand when she shall be brought near to the 
King, as the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, adorned in the 
glorious linen robe of her Lord, fitly embroidered with 
the elements of character which he can approve.— 
Psa. 45:13,14. 

Joseph's head was not turned by the prosperity 
which came to him; he showed himself worthy of it— 
that he had profited by previous experiences, so as 
to know how to use the prosperity wisely. He was 
not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit; and seeing 
that the Lord had opened the way before him we 
find him immediately taking steps to carry out his 
mission. His first move was to travel throughout the 
lengths and breadths of Egypt, to determine the most 
eligible sites for the building of granaries, or storehouses; 
and the Lord's blessing continued with him 
and prospered him in the work thus given him to do. 

R2888 : page 318 

So it should be with us; in whatever department of 
the Lord's service he is pleased to open the door of 
opportunity to us, we should enter it promptly and 
with energy— with zeal for him and for the cause to 
which he has called us. This is one condition of our 
acceptableness with him. If we are slothful, inattentive 
to opportunities, undoubtedly they will be removed 
from us, and given to others, for the Lord is 
abundantly able to raise up one or another to serve 
his cause without interfering with, or overruling our 
free moral agency. Let us more and more appreciate 
what a privilege we enjoy in being co-laborers 
together with God, and especially in connection with 
this great service which our Lord and Master Jesus 
is executing, and to fellowship in which we have been 
called, as his bride and joint-heir. 

They that honor God he will honor, in his own 
way; and his way will always be found eventually to 
be the best way. We not only are to honor the Lord 
by word of mouth, but especially are we to show forth 
his praises in the affairs of life— in connection with 
home duties, business duties, service of the truth: in 
all things we are to glorify him in our bodies and 

R2889 : page 318 

spirits which are his; and those who thus do shall be 



blessed indeed of the Lord and be used of him. The 
slightest service here permitted us is an honor indeed, 
and faithfulness in these slight services of the present 
time are eventually to be blessed and rewarded with 
the greater and grander service of the Kingdom. 



R2889 : page 318 

WORDS OF CHEER AND ENCOURAGEMENT. 



Dear Brother Russell:— After a thankful and (to 
me) blessed perusal of the last issue of Watch 
Tower, I want to state that I have truly come out 
of Babylon, since I read the very first Tower that 
ever came into my hands— March 15 and April 1, 
1900. So powerful was the impression made upon 
me by it that I was then, and have been ever since 
convinced of these great truths, and all my former 
doubts are satisfied forever. Now I realize what the 
blessed Master meant by the words, "The truth shall 
make you free." Regarding churches in general, 
when I think of the good, conscientious Christians, 
many of whom I would fain emulate; and think of 
seeming to be better than they, I feel very much 
troubled and very humble. Nevertheless, I can never 
believe their way again. I often think of the church 
at Allegheny, and wish I might enjoy the blessing of 
meeting with you all at times. 

The lesson on "Patient Endurance," and that on 
"Duty-Love" in May 1 Tower, are my constant study. 
I was a member of the Episcopal church. Our minister 
has called time and again and kindly solicited 
my return. I have deferred telling him of my change 
of views only out of consideration for him, as he has 
been deep in affliction the past year, and when I look 
at his kind face and think how I may hurt him, I cannot 
but forbear. This is my standpoint at present. 
Do not think I am ashamed to own my Lord; O, 
no ! I am watching my opportunity, which will be 
soon, I believe. I have distributed tracts to many, 
having myself enjoyed the blessed truths revealed 
in them; truly God assisted you to write them. I 
thank you for their precious lessons. When I think 
of my unworthiness, and humble station, and realize 
what great things the good Lord has called me to, 
can I do aught but press onward to the attainment of 
the high "mark"? 

May God bless and strengthen you in preparing 
the marginal references you contemplate for the new 
Bible! Pray for me that I may do all for Him that I 
can find to do. Yours in the Master, 
Mrs. R. L. Jones,-Ohio. 



[I am glad, dear Sister, to note that you are 
"tender-hearted" and trust that when, in withdrawing, 
you announce your present position to the minister 
and members of the church, it will be worded 
kindly, inoffensively. See the "Withdrawal Letters" 
which we supply free for this purpose,— sufficient for 
all the church membership. But, dear Sister, when 
you feared to cause pain and disappointment to an 
earthly minister and friend, did you forget the Friend 
above all others— the Lord— and his smile of approval? 
Remember the poet's words,— 
"O, let no earthborn cloud arise, 
To hide thee from thy servant's eyes." 

Let us see to it, dear Sister, that the Lord's approval 
has first place in our hearts.— Editor.] 



Dear Brother Russell:— Our "Volunteer Rally" 
yesterday was a success every way respecting the 
amount of work done and the spiritual blessings received. 
The Lord was evidently with us paving the 
way, and the interest manifested by the friends from 
surrounding towns who came to help in the Harvest 
work was certainly strengthening and encouraging 
to us here, and the meeting together of all after the 
day's work was edifying in the extreme. That our 
hopes and aims are one, was beautifully brought out 
in the testimonies, praise, prayers and thanks; and 
it was manifest that the Holy Spirit was in our midst. 
It was "spontaneous combustion," so to speak, and 
the afternoon was not half long enough to give all 
an opportunity to voice their gratitude for blessings 
received, and for being privileged to do something 
for Jesus in the "Volunteer" work. We realized how 
we had been called and thus far led; and that if we 
continue to walk faithfully nothing will be able to 
separate us from the love of God. Bro. Russell and 
his helpers, and all of the Lord's children everywhere 
were remembered in our prayers. 

The number engaged in tract distribution was 
seventy-nine, as follows: From Tiffin, 19; Ft. Wayne, 
6; Auburn, 1; Ypsilanti, 3; Battle Creek, 1; Pt. Clinton, 
5; Detroit, 3; Fostoria, 2; Bowling Green, 1; 
Ottawa Lake, 1; Findlay, 1; Toledo, 36; total, 79. 
Tracts distributed about 5,000; churches served, 
about 55. The weather was extremely hot,— harvest 
weather— just the sort to ripen wheat, and the volunteers 
proved themselves veterans, and turned up smiling 

R2889 : page 319 

and content, receiving ample pay in the mysterious 

blessing that comes over one when handing 

out tracts. Certainly the Lord is our strength in all 



our ways! 

We feel satisfied so far as the day's work went, 
and know the Lord will bless it in his own time and 
way. Praying that the Lord will further bless us with 
his grace, we are, dear brother, 
In the "Harvest" work, 

The Toledo Class,— Ohio. 



Dear Brother Russell:— Just a line to thank you 
for the Gospel Truth as I believe Christ would have 
us know it, and which I have received at your hand. 
I think I have made good use of the tracts sent me 
a few months ago; since that time I have learned of 
the meeting-place of the brethren in Liverpool and 
got a blessing. My family are members of the Methodist 
church, to which I am attached, but now I see 
the Gospel in a different light, thank God! With the 
help of prayer I am trying to do a little of the Lord's 
work among my shipmates, many of whom are skeptics; 
I am trying to convince them of a living God 
and a future judgment. Please let me know if there 
is a meeting-place in or around Boston that I can 
attend while my ship is in port. I am willing to be 
at your service in delivering God's Word, in the shape 
of tracts or magazines at church doors or meetings 
of any kind in Liverpool or Boston. 

God bless you in the work of spreading the true 
gospel throughout this wicked world. I pray his 
Kingdom come and his will be done on earth as it is 
done in heaven. Your loving brother in Jesus, 
James H. Wallace,— England. 



My dear Brother:— I have at last decided to give 
up all, and I have prayed earnestly for help to make 
the surrender complete; God forbid that it should be 
otherwise! 

My contract in the business indicated above (insurance) 
will expire in November next; but I want 
to be wholly occupied in a better work long before 
that time. In fact, I can't hold my tongue now, I 
must declare the light I have found (through your 
help) in the Scriptures; these are now my delight, 
where before they were uninteresting, though I have 
been a member of the Missionary Baptist church for 
twenty-three years, and a deacon fourteen years, but 
I will send in my letter of withdrawal soon. 

I have been a leader in the Reform Party in 
politics, in this State, for ten years, and have held 
many positions of trust; but have found that a failure, 
and will give it up. Have been a drawing speaker, 
but my voice is nearly gone, hence I will have to 
supplement it with literature in spreading this "good 



news" so little known in these parts. I am willing 
to take a very humble place in the ranks because of 
my extreme unworthiness and the lateness of the 
hour. 

I have seen in some of your literature that you 

have colporteurs for Millennial Dawn, and other 

works. Write me terms and full particulars, also 

any help you can give me on my spiritual condition. 

Yours thankfully, H. L. Brian,— Texas. 



R2890 : page 319 

THE ASSASSINATION AND ITS PROBABLE RESULTS. 



It is difficult to account for the peculiar operation 
of the brain of the anarchist who shot the noble 
President of this nation,— William McKinley. What 
could he, or the class he is supposed to have represented 
in the act, hope to gain by such an act? What 
motive of any kind could inspire such a deed? It is 
most charitable to view the assassin and his accomplices 
as mentally unbalanced to a greater degree than 
are the majority of the human family; so that to their 
view the essential of peace and blessing is less law: 
whereas those who are directed by the Word of the 
Lord know that the world needs yet more stringent 
laws for the correction of evil-doers. How blessed the 
assurances of the Scriptures that the great reign of 
righteousness— law and grace— is near at hand. That 
the Millennial Kingdom will not only effectually restrain 
such unbalanced creatures, but by restitution processes 
will lift them up toward soundness and righteousness. 

A cypher letter has just been found and interpreted. 
It announces that the anarchists have plotted 
the assassination of President Roosevelt, Senator 
Hanna, the governors of all the States and the financial 
princes— J. D. Rockefeller, J. P. Morgan and C. 
M. Schwab. It seems difficult to suppose that the 
anarchists hope to terrorize the people so that no one 
would accept office. Do they not know that there are 
several millions of men anxious for a chance at these 
offices and willing to brave every risk? Anarchists are 
comparatively few in these days of prosperity: not 
in prosperous times,— not until "trouble like a gloomy 
cloud" shall have gathered world-wide and shut out 
the light of hope, need we fear that the insanity of 
anarchy will prevail to the extent predicted in the 
Scriptures— the overthrow of the entire social fabric. 

We see no special significance in the assassin's 
deed as respects the peculiar times in which we are 
living— the "harvest"— except that it will probably 
lead to stringent repressive laws against anarchists. 



Such we would approve, but opine that a restriction 

of liberty in this approved direction might soon lead 

to an abuse of power and a restraint of proper liberties; 

—an attempt to restrain any and everything not 

favored by general public sentiment. For instance 

WATCH TOWER publications have thousands of enemies 

who would not hesitate to misrepresent its teachings 

as anarchistic, and in doing so think they did 

God service;— after the example of Saul of Tarsus. 

We are expecting some such violent interruption 

of the "harvest" work within a few years now; but 

will conclude then that "the door is shut." Meantime 

let us each and all "labor while it is called day; 

for the night cometh wherein no man can work." 



page 321 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. OCTOBER 15, 1901. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 

Finishing Touches of Christian 

Character 323 

Anarchy Opposed to Christian Faith 326 

Joseph the Merciful 327 

Speaking Perverse Things 330 

The Close of a Noble Life 330 

Jephthah's Vow 333 

Encouraging Words— British Branch 333 

Disadvantageous Postal Ruling 322 

page 322 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



R2892 : page 322 

A DISADVANTAGEOUS POSTAL RULING. 



The Postoffice authorities inform us that we may expect 
(in common with many other publishers) to be deprived of the 
privilege of mailing thick pamphlets (M. DAWN) at the special 
second class rates of postage heretofore enjoyed. We deny the 
right of the Postmaster General to make such a law;— for law-making 
it practically is, since the present law has been otherwise 
interpreted for the past thirty years, by all previous Postmasters 
General; and several of them desired and petitioned 
Congress (the law-making branch of the Government) to change 
the law, which Congress refused to do. This is in no sense a 
blow at our publications, however, and if others submit we will 
probably make no legal protest. 

One effect will be to curtail the circulation of paper-bound 
DAWNS because it will require us to pay 7 cents extra postage each; 
and we must collect this from our customers. We can still 
however reach some of you at low rates by express where the 
orders are for twenty books or more, east of Pittsburg and 
south as far as Virginia at the old rate, one cent per book: 
west of Pittsburg (20 or more) as far as Illinois and Kentucky 
at two cents per book. These prices apply only to paper-bound 
and leatherette-bound books. The cloth-bound books are unchanged 
in rate— average postage 10 cents each prepaid by 
mail or express. 



R2890 : page 323 
FINISHING TOUCHES OF CHRISTIAN CHARACTER. 



"Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honorable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, 
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are 
of good report; if there be any virtue, if there 
be any praise, think on these things."— Phil. 4:8. 

MANKIND in general does too little thinking, 

and what it does do is more or less 

along improper lines, and built upon false 

bases or premises. Nevertheless, all will agree as 

respects human welfare, there is a power in thought 

second to no other power in the universe. Few, perhaps, 



realize to what extent this is true,— to what extent 

their own happiness and well-being is dependent 

upon right thinking,— to what extent whole communities 

and nations owe their happiness or misery 

to their right or wrong thinking upon the important 

problems of life. Words are a power in the world, 

but only in proportion as they awaken thoughts and 

lead to actions; words, thoughts, deeds, is the order. 

Truly did the wise man say, "As a man thinketh 

in his heart so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) If he thinks 

justly, he will speak and act justly; if his thoughts 

are selfish and ignoble, his words will be deceitful and 

his conduct dishonest. 

It is because the power of thought is to a considerable 
extent recognized that it is appealed to on 
every hand. The teacher appeals to it; the preacher 
appeals to it; the politician appeals to it; the financier 
appeals to it; the sociologist appeals to it; the 
thousands of pamphlets, books, newspapers and magazines 
published in every land and in every tongue 
are all appealing to thought. Thought, indeed, may 
be said to be the great engine which is moving the 
whole world in its every department. The difficulty 
is that few are of logical and discerning mind, the 
fall having affected every member of the human 
family has disordered our reasoning faculties; and 
charlatans and demagogues and self-seekers very 
frequently take advantage of the weak mental state 
of humanity to delude with sophistry, and thus to 
hinder and obscure correct thinking and reasoning. 
Against the great force and weight of selfishness in 
its every member does humanity thus labor, as well 
as against the wiles of Satan; and it is not surprising 
that generally it is misled and deceived, because added 
to its incubus of false premises it must struggle 
also against its own inertia, sluggishness and 
inaptitude. 

The Lord, also appeals to the power of the mind 
through his Word, and urges upon his people that 
they be "transformed by the renewing of their minds." 
(Rom. 12:2.) Indeed, it may be said that the cultivation 
of the power of thought began with God's 
people, and that so far as religious matters are concerned 
it has in no particular degree gone from them. 
While heathen religions seek to restrain the intellect 
and appeal chiefly to the passions, prejudices and 
fears, the Lord, to the contrary, calls to his people, 
saying, "Come, let us reason together." (Isa. 1:18.) 
We are willing to admit that nominal Christendom 
has not heeded the Lord's invitation to any great 
extent— that very largely nominal Christians avoid 
thought on religious subjects, and especially avoid 
reasoning; but we hold that to the extent they thus 
violate the divine arrangement they have not their 
"senses exercised by reason of use," and are to be 
esteemed, at very best, only babes in Christ. 



Heb. 5:13,14. 

We are willing to agree also that thinking may 
be a very dangerous matter in the absence of absolute 
knowledge upon which to base and exercise our 
reasoning faculties; but the Lord has protected his 
faithful along this line by providing us in his Word 
with the proper basis for reasoning on all subjects 
involving our duty to our Creator and to our fellow-creatures. 
The Scriptures lay down certain broad 
lines, and invite God's people to reason within these 
lines of revelation, and by reasoning thus to taste and 
see that the Lord is gracious; and come to a clearer 
knowledge of him, a better understanding of his character 
and plan. Many who are awakened to independent 

R2890 : page 324 

thinking are careless of the limitations of the 
divine revelation, and consequently the influence of 
the divine Word upon them is a mental liberty and 
enlightenment which, lacking the divine control, is 
very apt to go to the extreme of license, selfishness, 
self conceit and infidelity. Wherever the Bible has 
gone it has been the torch which has led civilization: 
millions have profited by its enlightening influence, 
though only comparatively few walk close to its light 
and within its prescribed limitations of reason and 
conduct; and these few are the true Christians— the 
"wheat" of this age, "the first-fruits unto God of his 
creatures," which God is now harvesting.— 
James 1:18. 

THE CONTROL OF THOUGHT. 

Some are inclined to believe that since man's 
brain differs from each other man's brain to some extent, 
therefore his thinking must necessarily be different; 
in a word, that a man can only think in harmony 
with his brain construction. But we reply, Not 
so; each may learn to weigh and balance his own 
thoughts, to curb some and to encourage others; but 
to do this each must have before him an ideal of character, 
to be copied. Thoughts can be controlled just 

R2891 : page 324 

as words and actions can be controlled: the will is at 
the helm, and must decide which thoughts and sentiments 
it will entertain and encourage, and which it 
will repel. It is necessary, therefore, first of all for 
the will to be rightly directed, and secondly, to be 
strong, and to use its power in the control of thought; 
—in curbing those thoughts which it recognizes as 
evil, and in stimulating those which it recognizes as 
good, helpful, beneficial. The will, in Scripture 
called the "heart," is therefore continually appealed 



to by the Lord, as he now seeks amongst men for his 

"peculiar people." The message is, "My son, give 

me thine heart"— thy will. This request is not addressed 

to wilful sinners, for they are not recognized 

or addressed as sons of God, but as children of the 

Evil One. Those whom God recognizes as his sons 

are such as have been brought into harmony with 

him through forgiveness of sins, by repentance and 

faith in Christ Jesus, the Redeemer. It is to such 

that the Lord makes known that if they would "go 

on to perfection"— to the full attainment of his gracious 

purposes respecting them, the only proper 

course would be to give their hearts, their wills, to 

him in consecration. 

The heart, the will, thus given over to God, seeks 
to know the divine will, to catch the divine thought 
and to obey it in word and in act; and in proportion 
as this condition of the new mind is attained, in that 
same proportion will there begin to be a newness 
of life in every respect; in ambitions, hopes, sentiments, 
and efforts. It is for this reason that the revelation 
of the divine will and plan is furnished to believers 
—that by growing in the knowledge of it, by 
thinking on these things, by filling the mind with the 
divine plan and will, the transforming influence may 
extend into every avenue of life. 

OUR TEXT ADDRESSES THE SAINTS. 

A common mistake amongst people would be to 
address the words of our text on the subject of right 
thinking to sinners, to evil-doers and evil thinkers; 
but this is a mistake. The entire Epistle to the Philippians 
is addressed to "All the saints in Christ Jesus 
which are at Philippi" (1:1); and the exhortation is 
applicable to all the saints everywhere, but not to 
others than saints— not to the worldly, not even to 
the household of faith, until they have made a full 
consecration of themselves to the Lord. It would 
be useless to address others along this line; the exhortation 
would be of no effect. Hence, the exhortation 
of this lesson is not specially applicable to any 
but the most advanced Christians— not even to the 
"babes in Christ," but only to those who are somewhat 
matured in the new life. As for the babes who 
are not developed new creatures, they will have their 
attention very thoroughly occupied with the cruder 
elementary lessons, respecting the coarser sins which 
the new creature must abhor and battle against. 
This text addresses those who have made considerable 
progress along these lines of putting away "the 
filthiness of the flesh and of the spirit"— those who 
are seeking to perfect holiness in their hearts, and so 
far as possible also in their earthly bodies.— 
2 Cor. 7:1. 

The context proves our assertion, for after 



speaking of prayer and thanksgiving to God and the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding, keeping 
their hearts and minds, the Apostle sums up this 
advanced position of grace with the words of our text 
as the finality or finish of the argument, and of the 
process of character-development: "Finally, 
brethren." 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE TRUE." 

This is the first question to be asked respecting 
any matter: Is it true or is it false? If it is false the 
Lord's people are to have nothing whatever to do 
with it,— no matter how beautiful. Love for the truth 
lies at the very foundation of saintship, and we remember 
that the Lord declares through the Apostle 
that those who will be rejected and stumbled in this 
harvest time are such as "receive not the truth in the 
love of it" (2 Thes. 2:10)— such as have pleasure in 
unrighteousness (untruth). With our poor and at 
very best imperfect brains there is great danger of 
our being misled, and hence the Word of the Lord 
appeals to us with force that we should not even 
touch that which we realize is untrue. This does not 
mean that we may not weigh and balance evidences 
to discern the truth from the untruth; but it does 
mean that as soon as the truth is discovered it will 
be embraced and acknowledged, and the untruth as 
vigorously disavowed and completely withdrawn 
from. To tamper with error after we see it to be error, 
to "see how it would reason out, anyway," when 
we know the matter is on a wrong basis, is to lay a 
trap for our spiritual feet, one which frequently 
stumbles travelers on the way to Zion. 

If we are following God's admonition through 
the Apostle, in this text, it will mean an avoidance of 
fiction, of novels, of unrealities. This, on the other 
hand, will mean an increased reverence for whatsoever 
things are true, an increased devotion to them, 
an increase of time for their study, and an increase 
of the spirit of truth in our hearts as a result. 

R2891 : page 325 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE HONEST." 

The truth of the thing is only one of the tests 
to which it must be put. We may find a matter to be 
true and yet not find it to be worthy of our thought, 
dishonorable. Who does not know that there are 
dishonorable and dishonoring thoughts, the pondering 
of which not only wastes valuable time, but instead 
of bringing a reward, a blessing for the time 
spent upon them, entails a loss, a disadvantage, in 
that it leaves a dishonorable stain in our minds, unworthy 
of us as new creatures in Christ Jesus? 



The true but dishonorable or unworthy things 
presenting themselves for our consideration at the 
bar of our minds are perhaps oftenest in connection 
—with others— the weaknesses, the errors, the follies, 
or what not of our neighbors, of our friends. 
The entertaining of these thoughts, the pondering of 
them, will be unfavorable to us, and the sooner we 
discern the matter and dismiss them the better, the 
happier, the more noble will be our own hearts. The 
dismission of these unworthy thoughts will leave us 
the opportunity and the energy, if we will, to expend 
that much more time upon whatsoever things 
are not only true but also honorable, worthy of our 
attention as new creatures in Christ Jesus. 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE JUST." 

Here we have another limitation. Our minds 
are to be occupied in thinking about righteousness or 
just things, principles, etc.; we are not to be continually 
meditating upon grievances and injustices, 
either real or imagined. We are to remember, on 
the contrary, that we are living in the period which 
the Scriptures denominate "the present evil world," 
and that it could not be this if Justice prevailed generally. 
We are to remember that hereunto we were 
called,— even to endure injustice, for righteousness' 
sake;— to do good, to lay down our lives in the service 
of the Lord and his Word, and yet to be evil-spoken 
of and to be misunderstood and to have all 
manner of evil said against us falsely for Christ's 
sake. We are, therefore, not to think strange of the 
fiery trials that shall surely come upon all who are 
of the Royal Priesthood; but rather, having settled 
this matter in advance, when we made our consecration, 
we are to take it as it comes, as a matter of 
course, not grieving over nor specially thinking about 
the trials, the injustices, etc. And thus doing we will 
have the more time to give to thinking of the more 
helpful, the more strengthening, the more elevating 
things— the things that are just, the things that are 
in harmony with righteousness, respecting the past, 
the present and the future, as promised in the Lord's 
Word. 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE PURE." 

There is a vast amount of impurity everywhere 
throughout the world. It, therefore, behooves the 
Lord's consecrated people to follow the Apostle's injunction, 
and to carefully strain out the impurities, 
and see that they do not enter into our hearts, our 
thoughts, realizing that with them in the result will 
be to work our defilement, to a greater or less degree. 
Whoever maintains purity of thought will have comparatively 
little effort in maintaining purity of word 



and of action. Whether the impurity come from one 
direction or another— from the world or the flesh or 
the devil— its attack must first of all be upon the 
mind; and if repelled there the victory is won: if not 
repelled we cannot know what the consequences 
would be, as the Apostle James declares: "Lust [selfish 
desire of any kind], when it has conceived [in the 
mind] bringeth forth sin [develops sinful words or 
deeds], and sin when it is finished bringeth forth 
death."— Jas. 1:15. 

No wonder, then, that the Apostle mentions the 
necessity for our thoughts being guarded along the 
line of purity, and that if a matter were ever so well 
established as a truth, and if it involved no injustice, 
and even were not dishonorable, yet were impure, 
this would be quite sufficient to condemn it as unworthy 
of the mind of the Lord's consecrated people. 
Nor is it to be overlooked that any smut or impurity 
entering into the mind may cause such a defilement 
as will give trouble in its complete eradication, 
not only at the time, but for years afterward. 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE LOVELY." 

The saints are exhorted to be meek and peacemakers, 
but in order to be thus they must have amiable 
thoughts, lovely and lovable thoughts, kind 
thoughts, gentle thoughts. These in turn will gradually 
develop into graces of character. We are not 
to think upon subjects gendering anger, hatred, strife, 
—vexatious thoughts, quarrelsome thoughts, vindictive 
and contentious thoughts. These all are to be 
shunned as enemies to the new creature, and instead 
we are to think of the beautiful things, the amiable 
things, we may know respecting our neighbors, our 

R2892 : page 325 

friends; even though we be not able to fully close our 
eyes against their injustices or evil deeds, we may at 
least refuse to waste valuable time in thinking about 
their weaknesses and thus cultivating unamiable, 
quarrelsome dispositions in ourselves. 

"WHATSOEVER THINGS ARE OF GOOD REPORT.' 

It may be argued by some that since the world 
hateth the light and the children of the light, and 
rejoiceth in iniquity and in getting the advantage 
over others, therefore those things which would be 
reputable with it would not be the holy things suitable 
to the thoughts of God's people. But not so, 
we answer; the world does recognize to a considerable 
extent a right standard, even though it does not 
follow that standard, nor even pretend to do so- 
even though it hates those who it sees are endeavoring 



to walk up to that standard; even though it calls 
the children of light hypocrites, and crucifies them, 
as in the case of our Lord. It is policy and false religion 
that generally excite religious persecution. 
Nevertheless, if anyone will follow the standard that 
is reputable, and think upon those things he will find 
therein a blessing. 

FOR THE VICTORS ARE THE REWARDS. 

Some may feel that if they thus sifted and tested 
and rejected all the untrue, the unworthy, the unjust, 
the impure and the unamiable thoughts presenting 
themselves, that they would have no topic left whereon 
to engage their minds, and this we believe would 
be true with a great many— their minds for a time 

R2892 : page 326 

would be quite vacant of thoughts, if all the evil and 
improper ones were rejected, banished; but by the 
time they would be in this attitude they would have 
such a "hunger and thirst after righteousness," truth, 
things lovely, things pure, things noble, that they 
would be in the right condition to receive the very 
spiritual food which the Lord has provided for them. 
There is one thing, and one thing only, which fully 
combines all of the above propositions, and demonstrates 
itself to be the one thing true, honorable, just, 
pure, lovely,— and that is, the divine character and 
plan. Let us think upon its various features. Let 
us study the divine Word and behold through it, as 
a telescope, the beauty of the divine character, the 
splendor of the divine plan, as revealed in God's 
Word and plan. ..whose length and breadth and 
height and depth no man can measure, and only the 
saints can comprehend by the holy spirit, and that in 
proportion as they receive of the holy spirit, the holy 
mind, the holy thoughts, replacing and displacing the 
unholy thoughts and sentiments of the natural man. 
(Eph. 3:18.) What a splendid premium the Lord 
thus places upon the study of his Word in the esteem 
of all who are of the class addressed by the 
Apostle in our text! 

Such a ruling of the mind is a conquest; such a 
self-mastery is a victory; the greatest victory that 
can be gained. As the Scriptures declare, "He that 
ruleth his spirit [mind] is better than he that taketh 
a city." (Prov. 16:32.) And the prescription given 
by the Apostle in our text, for the mental health of 
the saints, is the very soul-discipline necessary to our 
development in character, to the degree pleasing to 
God and acceptable, through Christ Jesus our Lord. 
These are the victors to whom will be granted a share 
in the Kingdom. Ah, then, as the Apostle exhorts, 
"Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth 



so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the 
race set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author of 
our faith" until he shall have become the finisher of 
it (Heb. 12:1,2); remembering that he who is on 
our part, and who has engaged to help us and to carry 
us through every difficulty, and to fully instruct us if 
we submit ourselves to him, and thus to "make us 
meet for the inheritance of the saints in light," is Jesus, 
—who loved us and bought us with his own precious 
blood. 

Well do the Scriptures generally enforce the importance 
of guarding the mind, the will, the heart, 
saying, "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of 
it are the issues of life." Keeping it, to the saints 
now called and in the race, means life more abundant, 
with glory, honor and immortality. Neglecting it, 
refusing to exercise self-control, means the permission 
of selfish desires to be conceived in our brains, 
and to lead away from the Lord and his "narrow 
way" on toward sin, on toward the wages of sin- 
death— Second Death. 



R2892 : page 326 
ANARCHY OPPOSED TO ALL CHRISTIAN FAITH. 



IT IS DIFFICULT to get a clear statement of 
the principles of the anarchists, as they are at 
war with all received principles of human government 
and conduct, as well as antagonistic to all religions 
that accept revelation or the future accountability 
of human beings. Some light is thrown on 
the fundamental doctrines of the anarchists, for which 
many of them are willing to give up liberty and life, 
by a contributor to the London "Times," who has 
made a study of the social creed of the anarchists, 
and therefore writes with a fuller understanding than 
the hasty political doctors who have prescribed so 
many remedies for the direful disease. We here reprint 
his summary of the anarchist belief: 

"They hold that there is no moral law, natural 
or revealed, and, therefore, that every individual is 
entitled to be a law unto himself. Granting the 
premise, the conclusion seems irresistible. No majority 
of citizens, however large, can create a moral 
right. It can pass municipal laws, and, subject to 
certain limitations, those laws may bind in conscience 
men who believe that all civil power is of 
divine ordinance. But local and temporary majorities 
have often made or approved laws in flagrant 
contradiction with the most elementary conceptions 
of right, while the sacredness sometimes ascribed to 



natural law, as that law is deduced from the moral 

judgments of mankind, semper et ubique, depends 

on the view that it emanates from the universal conscience 

and that the voice of conscience is 

superhuman. 

"The anarchist rejects this view. He denies any 
supernatural government of the world, and, therefore, 
he denies, very consistently, the moral right of 
any power whatever to fetter his individual judgment 
or his individual will. All attempts to curb him in 
the free indulgence of his individual lusts and passions 
are in his eyes oppression. The fundamental 
laws on which society rests are to him tyrannical 
abuses by which the majority seek to limit the boundless 
license which is the birthright of every man born 
into this world. It is idle to tell him that those laws 
are supported by vast majorities. He answers that 
majorities, however vast, are mere synonyms for superior 
force, that he personally disapproves of the 
state of society which these laws have created and 
which they maintain, and that he has an innate right 
to assail that state by any means he chooses. His 
practical conclusion is appalling, but it seems to me 
to follow quite reasonably from his premises; and, 
as those premises are consciously or half-consciously 
held by thousands in all ranks of society, I fear 
that we are likely to hear more of him in the future.' 

"It is clear from this that the fundamental faith 
of the anarchists is atheism, not only as to the supreme 
supernatural governing power and future accountability, 
but as well as to conduct in the affairs of 
this life, denying the moral right of any power whatever 
to fetter or direct his individual judgment. All 
atheists may not be anarchists, but all anarchists are 
necessarily atheists. They cut adrift from the regulation 
or direction of their lives by divine or human 
power. This makes them anarchists. Their growth 
in Europe, foolish and crazy as it may be held, is not 
so surprising, considering the centuries of oppression 
and wrong operating on minds restrained by no moral 

R2893 : page 327 

or religious sentiment; but that their creed should 
have followers in this country shows not only the 
loss of all sense of moral accountability, but the density 
of ignorance and passion. The principles of the 
Christian religion or of any other of the world's great 
religions constitute a complete refutation of the creed 
of the anarchists. They are therefore the enemies 
of the human race." 



R2893 : page 327 



JOSEPH THE MERCIFUL. 

--GEN. 45:1-15. --OCT. 27.- 

"Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good."— Rom. 12:21. 

DIVINE PROVIDENCE in the affairs of men 
is the essence of this lesson. Joseph was now 
thirty-nine years of age, having been next to 
Pharaoh in the throne of Egypt for nine years. The 
seven years of plenty were in the past; the granaries 
of Egypt were full with enough to spare, and two 
years of the predicted famine were already past. It 
would seem that Joseph had made no attempt to 
communicate with his father and brethren; first, 
probably because the methods of communication at 
that time were limited, but more particularly, we 
opine, because he had for some years been realizing 
that divine providence was shaping his affairs. He 
remembered his early dreams, and could see that they 
were now in a fair way of fulfilment. He would 
leave to divine supervision this matter, which was 
evidently beyond his control anyway. He no doubt 
thought of the famine, and how it would affect Palestine, 
and thus the interests of his father and brethren, 
their households, flocks and herds. He no doubt expected 
that as other people from the vicinity were 
coming to Egypt to buy grain, so quite probably 
eventually the Hebrews would come also; and they 
were forced to come by the close of the second year 
of the famine. 

We may surmise that some law prohibited the 
sale of grain to foreigners, except by the chief ruler's 
permission, and that thus Joseph's brethren were 
obliged to come before him to explain. This thought 
is sustained by the fact that Joseph, wishing to try 
his brethren, first cast them into prison as spies— as 
though they were emissaries of a foreign power; 
which perceived the wealth of Egypt in food, and 
was meditating an attack upon the country. This 
gave Joseph the opportunity of inquiring minutely 
respecting the home conditions of his brethren, concerning 
his father and Benjamin, his younger 
brother, who was not with the brethren. Finally he 
gave them the opportunity of proving the truth of 
their statements, holding Simeon as a ransom until 
they would come again and bring Benjamin with 
them, knowing full well that they would be obliged to 
do this, because the famine would continue. These 
experiences proved a valuable lesson to the ten 
brethren, respecting the difficulties in which they 
were, and called to mind their past wrong conduct in 
respect to Joseph, for they accepted their present 
difficulties as retribution. "They said one to another, 
We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that 



we saw the anguish of his soul when he besought us, 
and we would not hear, therefore is this distress come 
upon us. And Reuben answered them, saying, 
Spake I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against 
the child;— and ye would not hear? Therefore behold 
also his blood is required. And they knew not 
that Joseph understood them; for he spake unto 
them by an interpreter." 

Joseph was not hard-hearted, but wise in his 
treatment of his brethren. Most evidently not a solitary 
act was inspired by vindictiveness. He was 
evidently taking God's view of matters; viz., that it 
is proper that a certain amount of retribution shall 
come upon evil-doers, so as to impress upon them 
the more thoroughly the sinfulness of sin. Thus 
parents and guardians of children should not permit 
their kindness and sympathy to hinder a reasonable, 
moderate punishment of wrong-doing. Nevertheless, 
pity and love should be back of all, as it was in 
Joseph's case; merely planning for the better opportunity 
and the larger amount of blessing in due time. 

When their grain was exhausted, and want was 
staring them in the face, Jacob finally consented to 
let Benjamin go with his brethren for the second purchase 
of grain; not, however, until Judah had become 
pledge for Benjamin, that he would not return to his 
home or family unless Benjamin also returned. The 
coming of the brethren to Joseph's house a second 
time, with the proof of the genuineness of their original 
story, was sufficient ground for their entertainment 
most graciously, and for the liberation of Simeon; 
—the whole company, to their surprise, being 
invited to dine with the governor, Joseph. They 
were surprised, too, that by some preconcerted arrangement 
they were seated at the table in the order 
of their ages; and further astonished that their 
younger brother, Benjamin, received five portions, 
as an evidence of special regard of the governor. 
They were rejoiced, undoubtedly, at the good fortune 
that had overtaken them, and making ready started 
on their homeward journey, doubtless thinking to 
themselves— We thought that our hardships of the 
previous time were probably in the nature of retributions, 
and that God's hand was in it, but after all, it 
seems that it was merely a natural thing that we 
should be taken for spies. Now, behold, we are 
prospered. 

But they had not gone far until they were overtaken 
by the governor's agents, who represented that 
a theft had been committed, that the governor's valuable 
silver mug, called by the Egyptians, "Cup of 
Divination," was missing. They protested their innocence, 
that they were not that kind of men, and 
suggested that they be searched thoroughly. Examination 
was made of the grain sacks of one after another, 
until finally the cup was found in Benjamin's 



sack, and the whole company, previously elated, now 
returned prisoners to the governor of Egypt, whose 
hospitalities they had so recently enjoyed, and apparently 
had so poorly requited. Perhaps they began to 
think about the Joseph matter again, and to say to 

R2893 : page 328 

themselves, The evil that we thought was past is still 
pursuing us. It was a good lesson undoubtedly, 
helping to impress upon their minds, not only the value 
of honesty, but also the thought that although 
the wheels of justice grind sometimes slowly, they 
grind surely and very fine. 

Benjamin, with the rest, denied that he had 
stolen the cup, and whether the brothers believed 
him or not, they would not lay special blame upon 
him, but generously shared it as a whole company. 
Judah, speaking for them, said, "What shall we say 
unto my Lord? What shall we speak, or how shall 
we clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquities 
of thy servants. Behold, we are my Lord's servants, 
both we and he also with whom the cup was 
found." They did not explain to Joseph the nature 
of their iniquity, though this evidently was in their 
minds. Joseph, however, wishing to see to what 
extent they had still the same evil, jealous disposition 
which they manifested toward him, proposed to 
let the others go free and merely to hold Benjamin, 
as the slave. The ruse was successful, and developed 
the fact that the brethren had learned lessons 
and formed characters in the interim which made 
them now more sympathetic one for another, and for 
their father. Their wrong course in Joseph's case 
had not been persisted in, but had been repented of. 
Judah explained the whole situation to Joseph 
through the interpreter, and so vividly did he picture 
Jacob's love for Benjamin, and his sorrow at the supposed 
death of Joseph, and the interest of the whole 
family in their father, that Joseph could no longer refrain 
—could no longer restrain his emotions. He 
felt that the time had now come to reveal himself to 
his brethren, and in order that they might feel the 
less embarrassed under the circumstances he ordered 
all the Egyptians from the room, and then explained 
briefly and sympathetically that he himself was their 
brother Joseph. 

What wonder that the brethren were troubled, 
as they thought probably of how they would be disposed 
to retaliate were they in his place of power. 
But Joseph soon convinced them that he had none 
but kindly feelings for them, that he was merciful, 
forgiving. The spirit which he exhibited under these 
circumstances is worthy of emulation, not merely by 
natural men, but also by the "new creatures in 
Christ Jesus." How often do we find that the Lord's 



people are narrow in such matters, instead of being 
broad and generous, loving and forgiving. Joseph 
now speaking to his brethren in the Hebrew tongue, 
repeated to them the words, "I am Joseph," and added, 
"whom ye sold into Egypt," that thus they might 
recognize him, not only by his speech, but by his 
knowledge of the facts, that it was really their brother 
who was before them. But this expression was so 
gracious, and anger and malice were so absent from 
his every word and act, that they were inspired with 
confidence, and at his request drew near to him. 

Many Christians would have spoiled the whole 
effect of this great lesson upon their brethren had 
they been in Joseph's place, by poor judgment, by 
reading the brethren a lecture;— by telling them 
what they already knew about the wrong of their conduct, 
about how now they were in his power, and how 
he could evil entreat them, but would not. Joseph 
was too wise and too merciful to take such a course. 
He took the contrary one, saying, "Be not grieved 
nor angry with yourselves that ye sold me hither." 
It seems wonderful indeed that a natural man could 
and would have so much of the spirit of God as is 
here manifested, and yet we know that Joseph was 
only a natural man— the holy spirit not having been 

R2894 : page 328 

poured out upon any of our race until Pentecost. It 
gives also a suggestion respecting the breadth of 
character of the ancients, quite in contradiction of 
the theory of evolution, which would claim that at 
that early period, man being but slightly above the 
monkey, would have coarse and brutish sentiments. 

Joseph preached a great sermon to his brethren 
in few words, when he said, "God did send me before 
you to preserve life"— he thus overruled your wrong 
course, and has brought out of it a blessing. He 
gave his brethren credit for ability to understand 
such things. That the Lord overruled their 
course for good, did not prove that their course was 
a good or proper course; it merely proved the divine 
power and the divine wisdom and divine providence, 
that was over Joseph and over all the house of Jacob, 
causing all things, even the evil thing, to work 
out for good, according to the divine plan. How 
great and how lasting a lesson came to Joseph's 
brethren through their experiences, and through this 
his short sermon we cannot tell; but there is a great 
lesson here for all of God's people today along the 
line of mercy toward those who deliberately sin 
against us; and also along the line of noting, discerning 
and referring to divine providence in connection 
with our affairs. We are not only to note divine 
providences, but we are to give credit for them, 
as it is written, "In all thy ways acknowledge him." 



Prov. 3:6. 

Joseph could have permitted his experiences to 
have developed a great deal of personal pride. He 
might have reasoned to himself, as some would have 
reasoned, that he was merely lucky, or that he was 
naturally bright, attractive, smart, and that this was 
the secret of his success; that this was the reason 
his father loved him specially; that this was the reason, 
when sold for a slave, he was bought by a good 
master in affluent circumstances; that this personal 
brilliancy was the cause of his rise in Potiphar's 
house to eminence; that the same effected his rise 
to a position of authority in the prison; that his keenness 
of intellect had enabled him to interpret the 
dreams; and that in general he stood head and shoulders 
above other men; and that others realized this, 
and hence he had come by his exaltation in a natural 
way. But had he thus been heady and high-minded, 
and self-conceited, we may be sure that it would have 
led to a fall— that God would not have continued to 
bless, prosper and advance him. We may be sure, 
too, that had he thus developed a spirit of pride and 
self-conceit, his conduct with his brethren would have 
been very different from what it was. He would 
have been crowing over them, and mistreating them 
in order to convince them of his power, and thus 
would have shown himself to be a very much smaller 

R2894 : page 329 

man than his proper course shows him to have been. 
He was a great man, and his greatness was manifested, 
not merely in his financial management of the 
kingdom of Egypt, but especially manifested in his 
reliance upon God, his realization that the divine 
promise and blessing, through his great-grandfather, 
Abraham, his grandfather, Isaac, and his father, Jacob, 
was resting upon him in some manner, and that 
because of this divine favor things were working as 
they were. 

The spiritual seed of Abraham may draw valuable 
lessons from this narrative. If it was appropriate 
that Joseph should acknowledge the Lord as the 
giver of all his blessings, which were all of an earthly 
and temporal kind, how much more should the spiritual 
Seed of Abraham acknowledge the spiritual blessings 
received at the Father's hand,— and recognize 
in every mercy and favor opportunities of service; 
that it is the hand of providence. Surely these should 
always be on the alert, to realize and to confess,— "It 
is the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes." 
But on the contrary, we are sorry at times to find 
some of God's spiritual children inclined to be puffed 
up, and to speak of God's favor, the knowledge of the 
truth which they have received of the Lord, as 
though it were something of their own achievement; 



—as though some honor were due them, as the inventors 
of the divine plan. 

Again, the spiritual Israelite should be even 
more merciful than Joseph. If he could see that the 
persecutions he receives, from his brethren and 
others, are merely incidents of divine providence— 
which the Lord is using to prepare him for coming 
blessings and exaltation, should not the spiritual Israelite 
take his disappointments as God's appointments? 
And should he not with a clearer eye of faith, be the 
better able to see that many of his spiritual advancements 
have come as a result of persecutions from the 
world and from false brethren? And should he not, 
like Joseph, look with great complacency upon all 
these various agencies which God has been pleased 
to use in spiritually uplifting him, to perfect him as a 
"new creature," an heir of God, a joint-heir with 
Jesus Christ, his Lord? He surely should. And the 
only things which can hinder us from seeing that our 
advancement is of the Lord, and not of ourselves, 
will be a lack of humility, and a lack of trust in divine 
providence; and the only things which could hinder 
us from feeling patient forbearance and kindly sympathy 
and love for those who have despitefully used 
and persecuted us, would be a lack of the spirit of the 
Lord, the spirit of mercy, and a failure to see properly 
that whatever agencies God may use in our spiritual 
upbuilding are to be appreciated and sympathized 
with;— whether they be brethren or of the world- 
Egyptians. 

Then Joseph explained the providence of God, 
the years of plenty and the years of famine, and how 
God had been supervising the entire matter, and that 
this was his means of preserving Abraham's posterity, 
concluding, "So now, it was not you that sent me 
hither, but God." We are not to give credit to the 
evil agencies through which we have received blessings, 
otherwise we might soon be disposed to call evil 
good; but we are to give full credit to God, because 
that which was intended to be evil, and which was evil 
of itself, divine wisdom, so far above the earthly 
plane, was able to overrule for our good. It is as we 
learn the lesson of God's inherent goodness— as we 
learn to respect his wisdom, love and power that our 
faith grows stronger and stronger, until we are able 
to trust the Lord, not only in things which we can 
see are working out for our good, but able to trust 
him also in respect to things which seem entirely 
dark and out of which apparently no good can come; 
thus we trust him where we cannot trace him. And 
this is faith; and faith is a gift of God in that it is cultivated 
to acceptable development by the Lord's gracious 
promises, rightly received, appreciated and acted 
upon. 

While Joseph had patiently waited for the Lord's 
time to come, and for twenty years had not seen his 



father's face, having now witnessed the fulfillment of 
his first dream, the bowing of his brother's sheaves 
to his sheaf, he realized that the Lord's time had 
about come for him again to see his father, when the 
second dream would be fulfilled. And whereas he 
was all patience before, now he was all energy and 
haste, because the time was come, and so he said to 
his brethren, "Haste ye, and go up to my father, and 
say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath 
made me lord of all Egypt. Come down unto me; 
tarry not." He impressed upon his brethren the 
glories of his position, not by way of boast or pride, 
but by way of assuring them of his authority and 
power to care for them, and so that they might fully 
assure their father Jacob that his caution might not 
hinder him from taking advantage of the goodly land 
of Goshen, now put at their disposal. His brethren 
and father were not invited to come and share in his 
throne and regal power, but were invited to come 
and partake of all the blessings flowing therefrom. 
Just so during the Millennial age, after the Christ, 
Head and Body, represented in Joseph shall be in 
the throne of glory and of power— in the heavenly 
Father's throne— when the Kingdom of God shall be 
established in the earth, all who feel a famine, a hunger, 
for the true bread of heaven, for eternal life, will 
be invited to come and receive abundantly of it. 
None, however, of the earthly class will be invited 
to share in the Kingdom honors, for the Kingdom 
class will be complete. But they will be invited to 
come and receive the blessings of the Kingdom, 
mental, moral and physical, health and strength, under 
the favor of the King of kings and Lord of lords. 
The parting of Joseph and his brethren was an 
affecting one; they now understood the meaning of 
their previous experiences, including the cup found 
in Benjamin's sack; they saw that these matters all 
were leading up to the present manifestation to them 
of the love and sympathy of Joseph, and now, as expressing 
his special love for Benjamin he kissed him 
first, weeping tears of joy and recognition, and then 
did to all the others similarly, and sent them on their 
way. There is power in affection, in love; but it is 
necessary that the loving affection be manifested, ere 
that power can be felt. A difficulty with many parents, 
husbands, wives, children, is that they do not 
manifest all the affection which they feel. Pride or 
fear or some other thing hinders, restrains them, from 

R2894 : page 330 

being as frank with each other as they should be. 
Joseph's example here is worthy of emulation. He 
was the wronged one; he was the one in power; he 
was the one who should have the dignity, and he, 
therefore, was the one who could best afford to humble 



himself, and to kiss and make an ado over his 
brethren. We may be sure that they appreciated it; 
that such a manifestation of affection on the part of 
the highly exalted brother touched a tender spot in 
their hearts, and doubtless worked good for them to 
the remainder of their lives. And so we may find it 
with our friends and relatives, that a manifestation 
of our love and kind feeling toward them will not 
only be reciprocated, but will do them good; and that 
our affection restrained of expression will leave an 
icy coldness, which nothing else will remove, and that 
such coldness will affect not only them but ourselves 
also unfavorably— sapping all of life's joy-springs. 

R2895 : page 330 

Let us remember, in this connection, the words of 
our text, "Be not overcome of evil, but overcome 
evil with good." Joseph exemplified this advice. 
He not only did not permit the evil course of his 
brethren to overcome him, and make him evil and 
bitter, but he overcame their evil tendencies, characters 
and dispositions by his love, his mercy, his kindness, 
his generosity,— affecting them favorably, no 
doubt, for the remainder of their days. Such a 
course is much more incumbent upon us than upon 
Joseph. He did it spontaneously; we have had the 
example and precepts of our Lord and his Apostles, 
and, as well, the begetting of the spirit of holiness. 
"What manner of persons ought we to be in all holy 
living and God-likeness?" 



R2895 : page 330 

"SPEAKING PERVERSE THINGS. 



TO WHAT ABSURDITY, yea blasphemy, men 
will sometimes go in their endeavor to say 
something "new" that will bring them into 
prominence before the public. The following utterance 
of a Brooklyn preacher deserves first place in this 
unsavory list. The pity is that his congregation and the 
public press put themselves on his low plane as respects 
spiritual things. What could be thought of 
Dr. Hillis' claim to believe in the vicarious atonement 
of Christ for the sins of the world, after we 
know his general view of the subject of atonement and 
entering the holy of holies as expressed in the following 
clipping. The gentleman's erudition is so 
highly esteemed among men that he is decreed a 
"Doctor of Divinity;" but it has utterly unfitted him 
to be a minister of the gospel of Christ— a declarer 



of the only name given under heaven and among men 
whereby we must be saved, and of the only vicarious 
sin offering, of the only and great High Priest, who 
has entered the holy of holies by virtue of his own 
sacrifice finished at Calvary and which alone has 
merit before God for the forgiveness of sins. 

SLAIN FOR THE NATION'S SINS. 

New York, Sept. 19. --The Rev. Newell Dwight 
Hillis spoke this morning at the memorial services in 
Plymouth church, Brooklyn. He said in part: 

"Among the heroes and martyrs who have died 
vicariously let us make a large place for our slain 
leader. In the highest sense, the president has now 
entered into the holy of holies, bearing the sins of 
his people with him. Reverently we confess that he 
was wounded for our transgressions and he was 
bruised for our iniquities. 

"With sorrow and shame, we hear and now confess 
that for our transgressions he was stricken. But 
we remember that the angel of martyrdom and the 
angel of immortality are twin brothers. Perhaps the 
death of our president has shocked the people into 
the consciousness of their sins. Perhaps his blood 
will cleanse away the people's transgressions. If today, 
assembled in church and hall, the people register 
a vow that they will strengthen the home, the school, 
the press and the church, through wise legislation and 
noble precept, expel anarchy, lawlessness, injustice, 
class hatred from the land, our martyred president 
will not have died in vain. Then, verily, he will have 
slain more in his death than in his life." 



R2895 : page 330 

THE CLOSE OF A NOBLE LIFE. 



-GEN. 50:15-26.-NOV. 3.- 

"So teach us to number our days that we may 
apply our hearts unto wisdom."— Psa. 90:3. 

JACOB was a hundred and thirty years old 
when his sons returned with news of Joseph's 
greatness in the land of Egypt. His joy at 
hearing that his son was still alive, and now great, 
was off-set by the natural weakness of his advanced 
years. Hence he could scarcely trust himself to believe 
the report, even with the explanation given by 
his sons, of how they had sold Joseph into slavery, 
and had besmeared his coat with blood for their father's 



deception, twenty-two years before. However, 
the story of his sons was well attested by the royal 
present which Joseph had sent to him, and by the 
Egyptian wagons sent to bear him and the family as 
comfortably as possible in the journey. These wagons 
were doubtless the carriages of that day, workmanship 
in that line not having advanced to present 
proficiency. Jacob was persuaded, and started on 
the journey, during which he offered sacrifices to the 
Lord, possibly questioning in his own mind the wisdom 
of thus leaving the land of promise, and whether 
or not it might be interpreted of the Lord as an 
abandonment of his faith, or a relinquishment of the 
blessing which from earliest childhood had centered 
and directed his course of life. 

R2895 : page 331 

The Lord answered his query, and his sacrifices 
(probably by a dream) assuring him that he was taking 
the proper course in going into Egypt, and that 
ultimately his posterity should come again into "the 
land of promise." The spiritual Israelite should thus 
have in view at all times that which by his covenant 
has become the center of his life, the center of his 
interest, of his hopes and of his aims— the Abrahamic 
covenant and his share therein. He, too, must be on 
the look-out lest there shall be deceptions of the Adversary 
combined with earthly prosperity and the 
world's favor. When we are undergoing disadvantages 
or persecutions we are in much less danger 
than when the tide of worldly prosperity sets in our 
direction. Let us remember at such times to go often 
to the Lord, to seek to know his will, fully, completely; 
to bring to mind our covenant and its value, as 
above all earthly considerations. And let us offer 
unto the Lord the true sacrifice— presenting the merits 
of our dear Redeemer's sacrifice as the ground of 
our acceptance, repeating the full devotion of our 
hearts— renewing our covenant. This is the only 
safe way in this pilgrim journey. 

We pass hastily over the narrative of the presentation 
of Jacob and Joseph's brethren to Pharaoh, 
and their settlement in the land of Goshen. After 
they had resided there seventeen years (Gen. 47:28) 
Jacob died, was buried with all the ceremonials common 
to the Egyptian court, because he was a relative 
of Pharaoh's representative. And it is here that our 
lesson proper begins. Joseph's brothers judged him 
to have a disposition considerably like their own; 
they could not believe him to be thoroughly generous 
and forgiving, and though they acknowledged his 
kindness toward them, they said to themselves, This 
was merely on account of our father Jacob, and not 
on our account, and now that our father is dead Joseph 
will treat us differently. It was because moved 



with such feelings that they first sent a messenger to 
Joseph, and afterward followed themselves into his 
presence, to ask his mercy and to declare themselves 
willing to be his servants. 

It strikes us that this well illustrates the condition 
of many who come to the Lord with an insufficiency 
of faith. They are convinced of his mercy toward 
them, and yet are always fearful. The truth is 
that they do not know him; they think of him as 
moved by like passions with themselves, more or less 
depraved, more or less controlled by animosity. It is 
an evidence of growth in grace when we come to that 
place in our experiences where, admitting our own 
guilt and unworthiness of divine favor we have, 
nevertheless, become so intimately acquainted with 
the Lord as to have a full assurance of faith in his 
declaration that our sins are forgiven. It is to such a 
development of grace that the Lord referred, saying, 
"This is life eternal, that they might know thee the 
only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast 
sent." (John 17:3.) But such a knowledge is not 
to be obtained instantaneously, but rather is to be the 
result of a growth in grace; for we grow in grace as 
we grow in knowledge, and we grow in knowledge as 
we grow in grace;— the two keeping pace, the one 
with the other, as do our feet in walking. It is because 
the majority who have named the name of 
Christ do not grow in grace and in knowledge that 
they fail to attain to that grand condition of which 
the Apostle speaks as "full assurance of faith"— full 
confidence in the Lord, in his goodness, in his wisdom, 
in his love, in his providential care over all of 
their affairs. And the lack of such growth is owing 
to their failure to offer their sacrifices unto the Lord 
—to commit all of their ways to him. 

Joseph's answer to his brethren was most noble, 
and gives good evidence that his conduct was not 
merely an outward profession, but the result of an 
established character. He did not even say to himself, 
My brothers have misunderstood me, but though 
I freely forgive them I will use their fear as a stepping 
stone to greater power over them, and will say to 
them, I will do you no harm, but on the contrary treat 
you most kindly, as long as you are fully obedient to 
me, and send me presents yearly, or give me tithes of 
your increase, or come annually to make obeisance 
before me, and to acknowledge afresh your wrong, 
and to confess my generosity. No; he had too noble 
a character for this; he was too unselfish. On the 
contrary, he said, "Fear not; for am I in the place of 
God?" The secret of his right course with his brethren 
was the correct view which he took of the matter 
himself; he saw himself as merely God's servant in 
dealing with his brethren, and in all things. He saw 
that God's providence had been in the whole affair. 
How could he think otherwise? He saw the fulfilment 



of his inspired dreams; he had noted the miraculous 

leading of divine providence in the various 

steps by which he had been led from slavery to the 

R2896 : page 331 

throne of Egypt; he probably reflected that if now 
he should either do evil toward his brethren, or think 
unkindly of them, he would be casting a reflection 
upon one of the instrumentalities which God had 
used for his blessing. He could not do this and be 
loyal to and appreciative of divine power, and he 
communicated to his brothers for their encouragement 
and comfort this thought; that although they 
had purposed evil, and had done evil, nevertheless 
the thing really done was a good thing, but for which 
they deserved no credit, but discredit, and God all the 
honor. He would have them see that this was the 
basis of his dealing with them, and that he felt not the 
slightest animosity, but a full appreciation of the divine 
blessing, which had come through their course. 

How great a blessing it would be for all spiritual 
Israelites to learn well this lesson; viz., that if we accept 
the results of any matter as being good, and if we 
realize that we were guided to those results by divine 
providence, we should think and feel most generously, 
most kindly, toward those who were the instruments 
used by providence, notwithstanding the fact 
that they might have been unwilling instructors, or, 
like Joseph's brethren, have verily intended opposite 
results. Those who are enabled to take such a view 
of affairs and forces operating in their daily lives are 
enabled "always to triumph through the Lord," as 
the Apostle expresses it. And such find no room for 
bitterness or railing, either against Satan or against 
any of his servants. 2 Cor. 2:14; Jude 9. 

This does not mean that they call the evil course 

R2896 : page 332 

good; nor that they will or should have any sympathy 
with the evil course; nor with the evil motives 
inspiring it; nor with the evil persons, so long as they 
are in harmony with the evil motives and evil course. 
But it does mean that their minds will be so filled 
with the thought of divine supervision in their affairs, 
and how all the time they were safe under the protecting 
care, the shadow of the Almighty, and that all 
things are working for their good, however they outwardly 
appear, that they will not have any bitterness 
whatever, either of word or of heart, toward those 
who attempted to, and outwardly did, do them evil, 
but whose evil intentions and conduct were overruled 
by the Almighty. In proportion as the Lord's people 
get into the large place where they can take a 
broad view of the situation, in that same proportion 



will they find themselves not only delivered from anger 
and malice and hatred and strife toward their 
opponents, but instead, possessed of "the peace of 
God which passeth all understanding," ruling in their 
hearts, keeping them secure amidst all of the storms 
and vicissitudes of life— because their anchor holds 
within the vail. They have "set to their seal that 
the Lord is true," and hence can rejoice always. 

Not only was Joseph's course the right one in 
the sight of God, the noble one in the sight of all 
right-minded people, the blessed one as respected his 
brothers, their comfort, their peace, their love toward 
him,— but it was in every sense the proper and the 
best course as respected his own peace, joy, blessing. 
When he allayed their fears and comforted them, and 
spake kindly unto them, and promised them and their 
families the same care as when their father lived, he 
was taking also the course which must have brought 
the greatest blessing and comfort to his own heart. 
All do not know it, but it is a fact that the grandest 
quality that man can exercise, and the one which 
brings the largest amount of blessing itself, is the exercise 
of the God-like quality of mercy, compassion, 
benevolence. Those of spiritual Israel who have not 
practiced in this direction are not far advanced in 
spiritual development, and those who have practiced 
realize the truthfulness of the Lord's words, "Blessed 
are the merciful," and "Blessed are the 
peacemakers." 

The next few verses of our lesson cover the period 
of fifty-four years from the death of Jacob to the 
death of Joseph; and give us comparatively little information, 
except that they give fresh evidence that 
the basis of Joseph's strength of character and fidelity 
to principle which carried him safely through the 
vicissitudes of his remarkable experience was faith 
in God— faith in the Abrahamic promise. And so 
we find it to-day, and all through the past, so far as 
we are able to decipher the teachings of history; 
those who have been the Lord's faithful people, have 
all been inspired by the hope set before us in the gospel. 
This is the hope of which the Apostle speaks, 
saying that it is "an anchor to the soul, sure and 
steadfast;"— it holds firm and secure in the storms 
and difficulties of life, and prevents the wrecking of 
our lives upon the rocks of sin, deception, doubt, selfishness, 
etc. 

Who can doubt that it was Joseph's respect unto 
the divine promise that kept him faithful as Potiphar's 
steward, again in the prison, and again as 
Pharaoh's representative in the throne? In proportion 
as heavenly promises are before our minds, 
earthly and selfish ambitions are dwarfed and lose 
their power over us. Joseph's eye of faith, centered 
upon God's promise to Abraham and upon the land 
of Canaan, exercised a potent influence, because he 



realized that to be a friend of God, and an heir of 

God's promises, called for a purity of heart and of 

life which God could approve. Looking back he saw 

the influence of these promises upon his great grandfather, 

Abraham, upon his grandfather, Isaac, and 

upon his father, Jacob, and we see that the same 

promise controlled him to his great advantage. The 

people who today become enamored of wealth and 

of position and of power, so that they would be willing 

to sacrifice principles of justice and of truth that 

they might selfishly grasp these, thereby give evidence 

that they lack the power of the truth, the power 

of the Abrahamic promise, to control them and their 

lives. Had the Abrahamic promise not been forceful 

and weighty in the mind of Joseph he might have 

been plotting and scheming for the throne of Egypt 

or to have obtained the mastery over his own brethren; 

but realizing that God was behind the promise 

he was waiting patiently for that, as the greatest and 

most wonderful blessing conceivable— far beyond 

the things which he could have grasped, and the 

grasping of which would have meant his relinquishment 

of God's promise. Not, however, that he expected 

to go up out of Egypt into the land of Canaan 

himself; for he evidently knew, and it probably came 

down to us through him, that God had appeared to 

Abraham, and told him that his posterity should be 

in Egypt, and be evilly treated there, and that the 

period of their sojourn would be four hundred years. 

Joseph's hope in God and in that Abrahamic 
promise must have been, therefore, a hope through 
a resurrection of the dead; and although it taught a 
valuable lesson, it was doubtless because of his imperfect 
understanding of the resurrection, and the 
power of God, that he so particularly gave commandment 
respecting the carrying up of his bones out of 
Egypt into Canaan, when the time of God's favor 
should come, and Israel should be delivered. And 
so must the spiritual Israelite have his mind centered 
in the future fulfillment of the divine promises, 
through a resurrection of the dead, if he would be delivered 
from the worldly influences of this present 
time, and be kept loyal to the Lord and to the highest 
principles of character. This faith in a future 
kingdom, future honor, future riches, future glory, 
dwarfs into insignificance the honor and glory and 
wealth of this present time, and makes all true believers 
separate from the world in these respects, and 
thus prepares them to think of the affairs of this present 
time from a more just and more equitable and 
dispassionate standpoint— they are removed from the 
immediate influence of selfishness in its most powerful 
forms, even though they still find, notwithstanding 
their faith in the promises, the necessity for keeping 
the body under, and mortifying its natural disposition 
toward selfishness. 



R2896 : page 333 

Our Golden Text is appropriate to the lesson, 
and every way worthy of the attention of the spiritual 
Israelite. We know that our days are numbered as 
respects the present life. We know that we need not 
expect eternal life under present conditions, and thus 
far the world and the Christian are on a common 
level; but here they part, the one saying to himself, 
"Life is short, and I must grasp and use it for myself, 
the best I can." The other, with a higher wisdom, 
that cometh from above, realizes his own inability 
and insufficiency, heeds the message from the 
Lord respecting an eternal life beyond the tomb— 
the resurrection life, and goes to the Lord, petitioning 
for wisdom respecting the life that now is, as well 
as that which is to come. 

In answer to his petitions he is taught of God in 
the experience of life to more and more appreciate 
the eternal, the everlasting life, and to spend time and 
energy in building up such a character as would be 
pleasing to his Creator, and bring the reward of "life 
everlasting." The Christian, in numbering his days, 
does not do so with a doleful or disconsolate sentiment, 
although he does so with sobriety. He counts 
the days as they go as so many blessings, so many 
privileges, so many opportunities to "show forth the 
praises of him who called us out of darkness into his 
marvelous light," to render assistance to others in the 
pilgrim journey, and to develop in himself more and 
more of the character pleasing in the sight of God,— 
to become more and more a copy of God's dear Son. 
As he numbers the days gliding swiftly by, and perceives 
how he is using them in harmony with the divine 
instructions, he ultimately comes to that condition 
of heart in which he is longing for the Kingdom 
and the full attainment of all the glories into 
which he hopes to be ushered, as a sharer in the first 
(chief) resurrection. And from this standpoint he 
numbers the days as they go by joyfully, and is glad 
when the days of the years of his present pilgrimage 
end; because his hope in the Lord, and in the gracious 
features of his plan, is growing daily stronger, 
clearer and brighter. 



R2897 : page 333 

JEPHTHAH'S VOW-A BETTER TRANSLATION. 



In our September first issue we answered a question 
respecting Jephthah's daughter. Since then 



Brother C. J. Peterson calls to our attention the following 

item from the Appendix of the Emphatic 

Diaglott. 

"The original, Judges 1 1:30, when properly 
translated, reads thus: 'And it shall be that whoever 
comes forth of the doors of my house to meet 
me, when I return in peace, from the children of Ammon, 
shall surely be Jehovah's, and I will offer to him 
a burnt offering.' The vow contains two parts: (1) 
That person who would meet him on his return 
should be Jehovah's, and be dedicated forever to his 
service, as Hannah devoted Samuel before he was 
born. (1 Sam. 1:11.) (2) That Jephthah himself 
would offer a burnt offering to Jehovah. 

"Human sacrifices were prohibited by the Law 
(Deut. 12:30); and the priests would not offer them. 
Such a vow would have been impious, and could not 
have been performed. It may be safely concluded 
that Jephthah's daughter was devoted to perpetual 
virginity; and with this idea agrees the statements 
that 'she went to bewail her virginity;' that the women 
went four times in every year to mourn or talk 
with (not for) her; that Jephthah did according to his 
vow, and that 'she knew no man.'" 

We are glad that our attention is called to this 
evidently better translation, which clears away the 
difficulty, and shows that the burnt-offering was one 
thing, and the devotion of the daughter another 
thing. We are to remember, too, the testimony of 
the entire Old Testament, to the effect that prior to 
our Lord's birth all the women of Israel coveted 
earnestly the great blessing and privilege of being 
possibly the mother of Messiah, or amongst his forebears. 
We are to remember, also, the exultant 
language of the Virgin Mary when finally it was announced 
to her that she had won this long-sought 
prize: "Henceforth all shall call me blessed"— all 
shall recognize me as the one who has attained this 
blessed privilege of being the mother of Messiah. 



page 333 

ENCOURAGING WORDS THROUGH THE BRITISH BRANCH. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

You will be pleased to know that the work in 
Great Britain is going on nicely. There are now 
fourteen Colporteurs spending all their time and energy 
in the blessed service, in this country, and several 
others are giving much of their spare time in the 
same way, some of these with a view to entering 
wholly into the work when able. These are encouraged 



from time to time by seeing some fruit of their 
labors. 

The volunteers have been quite industrious also, 
and the tract distributors as well. We shall not at 
this time give figures to show how many Dawns and 
Tracts have been placed in the hands of the people 
here this year, as we hope to do so in due time in the 
Annual Report. 

As brethren and sisters have taken their holidays 
this summer, the principal thought with most 
of them seems to have been how to use this time to 
the very best advantage. With this in mind, many 
have gone to new places, and have consulted together 
so that as many as possible of the seaside towns 
might be visited. While there, they have been diligent 
in the volunteer work and tract distribution to 
the residents and visitors from all parts of the country, 
who might carry of the influence back to their 
homes. Some happy results have attended these labors 
of the harvesters, for which we thank God. We 
continue to pray, as we doubt not you also do, that 
the Lord of the Harvest will send forth more laborers 
into the field. 

Herewith are extracts from interesting letters 
recently received at the British Branch. 

Yours faithfully in Christ, E. C. Henninges. 



page 334 

Dear Friend:— 

I write to thank you for the parcel of booklets 
and tracts which you forwarded. As the Lord opens 
up opportunity for me, I shall make good use, I trust, 
of the good seed entrusted to my care. 

I know many "thinking Christians" who are expecting 
our Lord's return, but who weary in the waiting, 
and are, I think, somewhat confused in their 
minds, looking for the person and neglecting the 
"signs." For these I shall find the little pamphlet on 
the Second Advent extremely valuable, though I am 
beginning already to find that many of these dear 
people are not quite ready to assimilate the "meat in 
due season." 

My own experiences in studying this magnificent 
work are such as I have never known before. 
From childhood I have been a great reader, and have 
read the standard works in all departments of English 
literature; but no work apart from the Holy 
Scriptures has ever given me such satisfaction and 
joy— such understanding of the Divine Word— as 
Millennial Dawn. It is indeed happiness to live now, 
for clouds of darkness have rolled away from my 
mind. 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 



A. E. D.,— Gloucestershire. 



My Dear Brother:— 

In consequence of the distribution of "Food for 
Thinking Christians," I am now coming into contact 
with many enquirers, some of whom are giving the 
truth careful consideration, while others are becoming 
veritable enemies, denouncing us and our work, 
saying that it belongs to the devil. I thank God for 
positive proof that his grace is amply sufficient for us 
all, and we feel that, having put our hands to the 
plow, we dare not look back, but will press along 
the path revealed, whereon the light shineth more 
and more unto the perfect day. 

I have sent literature to various parts of this 
country, and to Bermuda; so you see that our little 
circle of work is spreading. I only wish I were able 
to do more; but if the Master wishes us to do so, I 
have no doubt he will open the way. We shall be 
glad of another supply of "Food." 

With kindest love from Brother C., my wife and 
self, and praying our Father's richest blessing be 
your portion, believe me, 

Very sincerely yours in Him, 
H. W. L.,-Kent. 



Dear Brother:— 

We are now settled in D . We have been spying 

out the land, and— well, if it isn't flowing with 
milk and honey altogether, we think there should be 
some good work done here. 

We should like to serve the churches here with 
some "Food" on the Sundays. There is a considerable 
number of them, and we shall require a large 
quantity. Brother C. will be the "captain," and I will 
be one of the "volunteers," meantime, and perhaps 
the Lord will send recruits. 

With Christian love and kind regards, we are, 
Yours in His service, 

(Colporteurs),-C. & C, -Scotland. 



Dear Brother:— 

Greeting! It is refreshing to hear of the increased 
interest in London, and we praise the dear 
Lord you are permitted to see some fruit of your labor. 
Thank God, the time is near when the glory of 
the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it 
together. Oh, may we all be faithful unto death, and 
so have a glorious share in revealing our gracious 
Father's character to an astounded world! Oh, 



what a prospect, how stimulating ! How can we 
keep from singing? Are not we the blessed people 
who hear the joyful sound? Hallelujah! 

We have not done so well as usual the past two 
weeks, and we must acknowledge we have been much 
disappointed; but we shall certainly, in future, be 
more sympathetic with those who are less successful; 
yet, if it please the Lord, we wish to do better, so as 
to encourage others to come out into this branch of 
the harvest work. Please pray for us; we remember 
you without ceasing. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, 

L. & K. (Colporteurs),— Leicestershire. 



Dear Sir and Brother:— 

Of the "Food for Thinking Christians," which 
you sent for distribution, I have given away about 
200, not without a good deal of opposition; but I rejoice 
that the truth is being listened to by a number, 
and obeyed by a few, among whom are one of my 
brothers, a sister and her husband, who are now rejoicing 
in the truth of God's Word; also a dear friend 
who recently went to Scotland; there he has had to 
suffer persecution for the truth's sake; but in that he 
greatly rejoices— that he is counted worthy so to 
suffer. 

I find that the majority of people have to be educated 
up to these things, and our tracts are most useful 
for that, in my experience. 

With all good wishes for the furtherance and 
spread of the truth, I am as ever, 

Yours sincerely in the Lord's service, 
J. R.,— Northumberland. 



Dear Brother:— 

We distributed about 500 of the Towers in R., 
when prejudice against the truth became so great 
that we were obliged to withdraw. The place is 
small and the news of the circulation spread so rapidly, 
and so much had been said against them, that a 
very large number of the people began to refuse 
them. Truly, Satan hath blinded their eyes, lest the 
glorious gospel of Christ should shine into their 
hearts, and they be free; but thank God for the assurance 
that this condition shall not long obtain. Soon 
the light and knowledge of the Lord shall be caused 
to fill the whole earth, and Satan will no longer have 
power to deceive the people. 

I am thankful still to be privileged to do a little 
"harvest" work, now and again, and I do thank God 
that I do see some fruit for my labor. I often wonder 
why our Lord has been so gracious to me, for I 



am so unworthy. His blessings have been so rich, 
that I am persuaded that nothing shall separate me 
from the love of Christ, my Savior. 
Yours faithfully in Christ, 

G. H. T.,-Scotland. 



page 335 

Dear Brother:— 

On occasion of your recent visit to M , from 

which place I have been transferred, I did not get an 
opportunity to see you and have a talk; circumstances 
beyond my control prevented me from being at 
M that day. 

On taking up my duties here, I soon began to 
realize that I was alone, so far as my views are concerned, 
and that if I wished to have any friends and 
co-workers, I must set to work at once. I distributed 
quite a lot of tracts without apparent success; but 
am pleased now to inform you that by the help of 
God, I have made a very favorable impression on 
three of my workmates. We have spent several profitable 
evenings together at my home, and I have 
reason to hope that our heavenly Father, in answer 
to my prayers, has favored me with at least one 
brother and helper. 

Although my knowledge as yet is limited, I am 
quite sure that our Master will help us, for it is written, 
"Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after 
righteousness, for they shall be filled." I am most 
anxious to transmit to others the truths with which 
I have been favored, in the earnest hope that I may 
be of some use in heralding the approach of our 
Master's kingdom, and thereby discharge, to some 
extent, the great debt which I owe him for all that he 
has done for me. 

I trust that you will remember me in your prayers. 
Yours in Christ's service, 

A. M.,— Lancashire. 

R2897 : page 335 

LETTERS FROM THE HOME FIELD. 



[The following letter, written on return from the 
Oakland Convention to the Brother who so kindly 
entertained the friends, will be very interesting to 
many of our readers. We publish it with Brother 
Weber's permission.— Editor.] 

My dear Brother Webster:— I am glad to write 
you that I arrived home Tuesday morning. Had a 
very pleasant and profitable journey, for which I thank 



and praise my heavenly Father. How much I thank 
him upon every remembrance of you! He put it into 
your heart to write to me; then so to arrange that I 
met you on that memorable day in Baltimore; then in 
inviting me to this last feast at your home— to meet 
Brother Russell, your own dear family, and so many 
of God's dear children; then to feast at our Father's 
table. Oh, how good it tasted! I felt so hungry for 
the truth. Altho the Lord has richly blessed me 
since this glorious truth began to dawn upon my soul, 
I had never met with but two people of the Dawn faith 
before this. 

I have written a long letter to the Church where 
I have been a member for nearly 30 years, asking them 
to drop my name from their roll of membership, and 
giving my reason for this. I shall also have to write 
to several missionary societies and other churches and 
colleges where I have been a contributor. Of course 
for the present fiscal year I shall have to contribute 
according to my pledges, but after that it will close 
and I shall be able, if the Lord continues to prosper 
me, to do more for this Truth for which I now stand. 

Well, I will not weary you with too long a letter. 
I thank the Lord for you and ask you to extend my 
sincere thanks to dear Mrs. Weber and the girls for 
all their work of labor and love, also to the boys that 
were kept so busy. I know God will bless them. 
And now whenever you come East remember your 
oldest (or youngest) boy in Cromwell, Conn. I shall 
indeed esteem it a favor to have the privilege of having 
you with us, and any of your family that can conveniently 
come this way. I am arranging with Brother 
Russell to have a Pilgrim brother come here and give 
Chart lectures. Yours in the Master's service, 
A. N. Pierson,— Connecticut. 



Dear Brother Russell:— I have not written for 
a long time; nevertheless my thoughts and prayers 
are constantly with you and the friends at the "Bible 
House." 

Circumstances forbid my entering the colporteur 
service, as I had so fondly hoped; but I wish 
you to know that my zeal for the cause is no less fervent 
than when I was first enlightened. The experience 
of those days was sweet to me, for then I 
drank deep draughts from the fount of knowledge- 
it was sweet in my mouth, but you are acquainted with 
the after effects. We can have Christian experience 
only as we put on Christ; and since it is my daily 
labor to be transformed by the renewing of the mind 
into an example of godliness, I can bear witness to 
the truth of the experiences of the brethren. You 
may remember how anxious I was in the beginning 
to spread the Truth; how confident that I would be 



an excellent instructor of the foolish and erring ones. 
Having read four volumes of Dawn, I felt there was 
very little more to be known about the Scriptures; 
but now having advanced further in the knowledge 
of God's plan, and having developed further in Christian 
character, I feel thoroughly unfit to be a teacher 
of so great truths. 

The school I had last winter was closed prematurely 
for lack of students. I have tried in many 
ways to provide for my temporal necessities more 
comfortably at home, but they have all failed;— rather 
they have not materialized as I expected; but perhaps 
from the Lord's standpoint they were a success. 
I know one thing; they have taught me humility and 
dependence upon God's loving care. This assurance 
that I am still in the way I think is due you. 

The Watch Tower I find an indispensable vade 
mecum, ever full of instruction profitable for all who 
run for the attainment of the joy set before us. May 
the Lord ever provide you wisdom, strength and 
courage, that you may incessantly preach the Word, 
endure hardness as a good soldier, and be faithful 
unto death. 

Yours in the service of our present Lord, 
James A. Browne,— Georgia. 

[The above is from a colored brother; and incidentally 
we remark that about 200 colored persons 
on the Watch Tower lists give good evidence that 
they are of the "pure in heart," "accepted in the Beloved." 
Some have thought that we in some measure 
disdained brethren of color, because we stipulated 
that the "Volunteer" distribution should be done at 
white Protestant churches. But not so: we meant no 
disparagement of Catholics, nor of blacks; but arranged 
thus merely because their average standards 
of intelligence, etc., do not seem to warrant the necessary 
outlay.— Editor.] 



page 337 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. NOVEMBER 1, 1901. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 

A New Era for the Jews, etc 339 

Anti -Clerical Agitation in Spain 340 

Hell Less Popular with Methodists 341 

Poem: Are You Watching? 342 

Israel Oppressed in Egypt 342 

Concerning the Closing of the Call 344 

He was a Goodly Child 345 

The Parabolic Vineyard Wasted 348 

Encouraging Words from Friends 350 

Another Swiss Helper 351 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 



and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve in this 
manner. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM SERVICE. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 
write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 

(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number of an audience could probably 

be gathered? 
You can answer all queries briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. 

(c) John Smithson and Amos Browning, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. 
(f) Yes: 100 to 300. 



R2897 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



A NEW ERA FOR THE JEWS. 



LONDON, September 24. --Israel Zangwill, the 
novelist, poet and playwright, who has become 
one of the most prominent of the prophets 
in the Zionist movement gave to-day some significant 
facts concerning the coming conference of the 
Zionists at Basle, Switzerland. "It is not impossible," 
said Mr. Zangwill, "that Dr. Herzl may have a 
great surprise for the world, to be announced at that 
convention. He has been negotiating in person with 
the Sultan of Turkey for a charter for Palestine, and 
it is possible that he has obtained that charter. It 
seems likely at any rate that the charter may be had 
before many months. 

"Once the charter is assured, much larger contributions 
should be obtained. We have at present 
about a million dollars, most of it from three or four 
subscribers. We're not going to admit anyone except 
skilled workmen. Jews who want to get into 
Palestine under the new charter will have to come up 



to a high standard financially, physically and morally 
in order to be admitted. If we were going to let in 
those who were looking for food where there was no 
food except such as the colonists make for themselves, 
it would lead to a great disaster." 

"What sort of government would Palestine have 
under the charter from the Sultan?" asked the 
reporter. 

"Well, there's the Chartered Company in South 
Africa, for instance. Perhaps it would be something 
like that. But you may say that the leaders of the 
Zionists have read deeply enough in their histories to 
know that the pilgrim fathers didn't have the present 

R2898 : page 339 

constitution of the United States in their heads when 
they sailed for America. The constitution evolved 
itself— and just so the government of Palestine will 
evolve itself." 

WATER WORKS IN JERUSALEM. 



The ancient aqueducts and reservoirs of Jerusalem testify 
to the abundant provision that was made for running 
water in the Holy City when it was the metropolis 
of the Jewish state. It is only within the last few 
weeks that they have been brought again into the 
service of the city, which, during intervening centuries, 
has been dependent upon the scanty accumulation 
of rain water. The droughts of the present summer 
led to distress, which, happily the new governor 
of Jerusalem, Mohammed Pjevad Pasha, had the will 
and energy to combat. He secured the Sultan's consent 
to lay immediately a pipe from Solomon's pools, 
nine miles south of the city. The pipe draws from 
the sealed fountain mentioned in the song of Solomon: 
"My beloved is like a spring, shut up in a fountain 
sealed," the deep down subterranean spring, 
which, from the time of Solomon, flowed through an 
arched channel to a distributing chamber. The tunnel 
is roofed with stones in the shape of an inverted 
V. It is one of the oldest structures in existence. 
It passes through the valley where are the beautiful 
ancient gardens of Solomon mentioned in Ecclesiastes. 
After passing around the slope of Zion, it enters 
the city through the grounds of the mosque Omar, 
which is in the old temple area. 

This drawing from Solomon's pools will enable 
the use of twelve ancient fountains in the city. It 
will require twenty kilometers of piping, ten centimeters 
in diameter when finally installed. The 
governor has also successfully repaired the Virgin's 
fount, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, outside of the city 



walls. Its waters pass to the pool of Siloam to a tunnel 
built by Hezekiah, as his workmen recorded in 
a rough-hewn Hebrew, which is the oldest inscription 
extant. It was stolen, but afterward recovered, and 
is now in a museum at Constantinople. 

A ROMANIST VIEW OF MORTAL SIN. 



"The new Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic 
diocese of Hexham and Newcastle made his visitation 
to St. Joseph's, West Hartlepool, on Sunday. 
In the course of his address he said it was one of his 
duties to point out their faults. He reproved them 

R2898 : page 340 

for their irregular attendance at mass, for drunkenness, 
and for the irregular attendance of their children 
at the day schools. The practice of Roman 
Catholics sending their children to Protestant schools 
when they had schools of their own, he said, was one 
of which no bishop could approve. It was a mortal 
sin, for which no priest could give absolution." 
The above is clipped from an English journal 
and serves well to show how men who are not vicious 
may be combative and dictatorial to such a degree 
as to not only do violence to God's word and 
character, but also to insult reason, even in its most 
degraded form. This bishop is very new and fresh 
every way, when he thinks that even ignorant Romanists 
will believe him sincere in thus declaring 
that the sending of Catholic children to the public 
schools constitutes a sin unto death— that hath never 
forgiveness. And by this the bishop means a sin unto 
endless life in the torments of hell. Poor world! 
the "Doctors of Divinity" have long been Satan's 
deceiving agents; but thank God for the promise of 
his word in Rev. 20:2,3. 

UNREAL HOPES AND FALSE PROFESSIONS. 



An editorial comment in a prominent New York 
journal says: 

"Future life, no matter how gorgeously it is depicted, 
is, and must be, a depressing subject for people 
of one sort, comfortable, prosperous, and self-satisfied. 
For before they can make their triumphal entry 
into Heaven they feel they have to make their exit 
from a world in which they are far more thoroughly 
at home than in any heaven they have ever heard of. 
Hence the difficulty about the rich man's entering the 
Kingdom of Heaven is not confined to one side only. 



The rich man, for his part, is not in a hurry to get 
there. And inasmuch, as people of this kind set the 
tone in society, it is no wonder that scientific investigation 
of immortality is not encouraged. People 
do not want to hear about it, and above all they do 
not want to know about it. For if once they knew, 
it would be most inconvenient. They would have to 
act on their knowledge, and that might upset the habits 
of a life time. And the older one gets the less one 
likes that. What the decision was would not so much 
matter; whether science decided for immortality or 
for annihilation, the blissful ignorance that enabled 
one to ignore the subject in ordinary life would be 
gone for ever. Hence an uncertainty to which we 
have grown adapted is deliberately preferred to a 
knowledge that would involve the re-adjustment of 
ingrained habits." 



"When the Son of Man cometh shall he find the 
faith on the earth?" (Luke 18:8.) It surely is very 
scarce at present; and as the higher critics proceed, 
and as the evolution theories spread, faith in God and 
in His Word becomes more and more vague and lifeless. 
How thankful we should be to God for the 
"meat in due season" and light of present truth which 
hinders us from being "shaken" as are others. 
Heb. 12:25-28. 



R2898 : page 340 

ANTI-CLERICAL AGITATION IN SPAIN. 



THE humiliation of Spain in the war with 
the United States has given a basis to various 
movements for reform in the land of the Don, 
politically, socially, and ecclesiastically. One of 
these movements, headed by Don Sigismundo Peyordeix, 
is attracting considerable attention in church 
circles, and according to the Frankfurter Zeitung is 
developing rapidly both in extent and in intensity. 
The agitation is anti -clerical, but not anti-Catholic. 
According to the same journal, Don Sigismundo sees 
in the Jesuit order the chief source of the ills that have 
befallen the church and the people of Spain. Originally 
a priest in Barcelona, he has now, in conjunction 
with a number of other dissatisfied ecclesiastics, 
organized a formal crusade against the status quo in 
the Spanish church. His official program is announced 
in these words: "We are Catholic, but not 
clerical; on the contrary, anti-clerical." The organ 



of the movement has been a weekly journal called El 

Urbiore, so named after a famous mountain fastness 

which neither the Mohammedans nor the French 

were ever able to subdue. In addition to this journal, 

Sigismundo has recently published a larger work 

against the Jesuits, entitled "Crisis de la Compania de 

Jesus," and is developing great literary activity in 

non-Spanish periodicals also. The first organ of the 

movement having been suppressed, a new periodical 

was called into existence, called El Cosmopolita. In a 

recent indictment of the Jesuit order the Spanish agitator 

designated twenty-four points, in which he considers 

a reform necessary. Among these are the following: 

Alleged decline of the true worship of God 

and of the true following of the crucified Savior; exaggerated 

and idolatrous reverence for the saints; the 

worship of the Sacred Heart and other objects of 

adoration; decrease in the practice of Christian virtues, 

such as righteousness, wisdom, temperance; and 

the increase of external religious exercises that appeal 

only to the senses, such as processions, festivals, 

and the whole body of ceremonies; decrease in love 

and care for the poor, and the growth of the desire 

for riches, power, and influence; neglect of the Gospel 

and the traditions and an increasing exaggeration 

of churchly authority and especially of the power of 

the Vatican; simony and favoritism in the papal and 

episcopal government; the prominence given to political 

trickery in the management of church affairs, and 

the deterioration of love, justice, and holiness in the 

leaders of the church; tyranny on the part of the ecclesiastical 

authorities over the lower clergy and the 

people. The Frankfurter Zeitung quotes Don Sigismundo 

as saying: 

"Against all these weaknesses and evils, which 
indicate a terrible degeneration of Christian spirit in 
the church, I have determined to raise my voice day 
and night, with the permission of my superiors or 
without this permission. These evils spring from 
the spirit of Anti-Christ, and to fight this I do not 
need the permission of Pope or bishop; the call of 
God and my conscience are sufficient authority." 

R2899 : page 341 

He also makes it a point to attack the enforced 
celibacy of the priests, declaring that while celibacy 
is a good thing in itself it is such only when it is 
adopted as a matter of free choice and not of compulsion. 
With reference to the outcome of the agitation 
and of the present condition of affairs, he writes further 
as follows: 

"What will be the consequences as far as the future 
is concerned? This is hard to say beforehand. 
In the church there is a schism threatening. The 
Primate of Toledo and the Archbishop of Saville are 



the two opposite poles in the Spanish church. The 

former aims at a reintroduction of the Inquisition, 

and the latter strives for the same freedom of the 

clergy that prevails in the United States. In political 

circles there prevails an opposition to the liberal 

spirit of the lower classes, and the higher classes are 

sighing for the Inquisition. In economic affairs suffering 

is rapidly increasing and immorality is making 

rapid strides. Corruption in official circles caused 

the catastrophe in Cuba and in the Philippines, and 

Spaniards, monks, and Free Masons have all acted 

like robbers. Spain is the most unhappy land on 

earth because it is ruled by the Jesuit order. The 

people are without faith or confidence, without manhood, 

without strength, without law, without science, 

even without the sense of honor. The highest that 

this country can do is to hope that the vulture of Jesuitism 

may soon cease to devour the vitals of this people. 

However, as it seems, there is the dawn of a new 

day, when the people will take terrible vengeance on 

those who have materially and morally ruined their 

fatherland."— The Literary Digest. 



R2899 : page 341 

HELL LESS POPULAR WITH METHODISTS. 



REV. J. A. FAULKNER of Drew Theological 
Seminary has given to the world his opinion 
on this subject, in the columns of The Methodist 
Review. We quote as follows: 

HELL ONCE POPULAR. 

"(1) It is within the memory of men now living 
that frequently the declaration was heard from the 
pulpit that there were infants and children in hell. 
(2) The descriptions of hell were frightfully realistic; 
that is, realistic as judged from a literal interpretation 
of the Scripture. Vivid pictures of physical torment 
were frequent. (3) The impression was made that 
the vast majority of mankind— including all, or nearly 
all, the heathen world— were doomed to eternal 
destruction [torment?]. (4) This doctrine formed a 
staple of preaching to an extent not known to-day. 
Then it was a frequent theme, now it is a rare theme 
in the pulpit. 

WHY LESS POPULAR NOW. 

"If we inquire the causes which have led to this 
change of emphasis and attitude toward the doctrine 



of hell, I think we may mention the following: (1) 

The growth of humanitarian sentiment. Thirty or 

fifty years ago there were severer ideas as to punishment 

in general, and a more calloused feeling in regard 

to suffering, than is the case today. Take the 

treatment of prisoners and the prevalence of capital 

punishment. Treatment that we would consider 

shockingly cruel, that would arouse a feeling of indignation 

in all minds, was then taken as a matter of 

course. It was so in regard to school discipline. I 

was in common school between 1865 and 1872. In 

years so recent as those, I say distinctly that the punishments 

in vogue were cruel and barbarous. But 

they were never so considered then. The growth of 

love, the larger influence of the spirit of Christ on society, 

has made an entire change in the atmosphere 

in which we live. That change has silently made 

obsolete and of none effect the kind of preaching that 

once was powerful on the minds of men. (2) Theological 

developments have also had their influence. 

Methodism has made familiar the thought that God 

deals not only justly with all men, but mercifully as 

well, that there is an impartiality in His treatment of 

souls, that men must be given an equal chance of salvation, 

that no man will be condemned for rejecting 

a Christ he never heard of, or for sinning against light 

he never had.... 

"(3) The better understanding of Scripture also 
accounts in part for the change in the thought of hell. 
Our familiarity with the modes of speech in the East, 
the intense imagery, the word-painting, the use of 
parable, figure, simile, with which Oriental speech 
abounds— all this has made us skeptical of the hard 
and matter-of-fact methods of our Western speech 
when it coarsely makes literal what the sacred writers 
left figurative. In other words we now understand 
that in that fresh, imaginative, child-like age 
the sacred writers, necessarily spoke, as Easterns, 
that the Holy Spirit had to use the only vehicle that 
was open to him, and that therefore we must seek to 
interpret in our Western tongue the truths that underlay 
the extravagant, tropical descriptions of the 
Oriental writers. The growth of the science of Biblical 
hermeneutics has had its share in modifying the 
old-fashioned ideas of hell. 

"First, it has made sad the hearts of those whom 
God has not made sad. It has turned the hopes of 
thousands of devout believers into ashes, and filled 
the souls of God's children with tormenting doubts 
and dark forebodings as to their own salvation and 
the salvation of their friends. The brilliant and pious 
Henry Rogers expressed the despair which this doctrine 
wrought in him: Tor my part I should not 
grieve if the whole race of mankind died in its fourth 
year. As far as I can see I do not know that it would 
be a thing much to be lamented.' Albert Barnes 



confesses to the same confusion of spirit: In the 

distress and anguish of my own spirit I confess that 

I see no light whatever. I see not one ray to disclose 

to me the reason why sin came into the world, why 

the earth is strewn with the dying and the dead, and 

why man must suffer to all eternity.' These two testimonials 

from eminent divines in England and America 

may be taken as representing thousands of similar 

questionings and thoughts of despair in those who 

have tried to realize the full meaning of the popular 

doctrine when it was a living thing: Second, the doctrine 

has worked havoc in turning those who otherwise 

R2900 : page 342 

might have been Christians into infidels. It was 
this which made an infidel of the elder Mill. 'Compared 
with this,' he says, 'every other objection to 
Christianity sinks into insignificance.' It helped 
make Theodore Parker a Unitarian. It gave an immense 
impetus to the spread of Universalism and 
Unitarianism, and afforded a ready fulcrum to the 
lever by which the preachers of these two sects lifted 
the people away from Christianity. It will be found 
that the preaching of hell, in the fashion common 
some years ago, works in an entirely opposite way 
from that which the preacher wishes: that is, it turns 
those away from Christ whom he desires to influence 
by a salutary fear, and those who are already Christians 
or on the way to Christ it fills with anguish, 
doubts and despair." 



We are glad to see this professor so candid and 
outspoken; and rejoice that the editor of The Methodist 
Review had the courage to publish the article. It 
will do good in the way of loosing the bonds of superstition 
and helping prepare some for the truth; yet it 
is deficient in that it does not go far enough and show 
up the basis of the error to be the misunderstanding 
and misrepresentation of God's Word through mistranslations, 
etc., which have deceived the minds of 
lay-readers and grossly misrepresented the divine 
character and plan. For these reasons it tends in the 
direction it condemns— toward Universalism and 
Unitarianism, with all that this means as respects a 
denial of the fall of man and of his redemption by the 
great ransom-price of Calvary. It means a loss of 
reverence for the Bible under the false supposition 
that it supports or in any degree sanctions this atrocious 
calumny against God and human reason. 

Now is the time to properly assist those whom 
Dr. Faulkner may have awakened— before they stumble 
into skepticism. We know of nothing so helpful 
to such newly awakened ones as the pamphlet, 



"What Say the Scriptures About Hell?" followed by 
"The Divine Plan of the Ages." We supply these 
"helping hands" or "Bible keys" at very low prices or 
loan them free to those who so request. 



R2899 : page 342 

ARE YOU WATCHING? 



Are you watching for the "presence" 

Of the Reaper of the field? 

Knowest thou what "signs" proclaim Him 

Tho' at present He's concealed? 

Dost thou watch with straining vision 

For the dawning of the day? 

Can'st thou hear the legions tramping 

On Emmanuel's highway? 

Art thou faint with weary vigils, 

Looking for thy coming Lord? 

Have thine eyes grown dim with weeping, 

Sick at heart with hope deferred? 

Sore discouraged at the prospect 

Of the field so full of tares, 

And the Prince of Evil working 

To encompass us with snares? 

Sad indeed it seems, my brother, 
When we view from earthly height; 
For we fail to see the sunshine 
That disperses present night. 
Climb the peak, O, weary pilgrim, 
Of our God's eternal truth, 
And from thence behold the landscape! 
Then shalt thou renew thy youth. 

We'll not think God's arm is shortened 
When upon that height we stand; 
For His purposes are rip'ning, 
And His own shall rule the land. 
Tho the night precedes the morning, 
Yet at last shall rise the Sun; 
And the shadows quickly vanished, 
Shall proclaim the morn has come. 

Know his "presence" then, O pilgrim! 
"In like manner" hath He come. 
Reapers, now the sickle wielding, 
Soon shall sing the "Harvest Home." 
Tares are burning. Wheat is gath'ring, 
Soon shall all be gathered in. 
Welcome ye the "Lord of Harvest," 



Who shall triumph over sin. 

A. J. Morris, M.D. 



R2900 : page 342 

ISRAEL OPPRESSED IN EGYPT. 



--EXOD. l:l-14.-NOV. 10.- 

"God heard their groaning, and God 
remembered his covenant."— Exod. 2:24. 

SLAVERY is too strong a word to use with reference 
to Israel's condition in Egypt. We have 
seen that Jacob and his family, servants, herds 
and flocks, were received graciously for Joseph's 
sake, and located upon the grassy plains known as 
the land of Goshen. Pharaoh evidently in this matter 
was controlled by a spirit of benevolence, and by 
an appreciation of Joseph, and by a realization that 
his brethren, though not his equals, were men of ability, 
and likely to make good neighbors. He probably 
also recognized that as the Egyptians were not 
a pastoral people the Israelites would not be serious 
competitors in business, but on the contrary would 
probably help along the general interests of the kingdom. 
Moreover, he perceived that the land of 
Goshen, being toward the East, would serve as a 
measure of protection against invaders. But whatever 
his conjectures, he evidently could not have imagined 
so rapid a development, so great an increase 
of numbers in that people. That their increase was 
phenomenal is fully attested by vs. 7 of the lesson. 
"The children of Israel were fruitful and increased 
abundantly and multiplied and waxed exceedingly 
mighty; and the land (of Goshen) was filled with 
them." Here are five different expressions used to 
indicate their phenomenal growth. And when we 
remember that these all sprang from Isaac, and that 
he was the only son of his mother, and born when his 
father was over a hundred years old; and when we 
remember, further, that Jacob also, was born only 
after repeated prayers, and that Rachel his wife similarly 
was long unfruitful, it seems the more evident 

R2900 : page 343 

that the Lord's providence had much to do with the 
change which came over Jacob's family after it was 
transplanted to Egypt. 

The seventy souls mentioned in verse 5 were all 
males except two, Dinah, Jacob's daughter, and 



Sarah, his granddaughter. (Gen. 46.) It is reasonable, 

therefore, to infer that the females of the company, 

not included in the count, were about as many 

more. Neither is it unreasonable to infer that since 

Abraham's household represented many servants and 

helpers, Isaac's also, and Jacob's, these may have accompanied 

Israel to Egypt and have been merged 

into the nation under the law of circumcision. It is 

well that we have these facts in mind when considering 

that from the time of Jacob's death to the time of 

the Exodus was a period of only 215 years; and yet 

in the meantime the Israelites were so fruitful, increased 

so abundantly, multiplied and waxed exceeding 

mighty, to such an extent that at that time the 

male representatives of the nation numbered 600,000; 

which, counting four to a family, would imply a total 

enumeration of 2,400,000. 

Infidelity has been inclined to scoff at this record, 
and to declare that such an increase was impossible; 
but we are to bear in mind the distinct statement 
of verse 7, to the effect that the increase was 
phenomenal, beyond all precedent or ordinary calculation. 
One of the Hebrew words used in describing 
the increase gives the thought of swarming (as 
bees and fishes), and this in accord with the divine 
forestatement. (Gen. 46:3.) M. Millett, French 
Consul in Egypt, declares: "The air of this country 
is much purer and better than in any other. This 
salubrity of the air imparts itself to all organic beings, 
plants and animals. The females, not only of the human 
species, but also of the animals, are more fruitful 
than any other in the world." Doubtless also 
morality, freedom from wars, pestilences and special 
diseases, had much to do with the rapid increase of 
that people. As affecting the reasonableness of the 
record, Prof. Curtis quotes a volume of family memoirs, 
which shows that 5,564 persons are known to 
have descended from Lieut. John Hollister, who 
emigrated to America in 1642. It is said that in the 
early settlements of North America the actual rate 
of increase for several successive periods was for the 
population to double itself every fifteen years. Calculating 
at this rate, and counting husbands or wives 
for the seventy persons in the text (in all, 140), the 
increase would amount to 2,293,760 in 200 years. 

The statement of verse 8 doubtless applies to 
some period after the death of Joseph. Since Joseph 
ruled Egypt for eighty years, it is quite probable that 
there was more than one Pharaoh on the throne, and 
it is the general supposition amongst scholars that 
the new king of verse 8 signifies a new dynasty— a 
change in the royal family through insurrection or 
otherwise. Possibly the very fact of the general 
peace and prosperity of Egypt, during Joseph's term 
of office, led to a general abandonment of the affairs 
of state on the part of the royal family, and thus 



paved the way to such a rebellion and change of dynasty 

—an ambitious family grasping the reins of 

power after the death of Joseph, and at a time, probably, 

when matters, were not running so smoothly in 

the kingdom's affairs, by reason of the loss of the divinely 

guided governor. 

The kings of the new dynasty did not recognize 
Joseph, nor any indebtedness on the part of Egypt to 
him, and the Israelites, his people. On the contrary, 
the new ruler, less ready than his predecessors to 
look for the leadings of divine providence, cast a suspicious 
eye upon the Hebrew people, noted how rapidly 
they were increasing in numbers and prosperity, 
and reasoned that they had no ties to either Egypt or 
its throne, and that therefore their further growth 
would be inimical to the empire's welfare; because, 
in the case of wars, they might espouse the cause of 
the enemy, or might attack the government and seek 
to make themselves the rulers of Egypt. This would 
be worldly wisdom as represented in the treatment 
of the Sclavonian peoples today; and no doubt 
it was so regarded then. The new king put into 
execution plans intended, not to destroy the Israelites, 
nor to drive them off, but merely to hold them in 
check— to prevent their further marvelous increase. 
He sought to discourage the ambitions of the people 
by overwork under discouraging conditions, hoping 
that this rigorous treatment would impair their virility 
or possibly cause them to feel that they would not 
wish to bring forth children to so burdensome a life 
as their own. But the record is that the repressive 
measures were unsuccessful, and that the people of 
Israel increased more and more. The new king did 
not take divine providence into account. 

Scholars are quite united in the belief that Rameses 
II was either the first or second ruler of this 
new dynasty, antagonistic to Israel. His mummy 
was found in 1881; we saw it exhibited in the museum 
located near the Great Pyramid, in 1892. Of 
the identity there can be no reasonable doubt. The 

R2901 : page 343 

head of the mummy shows phrenologically just such 
a character as the history implies. The hooked Roman 
nose shows great determination, while the low 
forehead indicates a deficiency of the quality called 
benevolence. How surprised Rameses will be before 
long, when in due time, with the remainder of earth's 
millions, he shall come forth from the prisonhouse of 
death! He may still see his old mummy, and undoubtedly 
will see Israel, as represented in the ancient 
worthies, occupying the chief place in earthly 
power for the blessing of Egypt and all the families 
of the earth, under the ministration of spiritual Israel 
—Christ and the Church in glory. What a lesson he 



and others will read in the developments of the divine 

plan, as they will then perceive them— things which 

we perceive already because the eyes of our understanding 

are opened to the things revealed in the divine 

Word, and which will be corroborated more and 

more as we approach the Millennial day. 

We are not to understand that the Israelites as 
a whole were compelled to leave their industries and 
engage in brickmaking and the construction of treasure 
cities, palaces, highways, etc. On the contrary, 
we are to suppose that drafts were made from time to 
time upon the people, much after the manner of the 
conscriptions for the army in Germany, Austria, 
Italy, France and Russia. This same method of dealing 
with the people was in vogue in Egypt until quite 
recently, when the British Government took control 

R2901 : page 344 

there. It is known as the Corvee system of enforced 
labor. We recall that Solomon introduced such a 
system in Israel, compelling each individual to serve 
so many months upon public works. The same system 
is in vogue to some extent in various civilized 
countries, where the farmer is permitted to pay such 
a proportion of his taxes in money, and another proportion 
in labor— or, instead of the labor, he may 
pay it all in money. The system, rightly operated, of 
course, would be no more of an injustice to the people 
than an ordinary tax, but evidently the object of 
Rameses, the oppressing Pharaoh, was to injure the 
people under the guise of public works and necessary 
taxation. 

A lesson which we spiritual Israelites may learn 
from Israel's experience in Egyptian bondage is that 
our God is abundantly able to make all of life's experiences 
work to our advantage; and that his word 
is sure of fulfillment in its due time, regardless of 
what man may propose. Had Rameses adopted a 
different policy in dealing with Israel they might 
have forgotten the promise of God, which indicated 
the exact time in which their deliverance from Egypt 
would come— they might have become so interested 
in Egypt and its affairs, and in their land of Goshen, 
etc., etc., and so intermingled with the people of 
Egypt, that they would have forgotten the promise 
of their deliverance, and that the land of Canaan 
should then be theirs. In this we see another illustration 
of the fact that sometimes we receive greater 
blessings through adversity than through prosperity. 
As the adversities of fleshly Israel drew them together, 
and separated them from the Egyptians, so 
the trials and adversities of the spiritual Israel tend 
to draw them nearer to each other, and nearer to the 
Lord, and to separate them from the world,— leading 
their hearts more and more to an appreciation of the 



goodly heavenly Canaan which God has promised us. 

As the Israelites were more fruitful under the persecutions 

and oppositions, so we frequently find it to 

be with the spiritual Israel, that not only the zeal increases, 

but numbers also increase, as well as "fruits 

of the spirit," under persecutions and difficulties. 



R2901 : page 344 

CONCERNING THE CLOSING OF THE CALL. 



A BROTHER wrote us on this question recently, 
and a portion of our reply may be of interest to 
others and hence we present it below. We 
wrote him:— 

Respecting restitution: We have held from the 
first, or at last, since 1881, that we are in "the times 
of restitution" now; and that the opening features of 
restitution work will be manifested in the downfall 
and destruction of the things pertaining to this present 
order, making ready for the new order of things. 
We have given the illustration in first and second 
"Dawns" of how the new order of things might be 
compared to the beginning of a contract for the substitution 
of a new building for an old one— that the 
first evidences of the work would be those of destruction, 
the pulling down of the old. We still 
hold this, and hold that this is all that we should 
expect— that we should not expect personal, physical 
restitution now. Some years ago we had the impression 
that possibly some signs of physical restitution 
to humanity would be due in this "harvest" 
or lapping period; but all question on this subject is 
dispelled for years past, as we have seen most clearly 
that the new order of things and its blessing must 
wait until the entire "body" of the Great Priest has 
been completed— until the entire work of atonement 
has been finished— then the High Priest, head and 
body complete, will lift up his hands and bless the 
people, in glorious garments,— i.e., clothed in the 
majesty of divine power and authority as the foretold 
Prophet, Priest and King in one. 

Some years ago we were less careful than now 
in the use of language respecting the restitution 
times, in mentioning that coming condition as a 
"call" to restitution. We should have been more 
particular, more specific, and should have said that 
the "Trumpet of the Jubilee" would be blown, announcing 
the beginning of restitution times. This 
work is now being done, through the Watch 
Tower literature, etc. The Jubilee Trumpet is 
not a call, in the ordinary sense of the word call, but 



rather an announcement; the Lord will announce his 
Kingdom and its blessed regulations, and will expect 
every one to yield implicit compliance; and those 
who do not yield compliance will receive "stripes;" 
and if still persistent will "be destroyed from amongst 
the people." This thought is very different from the 
thought of a call, as that term applied during the 
Gospel age, when the matter was open to each who 
heard to either accept or reject the high calling and 
its "narrow way." 

Respecting consecration before 1881 being necessary 
to a share in the high calling: We must admit 
that all who were consecrated in 1881, when the 
general call ceased (because the full number had accepted 
which would complete the elect class) would 
have a precedence over any others: Indeed, that 
no others could be accepted to the "Bride" position 
in any sense, except as some of these already consecrated 
ones should be accounted unworthy, and their 
places and crowns vacated. (Rev. 3:5,11.) But 
since it requires all of these consecrated ones to complete 
the elect number, it follows that any who would 
be accepted to take their places must make their 
consecration and be accepted of the Lord subsequent 
to 1881. 

We are to remember, moreover, that justified 
believers are accounted "holy," and their justification 
is specifically designated in this way in several instances. 
For instance, the Apostle says, "I beseech 
you, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present 
your bodies living sacrifices, holy, acceptable to God," 
etc. And again, "Else were your children unholy; 
but now are they holy"— children one or both of 
whose parents are the Lord's children. It is from 
this class of justified ones that we should expect the 
Lord to accept the number necessary to complete 
the elect number— to take the places of those who 
in 1881 were in a consecrated attitude, but who, because 
of unfaithfulness since, will be rejected from 

R2901 : page 345 

the "Bride" class, to have their portion either with 
the second company, "saved so as by fire," or with 
those who sin wilfully and deliberately, and thus incur 
the "Second Death" penalty. We should, therefore, 
look for those who would now come into divine 
favor and join t-heirship with Christ amongst this 
class— amongst those who were already justified in 
October, 1881, or amongst the children of such as 
were justified at that time; though we may not know 
nor say that others may not have become eligible 
by a more recent justification. 

Since the general "call" ceased October, 1881, 
although the "door" is not yet shut, but stands ajar 
for some to pass out who fail to keep their covenant, 



and for others to pass in to take their places, that the 

predestinated number may attain the prize, and yet 

that none shall attain to it except such as are copies 

of God's dear Son, in heart, in intention— it is impossible 

for us to make positive promises of joint-heirship 

in the Kingdom to any who may consecrate 

their lives to the Lord at the present time. All that 

we can say to them is that consecration is their reasonable 

service in any event, and that if the Lord shall 

manifest his acceptance of their sacrifice it would be 

proper for them to consider this an evidence that they 

had been accepted of the Lord to all the rights and 

privileges of such sacrificers as made their consecration 

before the general call ceased. 

As to what would constitute evidences of divine 
acceptance, we suggest two, the enjoyment of both 
of which would seem to us a good basis for full assurance 

R2902 : page 345 

of faith on this point. (1) God's acceptance 
of the sacrifice might be reasonably inferred if the 
consecrated one finds opportunities for self-sacrifice, 
self-denials, etc., in the service of the Lord, of the 
truth and of the brethren— however humble the service 
or opportunities for "laying down our lives for 
the brethren." (2) God's acceptance of the sacrifice 
should in the present time imply not only a begetting 
of the spirit of holiness, but also an ability to appreciate 
clearly the spiritual features of the divine plan, 
represented by the light of the golden candle-stick 
in the "Holy," and by the shew-bread, and by the 
privileges of communion and service represented by 
the incense at the golden altar. 

Whoever has these two evidences has what we 
think he should consider a satisfactory proof that he 
is inside the first vail of the Tabernacle, that he is 
therefore counted for the time being at least as a 
member of the High Priest's body. And such, we 
believe, should consider themselves as fully eligible 
to the prize as any upon the race-course, upon condition 
of faithfulness even unto death. It will be noticed, 
however, that we distinguish between an appreciation 
of spiritual things and appreciation of restitution 
and earthly things merely. We believe that 
the "natural man," under favorable conditions, may 
appreciate a great deal of the divine provision for the 
world, and that it is the spiritual things which God 
has specially in reservation for the little flock, which 
can be appreciated only by those begotten of the 
spirit. This does not mean that the natural man 
cannot understand what we mean when we discuss 
spiritual things; but that, as the Apostle declares, 
though he understands what we say, our words are 
"foolishness unto him," he cannot grasp them as 
truth, and as applicable to himself. 



R2902 : page 345 

HE WAS A GOODLY CHILD. 



--EXOD. 2:1-10.-NOV. 17- 

"Train up a child in the way he should go; and when 
he is old he will not depart from it."— Prov. 22:6. 

EVERY CHILD is not born a Moses, and no 
amount of training would make him his 
equal as a man. We have everything to say 
in accord with the Golden Text, and not a word in 
opposition; nevertheless, the foundation for greatness 
must be laid before the birth. It is a great mistake 
made by many— and one to which they are assisted by 
false theological views— that each child is a special 
creation of God, so that, if an idiot, God may be 
blamed; and if well endowed and balanced mentally 
and physically, God receives the credit. The Scriptural 
proposition is to the contrary of this, viz., that all 
God's work is perfect (Deut. 32:4)— that Adam was 
his workmanship, and that he is not responsible for 
the defects and imperfections which more or less mar 
every member of our race. In a sense, of course, all 
that we have, even though imperfect, is of God, since 
he is the author of all life and indirectly our Creator. 
-Exod. 4:11. 

But our defects are explained to us in the Scriptures 
to be the results of sin, and the natural development 
of its death penalty, working in the race under 
the laws of heredity. We are all born in sin, shapen 
in iniquity, in sin did our mothers conceive us. (Psa. 51:5.) 
But we are not all born in the same degree of 
degradation. While fallen parents cannot bring forth 
a perfect offspring they can, and sometimes do, produce 
types higher than themselves. This is accomplished 
by a law of nature affecting the mental conditions 
of the parents, and especially of the mother 
(and she is always susceptible to favorable or unfavorable 
mental and moral influences from her husband) 
during the period of gestation. 

According to this divine law, therefore, parents 
are to a considerable degree responsible for the prominent 
traits of character in their children. If this 
matter were more thoroughly understood, more fully 
appreciated by parents, the result would be a great 
improvement in the natural quality of the children 
born. The husband would endeavor to make the surroundings 
favorable to the highest emotions and sentiments 
and aspirations on the part of his wife; who, 



in turn, would co-operate and set her affections on 
noble and good and pure and generous things, with 
meekness; and the result would surely be the birth of 
children much more resembling Moses than the majority 
do— in nobleness of character combined with 
humility. 

Nothing herein stated, however, is intended to 
encourage the begetting of children by the Lord's 

R2902 : page 346 

consecrated people living in this "harvest" time. 

That begotten and born of the flesh is flesh; while that 

begotten and born of the spirit is spirit. (John 3:6.) The 

"new creatures" in Christ Jesus have a still higher and 

grander work before them than the producing of even 

perfect children, were such a matter possible. They 

have the privilege of co-operation with God in the development 

of the "new creatures," the spiritual sons 

of God: and like our Lord and the apostles they prefer 

this highest of all privileges. Not that we dispute 

for a moment the Apostle's word: "Marriage is honorable 

in all;" but that we emphasize with him that 

he that marrieth doeth well, but he that marrieth not 

doeth better. (1 Cor. 7:38; Heb. 13:4.) So now we 

emphasize that he that brings forth natural children 

of the highest type does well, but he that co-operates 

with God for the begetting of spiritual sons does 

better. 

Our information respecting the birth and childhood 
of Moses is very meager. We know that his 
father's name was Amram, which signifies "Noble 
people." His mother's name was Jochebed, which 
signifies, "Jehovah is glorious." Though they were 
Hebrews, and as a race in bondage to the Egyptians, 
these names imply that this family of the tribe of Levi 
were persons of moral and religious sentiments- 
noble people in the proper sense of the word. This 
is implied also in the Apostle's statement, that they 
acted from faith. -Heb. 11:23. 

As we saw in a previous lesson, the Egyptian 
rulers of the new dynasty were fearful that the rapid 
increase of the Hebrews would ultimately mean that 
they would become the dominant race, or else that 
they would take their departure— as, indeed, they expected 
to do, according to the traditions which they 
reverenced, and which instructed them respecting the 
time of their sojourn in Egypt, and of the promise of 
God respecting their ultimate deliverance, by the 
interposition of his power. The Egyptians did not 
wish to lose the Hebrew people, as their efficiency as 
laborers had been demonstrated, and as they were 
profitable to the Egyptians in the way of trade. They 
neither wished to drive them away nor to kill them 
off. What they did desire was that they should not 
increase so rapidly. To hinder this phenomenal increase 



various expedients were tried, none of them 

effective; and finally, as a repressive measure, an 

edict went forth that all the male children of the Hebrews 

should be put to death, the intention evidently 

being the curtailment of the race for a time only, permitting 

children to be born later on. 

It was about this time that Moses was born; evidently 
there had been no such restriction at the time 
Aaron, his elder brother, was born. Moses was the 
third in the family; his sister, Miriam, the second, 
was the little maid mentioned in our lesson. The 
babe Moses was secreted by his mother for three 
months, in violation of the king's command, and at 
the risk of her own life as well as his; and the reason 
given is that she perceived that he was a goodly child 
—fine-looking, giving promise of the great man 
which he afterward became. The Apostle declares that 
the parents had faith— not faith in the child, nor yet 
in themselves, nor in the king; but faith in God, that 
he would bless and preserve the child; and we cannot 
doubt that this faith was accompanied by prayer to 
the Lord. We cannot doubt that even before the 
child was born, under such peculiar circumstances, the 
godly, faithful parents consecrated it to the Lord, to 
be trained for him, and instructed to the best of their 
ability, and to be the Lord's servant to whatever extent 
he would be pleased to use him. Without some 
such hopes and prayers the faith which the Apostle 
mentions would be inappropriate. Faith and prayers 
and consecrations usually go together, hand in hand, 
anyway,— both as respects ourselves, our children, 
and all with which we have to do. 

It was a very shrewd device which the parents 
adopted for the child's preservation, and it either 
shows a divine guidance or an inventive mind, with 
a good knowledge of human nature, or all of these. 
Moses' parents read human nature well when they 
concluded that the princess of Egypt, if she found 
the babe at the time of the taking of her bath (perhaps 
a religious rite), would be sure to be touched, and 
her heart appealed to by any child, and especially by 
so "goodly" a boy. It was a cunning arrangement, 
too, to have Miriam, his sister, nearby, at the time of 
the finding of the babe in the bulrush basket, and to 
have her suggest the getting of a Hebrew woman to 
nurse the child, and then getting his own mother. 
Undoubtedly the Lord's hand and wisdom were behind 
the entire matter; but even so, it teaches us the 
lesson that God is pleased to use human instrumentalities 
in the accomplishment of his purposes. 

R2903 : page 346 

The parents did right to exercise their ingenuity for 
the preservation of their child, at the same time that 
they exercised faith in the Lord. And so with us: 



our faith is not to be of the indolent kind which refuses 

to act, and would thus fail to be in the way to 

be used of the Lord; but rather ours also is to be a 

faith manifested by works. It is such faith that 

the Lord is pleased to bless. 

The princess is supposed to have been Neferari, 
the wife of Rameses II, and daughter of the preceding 
monarch;— all Egyptian kings being called Pharaoh. 
She adopted the waif as her own son, yet was 
willing that he should be nurtured in a Hebrew home 
for a time— it is presumed, until he was either seven 
or twelve years of age; after which she had him 
brought to the royal palace and instructed in all the 
wisdom and learning of the Egyptians. How apt the 
thought of the poet in respect to Moses' case when he 
says: 

"God moves in a mysterious way 
His wonders to perform!" 

How appropriate it was that the leader of Israel 
out of Egyptian bondage, as a type of the great Messiah, 
should be an educated or learned man; and yet 
how still more necessary it was that he should first 
have well fixed in his mind, in infancy and childhood, 
the basic principles of religion; and how marvelously 
the Lord arranged for both of these elements of his 
education. We cannot doubt that the parents, whose 
faith already had been manifested, would instruct the 
boy in respect to the Abrahamic promises, in which 
they trusted; viz., that as the seed of Abraham they 
were ultimately to be great, and to be used as the 
Lord's channels for blessing all the families of the 
earth; and that, as foretold to Abraham, the time 

R2903 : page 347 

when the Lord would bring his people forth from 

Egyptian bondage with a high hand and an outstretched 

arm of power was well nigh up. He was 

no doubt, thoroughly informed respecting his relationship 

to the Israelites, and no doubt not only faith in 

the promises, but a patriotic feeling of devotion to his 

people was liberally inculcated— because these qualities 

stand out nobly throughout his entire life, as they 

could not do unless they had been thoroughly implanted 

and cherished. 

Comparatively few parents seem to realize the 
privileges and responsibilities placed within their 
hands in connection with their own offspring. The 
Christian mother who has a growing family has certainly 
a wide scope for the use of all her talents, if 
she will but use them, in giving instructions in righteousness 
and in the reverence of the Lord, to her little 
ones. And it is a mistake frequently made, to 
suppose that children cannot appreciate religious 
principles, and that therefore they should not be given 
even "the milk of the word," or primary lessons along 



the lines of the divine law. We believe, on the contrary, 

that while children are born with a certain 

amount of depravity and predilection to evil, nevertheless, 

their little minds are in a large measure blank 

pages, upon which principles either for good or for 

evil are sure to be deeply engraved. If their minds 

be not directed in the lines of justice and mercy and 

love and patience, and if they be not taught that these 

are the divine requirements, and their reasonable service, 

we may be sure that they will be taught the reverse 

of these, as they come in contact with the various 

depraving influences of life— the world, the flesh, 

the devil. Those parents who consider their children 

to be each a little garden-spot, and who faithfully 

plant in these the seeds of justice and love and patience 

and meekness and gentleness, and all the fruits 

of the spirit, to the extent that they may be able, will 

be sure to find a rich reward in the graces of character 

that will result, under the Lord's blessing— especially 

if the children have been consecrated to him from infancy, 

or better, before birth. 

On the contrary, those who do not take the time 
to implant the seeds which would produce these 
graces, these mental and moral flowerets, will find, 
even as with an earthly garden, that it will not stay 
vacant until maturer years have come, and a more 
convenient season; but, instead, noxious weeds of evil 
disposition will grow, flourish, go to seed repeatedly, 
and bring forth bitter fruitage, to vex not only the individual 
himself, but also the parent, and society 
in general. Let each parent, therefore, so far as possible, 
see to it that any children he may bring forth 
will be "goodly," well-favored, by helpful pre-natal 
influences; and let him see to it also that having assumed 
the responsibilities of a parent he does good 
work in these little gardens, which are under his care 
—that the weeds of error are promptly plucked, and 
that the seeds of good are liberally sown. 

Although Moses was born over thirty-six hundred 
years ago, and therefore comparatively near to 
the time when the evolution theory claims that man 
was only "one step above a monkey," we find that not 
only was he a wonderful child and a wonderful man- 
even before the Lord specially blessed him in making 
him the leader of Israel, and putting his power upon 
him— but we find also high standards of mental and 
moral attainment amongst his people— the Hebrew 
Joseph, for instance. We find, additionally, that in 
Moses' time there was a distinct and well-advanced 
civilization amongst the Egyptians. For instance, 
the city of Zoan, one of the capitals of Egypt, near 
which Moses was born and reared, is shown by modern 
research to have been a most wonderful city— 
as compared with modern times. Of it a celebrated 
writer says: "The ruins show it to have been a marvelous 
city, the Athens of Egypt. An Egyptian poet 



of that day says of Zoan: 'She is beautiful, beautiful! 
Nothing like her is found amongst the monuments 
of Thebes— the very secret of pleasures of life. 
Her bowers bloom with gardens. Each garden is 
perfumed with the smell of honey. Her granaries are 
full of wheat. Flowers for nosegays are in the 
houses. Her ships come and go every day. The 
joys have fixed their seat there.'" And concerning 
the development of literature and arts in that day our 
quotations further on will show that they were far 
advanced. 

If as a child Moses was remarkable and attractive, 
so that Stephen calls him "exceeding fair" or 
margin "fair to God" (Acts 7:20), signifying refined, 
elegant; and if it be true, as Josephus says, that those 
who met him as he was carried along the streets forgot 
their business, and stood still to gaze at him, we 
may well suppose that his early training by pious parents, 
in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and 
his subsequent instruction "in all the learning of the 
Egyptians," as the adopted son of the monarch— 
the result must have been a very noble, refined and 
handsome man. And yet, strange to say, that with 
all these accomplishments by nature and education, 
he is described to us as having been "the meekest 
man in all the earth." Who can doubt that this very 
quality of meekness was largely inculcated by the 
poverty of his parents, and their subjection to bondage, 
and the humble sentiments inspired by their consecration 
of Moses to the Lord from the time of his 
begetting? Certain it is that very rarely are those 
who are the natural children of princes and rulers 
humble-minded. Yet this meekness was another of 
the qualities essential to Moses as the leader of God's 
people. As it was, we find that his forty years' dealing 
with the Israelites in the wilderness, as their leader 
and the mediator of their covenant with God, so 
far overcame the meekness of Moses that he was 
hindered from entering the promised land, because 
he took to himself, instead of ascribing to God, some 
of the credit of bringing water out of the rock, saying, 
"Ye rebels, must we bring you water out of this 
rock?"— smiting the rock. 

Under all circumstances we must think it very 
remarkable that a man so really great, and occupying 
so exalted a position for such a length of time, 
should have overcome the haughty "spirit of princes" 
in which he was reared, and have maintained his 
meekness with so slight an exception down to the 
very close of his career. We may well ask ourselves 
what would have been the result had God chosen for 
the leader of Israel a man who was naturally haughty 
and proud, or any other man than one who was very 

R2903 : page 348 



meek indeed. No other than a meek character could 
possibly have stood such a strain as Moses so grandly 
and so faithfully endured. There is a lesson for the 
Lord's people here. The Mediator of the New Covenant, 
Jesus, was also meek and lowly of heart, and 
those whom God is now calling from the world to be 
joint-heirs with Jesus, members of his body— as the 
great anti-type of Moses, to lead mankind out of the 
bondage of sin and Satan— these all must have likeness 
to their Lord and Head in this quality of meekness, 
if they would attain to his general character in 
other respects. We do well to remember continually 
the Apostle's injunction, that we "Humble ourselves 
under the mighty hand of God, so that he may exalt 
us in due time"— so that we may be meet [fit] for the 
inheritance, the Kingdom. 

Concerning Moses and the educational opportunities 
of his time, secular history gives us some intimations. 
The library of Rameseum at Thebes- 
over whose gate was the inscription, "For the healing 
of the soul"— contained twenty thousand books, and 
it is significant as indicating the intellectual activity 
of that time, that this structure was built by Rameses 
II, by whose wife Moses is supposed to have been 
adopted. Stephen declares (Acts 7:22) that "Moses 
was both mighty in words and in deeds," and Stanley's 

R2904 : page 348 

"Jewish Church" says respecting him,— "He 
learned arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, medicine 
and music. He invented boats, and engines for building, 
instruments of war and of hydraulics, hieroglyphics, 
division of lands." It declares further that 
he taught Orpheus, and was hence called by the 
Greeks Musaeus, and by the Egyptians Hermes. 
We know not how substantial is the basis for 
these traditions, but we do know that they are not of 
accord with the Scriptural records of Moses as a great 
leader. A lesson for us to learn in this connection 
is that God has his own way of preparing for all the 
various features of his own great plan. He knew the 
praying people who, at the proper time, brought forth 
their son. He knew how to direct so that the child, 
the youth, the man, should be an instrument ready 
for his own purposes; and yet in all of the divine dealings, 
here as elsewhere, we notice that God does not 
coerce those whom he uses for his work; but that 
rather he uses instruments ready, willing, desirous of 
being used. Let us each, therefore, seek by humility, 
by zeal, by love for the Lord and for his cause, by 
faith in his power, to be in that condition of heart and 
mind which will make us ready to be used, and useful 
in any department of the divine service to which the 
Lord may be pleased to call us. 



R2904 : page 348 

THE PARABOLIC VINEYARD WASTED. 

-ISAIAH 5. -NOV. 24.- 

Golden Text: "Woe unto them who are mighty to drink wine.' 

APPARENTLY our Lord had in mind the 
parable of the vineyard presented in the first 
seven verses of this chapter, in the parable 
which he gave, recorded in Matt. 21:33-44. In both 
parables the vineyard represents the Jewish polity, 
and the vines represent the people, especially such as 
were in influence and power— the leaders. 

Both parables show a lack of the proper influence 
of the truth which had been granted them, upon the 
hearts of the Jewish people. The Lord's favor and 
the knowledge of his goodness as it had reached 
them, had not brought forth pleasant fruit, but that 
which was acrid and bitter— had not brought forth 
love, but selfishness, and self-indulgence. This is set 
forth in verse 7. Having given Israel his law, instructing 
them through it respecting right and wrong 
in their dealings with each other, the Lord had reason 
to expect "judgment," that is, justice; but he 
beheld oppression. He beheld that those who had 
the greatest knowledge of righteousness were still 
exercised by a spirit of selfishness to the extent that 
they took advantage of their more ignorant brethren. 
The Lord says that when he looked for righteousness, 
peace, and prosperity, behold a cry arose to 
him from the oppressed— from those who under the 
social order of things failed to get their reasonable 
and legitimate share of the bounties which the Lord 
had freely granted. 

An intimation respecting the method of this oppression 
is given in verse 8, in the words, "Woe unto 
them that join house to house, and lay field to field, 
till there be no place [for the poor to occupy], that 
they may be placed alone in the midst of the earth!" 
The description represents a condition of things very 
similar to that which we are told now obtains in Great 
Britain, and indeed throughout Europe, where large 
estates are held by private owners, and thus withdrawn 
from the use and occupancy of the people in 
general. Landlordism seems also to be included in 
the thought— adding house to house. The Lord in 
another place declares respecting the future, "They 
shall no more build and another inhabit, no more 
plant and another eat the fruit thereof;" which may 
be understood to signify that in the future time of the 
Lord's Kingdom, houses will be built for the owners' 
occupancy— and not to be rented. 



It will be observed that we do not consider this 
lesson to be a "temperance lesson" in the ordinary 
sense of that term,— but a rebuke of the Lord against 
intemperance of every form— intemperate selfishness, 
etc. Moreover, although the parable and general 
lesson connected with it was addressed originally to 
the Jews, it appears to us, like many other Scriptures, 
to have a deep signification and meaning in respect to 
the Gospel Church, spiritual Israel, as well as for natural 
Israel. Indeed, as we have heretofore seen, natural 
Israel was in all its affairs, and the messages sent 
to it, a type of spiritual Israel, and hence all the things 
written and done toward and respecting the typical 
nation, should be understood as having a higher and 
deeper application to the anti-typical nominal spiritual 
Israel— "Babylon"— of to-day. 

At no time probably has there been a greater disposition 
than at the present to add field to field, and 
house to house— to amass wealth, and to control the 
land and machinery, and all sources of wealth and 

R2904 : page 349 

power. The Lord says that woe is coming upon this 
class, and this announcement is in fullest accord with 
the various declarations of the Scriptures which point 
out that the great "day of vengeance" is near at hand; 
and that it will be a time of severe trouble upon the 
whole world, but especially upon the rich. The 
Lord's warning is that surely many houses shall be 
desolate, and that even great and fine residences shall 
be without occupants. (Vs. 9.) The thought apparently 
is that the time of trouble of which we read 
that "they shall cast their gold and silver into the 
streets, but it shall not be able to deliver them in the 
day of the Lord's anger," will be especially against 
the great who live in earthly palaces, and who for 
safety's sake will desert these or be destroyed during 
the period of anarchy.— Ezek. 7:19. 

This spirit of acquisitiveness which lies at the 
foundation of all the trouble is to be found in every 
land, but nowhere more than in so-called "Christendom," 
and Christendom alone is evidently referred to 
in the prophecy, except as it may also have applied to 
fleshly Israel in the harvest time of the Jewish age, in 
which similar "wrath to the uttermost" in anarchy 
came upon that typical people. The fact is that large 
plantations and farms are managed by employees instead 
of each person planting and reaping on his 
own account: it is intimated that by and by this will 
lead to serious results. When the present social fabric 
breaks up, and there is "no hire for man nor hire 
for beast," and "no peace to him that goeth out, nor 
to him that cometh in," because every man's hand is 
against his neighbor,— then the large farms and 
plantations will be at a serious disadvantage, and the 



yield will be correspondingly diminished. 

Verses 11,12-22, mention wine and strong drink. 
We concede that literal wine and intoxicating liquors 
in general are a dreadful bane to Christendom; we 
concede that many who occupy influential positions, 
as well as a mighty host of the common people, are 
greatly injured by intoxicating liquors. We urge 
and warn all of the Lord's people against this evil, 
insidious, and contaminating influence. However, 
we are not certain that the Lord here refers exclusively 
to literal intoxicating liquors. It is true, at 
least, that there is another kind of intoxication that is 
very prevalent at the present time: it is scripturally 
termed the wine of Babylon: it produces an intoxication 
along religious lines, and hinders people from 
discerning and comprehending the divine Word, character 
and plan. It is the wine of Churchianity, which 
confuses those who use it, and beclouds their minds 
in this respect to the true Christianity. It addles 
their judgment and brings the people into captivity 
to false doctrines and false teachers, "because they 
have no knowledge,"— verse 13. 

Concerning this symbolic wine and intoxication, 
the Lord declares that Babylon has "made all the nations 
[inhabitants of the earth] drunken" with the 
wine of her incontinency and unfaithfulness to Him. 
(Rev. 17:2; 18:3.) The stimulating power is not the 
spirit of a sound mind, but the delusion of a false doctrine; 
as the Prophet declares, they are "drunken," 
but not with wine.— Isa. 29:9-13. 

Instruments of joy and praise they do indeed employ, 
often spending much money upon grand pipe 
organs wherewith they would praise the Lord, even 
in the delirium of their false conception of his character 
and plan; as it is written, "but they regard not 
the word of the Lord, neither the operation of his 
hands." They are not looking to see what the Lord 
is doing, nor inquiring to know concerning the 
mighty work which he is about to accomplish in the 
setting up of his Kingdom; and hence to them the 
overthrow of Babylon and the confusion and anarchy 
incidental to the establishment of the Kingdom will 
be as the same Prophet declares, God's "strange act," 
"strange work."— Isa. 28:21. 

"Because the people have no knowledge," they 
are consumed with thirst at the present time. The 
wine of false doctrine has produced erroneous views 
of various questions, and with the incidental bemuddled 
condition of the mind there comes at the present 
time a thirst for more knowledge, and for explanations 
and for consistency which their teachers cannot 
satisfy. The people in general have lost their taste 

R2905 : page 349 

and appreciation for the water of life, the truth; and 



false teachers warn them against it as poison. The 
wine of false doctrines now being manufactured at all 
the Theological Seminaries is the wine of evolution 
and higher criticism, which does not satisfy the thirst, 
but increases the confusion of mind, and makes null 
every attempt to appreciate and comprehend the divine 
plan, as set forth in God's Word. Even Babylon's 
notables are dissatisfied, famished.— See 
Amos 8:11. 

Verses 14-17 show the end of the matter. The 
grave figuratively opens her mouth to swallow these 
up; and in the time of trouble, unquestionably, large 
numbers will perish literally from the earth. But 
sheol, the grave, will specially enlarge, in that it will 
take into it more than human beings: it will take into 
it the great octopus system of Babylon, with its many 
heads and many arms, financial, political, social, religious, 
etc. In that day of trouble, all classes will 
be humbled together, and the Lord and his righteousness 
will be exalted in the sight of mankind. 

Verses 18-23 take us back again to point out 
the peculiarities of some who are prominent in the 
evil of this time, and who will bring special woes upon 
themselves. These are not those who are beset by 
temptations and yield through weaknesses resulting 
from the fall; but such as greedily take hold of sin and 
in-equity, through their vanity and self conceit. 
They deceive themselves into supposing that they 
are hastening the Lord's work, and that they are acting 
under the counsel of the Lord in their various sectarian 
enterprises; but the fact is that they are not in 
the condition of mind to appreciate the Lord's counsel, 
being drunken with false doctrine. Hence it is 
that they call evil good, and good evil, and put darkness 
for light, and light for darkness, and bitter for 
sweet, and sweet for bitter, and are wise in their own 
eyes, and prudent in their own sight, mighty in respect 
to their own wine of false doctrine. 

What could better compare with this matter of 
calling evil good, and good evil, than is general when 
the word gospel is used. The meaning of gospel is 
"good tidings;" but that which Babylon calls gospel 
is most awfully bad tidings— the announcement that 
nearly all the world of mankind (all except a little 

R2905 : page 350 

flock) are to go to eternal torment. And when the 

real good tidings is announced, we find these same 

persons drunken with the wine of false doctrine, 

rabid in their denunciation, calling it "nocturnal hallucinations." 

Do they not indeed put light for darkness, 

and darkness for light? Do they not indeed 

label "poison" the true message of the divine plan, 

and label "gospel," that which is the most awful and 

bitter dose that human intellect could be asked to 



accept with joy? Indeed, as a Presbyterian minister 
expressed it— "You must not attempt to masticate our 
doctrines, for if you do you can never swallow them; 
they are in this respect like a Brandreth pill." And 
yet this bitter dose, of which reason would forbid the 
swallowing, is misnamed sweet, heavenly truth. 

But do the ministers of Babylon show any disposition 
to justify the wicked for reward, or to take away 
the righteousness of the righteous from him? Yes, 
frequently; for instance, not long ago a brother in the 
West, who had accepted the true gospel, the true 
light, the sweet story of divine love, wisdom, and 
power, died. The Lutheran minister called upon the 
family (formerly attendants and members of his 
church), and without even waiting to be invited to 
preach the funeral discourse, said that, of course, he 
would be prohibited from preaching the funeral sermon, 
as it would be contrary to the rules of the 
church. The Brother had always been a consistent 
Lutheran, and after receiving the truth gave good 
evidence of his profession of being sanctified thereby, 
—yet in this way, and by derogatory statements, this 
minister of the gospel of eternal torment attempted 
to take away his righteousness from him. Indeed 
many Christian people have found to their surprise 
that, after leaving the nominal church, the special pillars 
of the same are ready to say all manner of evil 
against them falsely— or, at least, to imply evil. The 
same Lutheran minister a little later on was invited to 
preach at the funeral of a notoriously unregenerate 
man, and he accepted the invitation with alacrity, 
and, of course, in his discourse tried to justify the 
wicked, the reward probably being the influence upon 
the family, and in favor of the denomination. 

Verses 24-30, describe the great time of trouble 
now impending, in which, the Lord's great army shall 
overthrow Babylon and plow deeply with sorrow and 
tribulation the hearts of mankind, and make the 
world ready for the new dispensation, the Millennial 
Kingdom. See "The Day of Vengeance"— Millennial 
Dawn, Vol. IV. 



page 350 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FRIENDS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Your answers to my questions, and the little extra, 
"Things Whereof Ye Wrote unto Me," are in accordance 
with my views on the subject, and also what 
I had expected from you, after carefully reading your 
article in the July number of the Watch Tower, 1893, 



on the relationship of man and wife, with which Sister 
Stovel and myself were much delighted at the 
time it was published. It entirely coincided with our 
views on such relationship, which opinion neither of 
us have had the slightest reason to change in the 
slightest degree. Indeed we had positively refused 
to believe the whole of what we had heard of your 
opinions and advice; but as assertions were made to 
the contrary, I thought before denying them, to get 
your direct word upon the subject, feeling quite sure 
that if I was in error, you had good scriptural ground 
for your opinion. 

I have not seen Sister Stovel since she came back 
from Cleveland Convention; but to-day I received 
a long letter from her, informing me of the glorious 
time you all had there, and expressing herself as not 
only much delighted with the meetings, but as greatly 
benefited and strengthened for her journey along 
the narrow way towards her now dearer Lord and 
Redeemer, than ever. She also says that undoubtedly 
all enjoyed like blessings with her. I deeply regret 
not having been able to be present and to participate 
in such a foretaste of the joys set before us. 

I ask your continued prayers, dear Brother, that 
I may be supplied with an abundance of strength 
from the throne of the heavenly grace, to keep firmly, 
steadily, and courageously treading the narrow 
way, and finally be found worthy, in my Redeemer, of 
a conqueror's crown. 

I ask God's blessing upon you in your many 
trials and labors in the cause of the truth, and continued 
striving to build up and assist the members of the 
body of Christ. 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

Ebenezer Stovel,— Canada. 



Dear Brother:— 

Many thanks for the parcel of "meat in due season," 
which I was able partly to dispense this morning. 
First I distributed to about 200 houses, and 
afterwards to about the same number of persons leaving 
places of worship in the town. God grant that 
some of his dear hungering children may be even now 
feasting on the health-giving, satisfying, present 
truth! 

I am with you in the meeting now commencing, 
and would that I were actually present. Give my 
love to all the brethren. God bless you and all who 
love the Lord in sincerity and truth. 

Yours in Him, W. S.,— Hants. 



Gentlemen:- 



You will, I am sure, pardon the liberty I take in 
writing to you. To-day there fell into my hands a 
booklet which I read with the deepest interest, and I 
feel sure, profit. I notice on the last page you very 
kindly offer free copies for friends of readers, and 
further reading matter. If not asking too much, I 
would esteem it a favor if you would send me some 
copies for distribution among my Christian friends. 
I feel that this booklet has come as a message to be 
honored, and I pray God to bless your labors 
abundantly. 

Yours faithfully in Christ, 
W. B., -Norfolk. 



R2905 : page 351 

ANOTHER SWISS HELPER. 

Dear Brethren in Christ:— 

Am sorry I cannot write in English. Am a Swiss. 
About 27 years ago I was converted. Constrained 
by the love of Christ, I worked for six years in the 
Lord's vineyard, and also followed my profession and 
had much joy and peace in the Lord and in his work. 
The Lord led me into the Baptist church where I 
labored for 27 years with joy. I did not think that 
anything would ever separate me from it. In 1880 I 
entered the Theological Seminary in Hamburg. In 
1884 I received several calls from Baptist churches, 
and thought it God's will that I should accept a call 
to a church in Breslau, where I felt the Lord's blessing 
upon me. While I was there a large church was 
built with a seating capacity of 600. In Breslau 
Catholicism is very strong. Among the 280 that I 
was permitted to baptize on profession of their faith, 
one-third were Catholics. In 1893 I received a call 
to one of the largest Baptist churches in Germany, 
at Konigsberg in Prussia. A new chapel was built 
and meetings were held in 16 places in the country. 
During the three and three-fourths years of my stay, 
about 500 were converted and baptized. Three other 
brothers labored there beside myself; two in the 
country and one in the city. Then I received a call 
to Zurich, my mother-country, where the work had 
been progressing slowly. Considering the call as 
coming from the Lord I accepted it. The congregation 
was small, but with great joy I labored there 5 
years, and built a chapel and residence. There, also, 
I was permitted to baptize 200 on profession of their 
faith, among them some Catholics. 

About four months ago I received "Millennial 
Dawn," Vol. I. I read the book with deep interest 
and blessing. Sent for the three succeeding volumes 
and several pamphlets, and have read them through. 



I am deeply convinced as to the truthfulness of this 
work. My biblical and theological convictions have 
been corrected in a manner and degree I had never 
before experienced. I felt that honesty and humility 
were necessary that I might give due honor to these 
truths, and God has granted me these. I hear that 
the leader of a faith and prayer-cure institution, one 
of the most influential men in Switzerland, and who 
is considered a high authority, has denounced the 
book (Millennial Dawn), and has burned many. Have 
done much searching for the last 27 years respecting 
matters referring to the consummation of the age, 
and endeavored to be watchful of the signs of the 
times. It is due to this fact, in part, that I so highly 
prize this book and am determined to study it very 
carefully with the Bible, and to proclaim the truths 
so important to our times. I have commenced to do 
so in my congregation, but have learned what I formerly 
did not know, that even the Baptist church has 
traditions and confessions which prevent free searching 
and preaching of the truth. When I was told 
by my congregation that there were certain limits and 
rules which I could not overstep, I told them I would 
permit no such barriers to be placed around me, and 
resigned my position as Baptist minister. It seemed 
plain to me that this was God's will concerning me, 
though I do not know how he will lead me in the future. 
I have four children, 15, 12, 10 and 6 years, respectively. 
October is my time to leave and my successor 
will take my place. I am now waiting on the 
Lord to do as he may direct. This is not easy, as I 
am not a man of means, but I am persuaded the Lord 
will lead me aright. When my former congregation 
in Konigsberg heard that I had resigned, they extended 
a call to me with the assurance they would 
build a third chapel if I would come. But I do not 
feel free to accept. To me it is clear that I must not 
again be connected with any congregation, but 
should stand free, in order to declare the whole truth, 
as it is now due and now needed. 

Have recently been reading a new book by a 
Swiss theologian, Reinhardt. The author endeavors 
to demonstrate from a philosophical standpoint what 
"Dawn" presents from the standpoint of divine revelation. 
In many respects there is a striking similarity 
between this book and "Dawn." But Reinhardt 
is a rationalist, and believes the theory of evolution, 
and consequently is in error. He speaks of 
Chas. T. Russell in his book, the author of "Dawn," 
but cannot say more than "he believes too firmly in 
the inspiration of the Scriptures." 

For a time before reading "Dawn," I thought of 
entering Dowie's Zion work, and wrote to Dowie, 

R2906 : page 351 



but as yet I have received no reply; but since reading 
"Dawn," I feel that the Lord has another way for 
me, and other duties. My desire at present is— I 
should like to have a year for quiet and study, to 
search my Bible and spend in prayer, and thoroughly 
study "Dawn." When I am thus prepared of the Lord, 
I would like to preach the truth, as it is now due, in 
the cities of Germany and Switzerland. After Paul's 
conversion he had time for quiet and study; but I 
have been a minister for 17 years, and in the entire 
period have had no opportunity for rest and study, 
though I preached from four to five times a week. 
Through the study of "Dawn," there has been a revolution 
in my biblical and theological opinions, and 
I must have time to become established before I can 
publicly expound these doctrines, though I have a 
deep conviction of their truthfulness. 

As I am entirely without means, I must look to 
the Lord to provide the means to support my family, 
and this he will do if he wishes me to have the time 
for study. I wait for his direction. Of this I am 
thoroughly convinced, I cannot longer be a Baptist 
minister. 

Permit me to enclose a photo of my wife and myself. 
I am 44 and my dear wife 37. Our only concern 
is that we may attain the high privileges to 
which we are called, and that we may be co-laborers 
during the short time that remains, in gathering the 
elect. 

Should you consider it wise that I should go to 
you in America for a short time (without my family), 
I am ready to do so. I would be very thankful to receive 
an answer as soon as possible, in German writing, 
as October is approaching, when I must leave 
my home and field of labor. My desire is that God's 
will may be done in me and through me. May he 
also direct you in the advice you may give me. 

In Christian love and esteem, yours, 

Jan Kradolfer, Minister,— Switzerland. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. NOVEMBER 15, 1901. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 
Human Forces Bursting all 

Bonds and Barriers 355 

A New Chemical Agent 356 

Streams in the Desert 356 



In Peril from Their Own Troops 357 

Faith Severely Tested 357 

Certainly I Will Be With Thee 359 

The Ten Plagues of Egypt 361 

An Editor Lectures Churchianity 364 

Love Ye One Another 364 

The Church Expectant 364 

A Usurpation of Authority 367 

page 354 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 
and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM SERVICE. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 



write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. 



R2906 : page 355 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



HUMAN FORCES BURSTING ALL BONDS AND BARRIERS. 



JUSTICE BREWER, of the Supreme Court of 
the United States, was one of the speakers at 
the recent Yale bi-centenary celebration, and 
he made some statements which were extremely 
startling as coming from one in his high judicial position. 
The Picayune epitomizing his speech says: 

"Commenting on the extraordinary results attained 
in scientific discovery and mechanical invention, 
and their use in all the business and economies 
of daily life in a country inexpressibly rich in natural 
endowments, and inhabited by a vast and rapidly increasing 
population of the most enterprising and intelligent 
races of men, he said: 

'"These various causes are operating in our midst 
to produce wealth, consolidation, centralization. The 
rapidity and multitude of mercantile transactions are 
seen in colossal fortunes, in gigantic undertakings, 
in enormous financial consolidations, and corresponding 
organizations of labor. Local self-control is giving 
way before the pressure for centralized power. The 
town meeting is supplanted by the State Legislature, 
while the latter in its turn is yielding to the expanding 
power of Congress. Political parties are largely under 
the management of bosses, and the whole great 
forces of industry, business and politics seem passing 
under the domination of single central control.' 

"The eagerness with which the physical forces 
brought into play by scientific discovery and invention 
have been adopted and enlisted in every branch 
of industry and business is not more remarkable 



than is the tendency towards the concentration and 
centralization of human forces and agencies. On one 
side capital is concentrating. On the other labor is 
combining. Each is mustering all its forces so that 
each may work with the other with completer system 
and to better advantage, and, in case of a conflict, 
each will be able to hurl itself against the other with 
all the great energy and effectiveness, and the prospect 
is that, sooner or later, both sides will attain conditions 
of such formidableness as that the shock, 
should they come in full collision, will destroy the existing 
social and political organization of the Republic, 
unless the masses of the people, who will not be bound 
to either side, shall rally to crush out the combatants 
and save the country's institutions. 

"It has been declared by jurists that there is no 
evil which can occur in human economy that cannot 
find its remedy in the courts, but Justice Brewer does 
not agree with any such doctrine. He said in his 
Yale address: 

'"You cannot stay this movement towards consolidation 
and centralization. It is a natural evolution. 
The commercial spirit is taking advantage of the wonderful 
facilities given by steam and electricity. Injunction 
against strikers will not stop it; legislation 
against trusts will not. Attempting to stay the movement 
of its chariot wheels by injunction or statute is 
lunacy, compared with which Dame Partington's effort 
to stop the Atlantic with a mop was supreme 
wisdom.' 

"Then the last appeal is to the court of public 
opinion, and it must be a court independent of the 
contending parties. Not all the people of the United 
States belong to the privileged class of combined capitalists 
any more than they are members of labor organizations. 
The aristocracy of capital is made up of 
only a few thousands at the most. Organized labor 
may embrace a few millions of men not yet united 
under a central power. But although they may be so 
combined when the great conflict shall come, they 
will only make up a minority proportion of the entire 
population. There will be a great body of the people, 
to the number of tens and scores of millions, who 
will to a greater or less degree be independent, in 
sentiment at least, of both concentrated capital on 
one side and combined labor on the other, and this 
great majority will sit as a court to judge and determine 
what is necessary to protect the people's 
liberties and their free institutions from the aggressions 
of either or both of the combinations." 



The thinking people of the world all perceive that 
R2906 : page 356 



the great day of trouble is approaching,— very much 
as we have shown it from the Scriptures in The Day 
of Vengeance and The Divine Plan of the Ages. Yet, 
as above stated, they hope that the masses will at the 
proper moment save society from complete wreck 
and ruin in anarchy. It is well for mankind that hope 
occupies so large a place in the natural heart which 
has nothing else to lean upon. 

But if the Scriptures forbid us to exercise such 
hopes they give "us who believe" a still better hope of 
blessings to follow. The learned Justice hopes for 
the farming element, which heretofore has always been 
the conservative one, to preserve society and to enforce 
law and equity. But the Scriptures show the 
reverse of this. They show that it will be the reapers, 
the farmers, who will specially suffer and cry out at 
this time, and be specially instrumental in bringing 
about the anarchy. 

Already the "Agrarian Party" (the farmers) of Europe 
are now causing kings and emperors serious 
trouble. They cry out that they cannot make a living 
at present prices and want prohibitive tariffs 
which would so increase the cost of living for laborers 
and mechanics as to seriously disturb manufacturing 
and all foreign commerce. This is the result of the 
demonetization of silver— farmers of gold standard 
countries being obliged to compete with farmers of 
silver standard countries, while manufacturing is all 
done in gold-standard countries and has no such competition 
with the cheap labor of heathendom. 

Phenomenal conditions have given American 
farmers great prosperity— at the expense of millions 
in India and Russia, who have suffered from famine. 
But we are not to expect bountiful harvests here, 
and famines elsewhere to keep up prices, always. 
When the reverse movements come, the farmers of 
this favored land will also begin to cry out as represented 
in James 5. 

A NEW CHEMICAL AGENT. 



"The first milestone on the journey toward bloodless 
surgery has been reached. Its name is Adrenalin, 
that being the title of a chemical composition recently 
discovered by Dr. Jokichi Takamine, a well 
known and highly educated Japanese, who is connected 
with a chemical house that has a local office 
in this city. Adrenalin is to medicine what liquid air 
is to science, the only difference being that the chemical 
is under complete control, with unlimited possibilities 
before it. 

"By the local application of Adrenalin, in solution 
of one part to 5,000, operations may be performed 



on the nose, ear and eye without the spilling 

of a drop of blood. Such operations have also been 

performed with Adrenalin in solution of one part to 

10,000. 

R2907 : page 356 

"Thus has it been demonstrated that the discovery 
is the most powerful medicine known, and at 
the same time, it might be said, the most expensive. 
Physicians but it at $1 a grain, or $7,000 a pound. 

"The isolation of the blood pressure raising constituent 
of the suprarenal gland is of course the chief 
virtue of Adrenalin, and its uses and developments 
along this particular line are unlimited. It has also 
been ascertained, however, that Adrenalin is a most 
powerful cardiac stimulant, and it has been hinted 
by physicians that it may be possible to resuscitate 
persons who have died of heart failure. 

"Premature childbirth may also be made obsolete, 
as it is said Adrenalin can be made to revivify the 
heart of the dead child. Work along these lines is 
now being carried forward by Dr. Takamine in his 
laboratory, and before another year is gone it may 
be possible to perform amputations without the loss 
of blood, which is so disastrous to the patient."— New 
York Herald. 

STREAMS IN THE DESERT. 



"Surely the 'Great American Desert' of our childhood 
days will soon be a thing of the past. The only 
conception of a desert that the next generation will 
be able to obtain must come from pictures and descriptions 
of something that once existed, but is no 
more. Indeed, it is quite likely that we shall not have 
to wait for the next generation to witness the realization 
of this change. 

"A special from San Bernardino announces that 
an artesian gusher, with a flow of nearly 200 inches 
of water, has been struck on the Mojave desert, near 
Victor, at a depth of less than 200 feet, by parties who 
were drilling for oil. This is not, by any means, the 
first time that water has been struck in Southern 
California by persons who were seeking for oil, and 
in some cases the water has proved to be more valuable 
than a moderate amount of oil would be. 

"Out on the Colorado desert, below sea level, 
they have obtained a fine supply of artesian water at 
a moderate depth, and at the other end of the desert, 
near Yuma, water is flowing through a canal which 
is big enough to be navigated by a steam launch. 

"All this is only a slight foretaste of what is 
to come within the next few years. That favorite 



quotation of our friend, the country editor 'The desert 

shall blossom as the rose,' is destined to be exemplified 

to a remarkable degree in Southern California 

within the next decade. Not only shall the 

desert blossom as the rose, but also the less beautiful 

but more profitable cabbage and potato and cauliflower 

and sugar beet and watermelon and fruit tree, 

and many other things which profit a man's stomach 

and swell his bank account."— Los Angeles Daily 

Times. 



The foregoing clippings corroborate the testimony 
of the Scriptures,— that we are in the dawn of 
the new epoch, long by God's prophets foretold— the 
Millennium, the period of divine favor for the blessing 
of Adam's race through him who redeemed it- 
Christ. They corroborate the assurance that under 
that Kingdom of Messiah the "curse" shall be lifted 
from the race and as Sin and Death have reigned for 
6,000 years, now soon Grace and Truth shall reign 
unto righteousness and life.— Rom. 5:17-21. 

Meantime, also let us not forget the teaching of 
the Lord's Word that so far as humanity is concerned, 
it is so full of selfishness that it cannot enter 
into these blessings now due peaceably; but 
must needs pass through "a time of trouble [anarchy] 

R2907 : page 357 

such as was not since there was a nation." 

We must note the trend of events in this direction 

therefore, also. It is significant that one Socialist 

publication claims to have sent out during the forty 

weeks of this year, over 6,000,000 papers and pamphlets. 

And below we quote a cable to the Chicago 

Daily News— also significant. 

IN PERIL FROM THEIR OWN TROOPS. 



"London, Sept. 30.— Dangerous social fanatics in 
the ranks of continental armies are causing unrest in 
a number of the principal capitals of Europe, according 
to a high officer of the British army who 
has just returned from a professional tour of the continent. 
He asserts that some monarchs are in peril 
when in the presence of their own troops and are 
now taking drastic measures to correct the evil. To 
the correspondent of The Daily News he said today: 

"The barracks of Europe have become nurseries 
of anarchism. Realizing the opportunity offered to 
them in the leisure hours of army life, anarchists have 
gladly submitted to conscription and subsequently 



have poured the poison of their doctrine into the 
ears of their comrades. They have appealed especially 
to young peasants caught in the net of compulsory 
military service, and have sent many of the latter 
out of the army convinced of the tyranny of the 
ruling classes and eager to identify themselves with 
the radical element of the population. 

"This has happened on a particularly large scale 
in Germany, Austria and Italy, and the officials of 
those countries are greatly disturbed. They have 
adopted measures for strangling revolution in the 
barracks. The latter are now frequented by government 
eavesdroppers and spies who make short 
work of the preachers of assassination and 
insurrection." 



R2907 : page 357 

FAITH SEVERELY TESTED. 



"By faith, Abraham when he was tried, offered up Isaac;... 
accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the 
dead, from whence also he received him 
in a figure."— Heb. 11:17,19. 

WITH CHANGES of dispensation come 

changes of divine methods of dealing with 

the faithful. The Lord's command to Abraham to 

sacrifice his son was totally different from any command 

he would give to his people now; and yet tests 

of a similar import, though of different kind, are laid 

upon the Lord's people to-day, and for a very similar 

purpose, viz., the testing of our heart-loyalty toward 

the Lord:— testing of faith in him,— in his wisdom, in 

his power, in his goodness. 

In Abraham's day the patriarchal form of government 
prevailed, and under it the father of a family 
held an autocratic power which seemingly was rarely 
questioned by the children. The same extreme 
view of paternal government prevails, at least outwardly, 
in China to-day, we are informed. The patriarch, 
Abraham, was amenable to no earthly law or 
ruler, but to God only; and when the Lord proved or 
tested his faith and obedience by calling for the sacrifice 
of Isaac upon Mount Moriah, Abraham, full of 
faith and obedience, promptly responded, and there 
was no law or power to restrain the obedience. Even 
Isaac, who by this time was twenty-five years of age, 
seems to have offered not the slightest resistance to 
the divinely arranged program as set before him by 
his father; for in the vigor of youth he certainly need 
not have been bound to the altar contrary to his own 



will. 

A severer test upon Abraham than this one could 
not be imagined. What could be a more difficult thing 
for any father to do than to slay his own child, even 
in response to the divine command? But in Abraham's 
case the sacrifice was a doubly keen one, because, 
not only had he the natural parental love for 
his offspring, but this was the son of promise, for 
whose birth he had waited according to divine promise, 
and longed and prayed, for twenty-five years— the 
son whose birth in his old age was admittedly a miracle 
of divine power— the son in whom, according to 
the divine word, centered all the gracious promises 
which had filled Abraham's heart for now fifty years; 
and which, during all this period, had constrained him 
to be a pilgrim and a stranger in the earth, so that he 
might in due time inherit these gracious promises 
which belonged to the future. How strange it must 
have seemed to him— how utterly inexplicable, that 
the Lord should ask him to surrender Isaac as a 
sacrifice! 

Our respect for Abraham's faith rises higher and 
higher, as we behold the various manifestations of his 
confidence in God, and his obedience to the divine 
command. We say to ourselves, even as new creatures 
and partakers of the divine nature, O that we 
might have in fullest measure this abounding faith, 
this willing obedience, this trust, resting securely in 
God, this assurance that he is able to accomplish all 
that he has promised, even though the accomplishment 
of it should make necessary a resurrection from 
the dead! For the Apostle assures us that Abraham 
philosophized upon this matter— respecting the fact 
that Isaac was his legitimate heir, and had been so 
acknowledged of the Lord, saying, "In Isaac shall thy 
seed be called." He could see no other way that 
God's word could be true; yet so strong was his faith 
that he trusted that the Lord was able to raise his son 
from the dead in order to fulfil the promise. 
Heb. 11:19. 

This is exactly the kind of faith that the Lord desires 
to find in the spiritual seed of Abraham, the Gospel 
Church— a faith that will trust him even where it 
cannot trace him; a faith which recognizes his perfect 
wisdom, perfect love and perfect power. It is not a 
faith, however, that is a spontaneous growth, under 
present fallen conditions. It requires years for its 
development. Abraham had not this degree of faith 
when first he entered the land of Canaan as a pilgrim. 
It was the lack of this perfect trust in God which 
made him fearful to acknowledge Sarah to be his wife, 
when later he went into the borders of Egypt; it was 
a faith that had grown through his continued intimacy 



*This was written as the S.S. Lesson for Aug. 25 but was 
accidentally omitted. Many requests lead us to present it now. 

R2908 : page 358 

with his Almighty "Friend." His previous 

trials and testings had already contributed to the development 

of this his finished faith; the long waiting 

and frequent disappointments in respect to Isaac had 

been beneficial; the attempt to assist the Lord in the 

fulfilment of the promise, in the begetting of Ishmael, 

and the subsequent rejection of Ishmael as not being 

of the Lord's arrangement, had no doubt helped to 

establish the patriarch in his confidence that God's 

purposes are immutable, and his power unlimited. 

And so it is with the spiritual seed of Abraham, 
the Christ, the Church:— our faith-development also 
is a work of time and patient endurance of trials and 
testings, which, rightly received, work out for us an 
increase of knowledge, an increase of faith, and an 
increase of fellowship with God,— until, by the Lord's 
grace, we later on reach such a development of faith 
in him as sometimes surprises ourselves, and assures 
us that we have made some progress; because at the 
beginning of our way we could not have endured the 
same trials successfully. Thus we see that in many 
respects even our faith is a gift of God— that while 
we exercised some faith in the beginning of our experiences, 
yet the development of it to such a condition 
and degree as will be acceptable to God is of 
God's grace, through his providential leadings, dealings, 
instructions. To him, therefore, we must render 
the praise, not only for the glorious results, but 
also for the faith and the works of this present time, 
which fit and prepare us for the coming glory and 
blessings. 

Mount Moriah is one of the hilltops embraced 
in the city of Jerusalem, which of course was not in 
any degree built or inhabited in Abraham's time. 
The Temple was built upon this hilltop, and the original 
rock upon which it is supposed Abraham offered 
his son— later represented by the ram— is now to be 
seen. True, it is no longer called the Temple, but a 
Mohammedan mosque— the Mosque of Omar. 
Nevertheless, the Mohammedans have preserved this 
natural rock from any desecration, and visitors are 
permitted to look upon it over a railing;— the writer 
so viewed it with keen interest in 1892. In Solomon's 
Temple it constituted the base of the altar of sacrifice, 
and a drain (apparently a natural one) leads from 
this place of the killing of the sacrifice, underground 
toward the valley of Jehoshaphat, or the "valley of dry 
bones," which typically represents Adamic death, as 
the Valley of Hinnom symbolizes the Second Death. 
We see in this the divine foreknowledge and fore-arrangement 
in respect to every feature of the plan of 



salvation. God not only foreknew that he would use 

the land of Palestine in connection with the development 

of typical Israel, but he premeditated also the 

construction of the Temple, centuries afterward, upon 

the site which he selected for it. And that site, and 

the Temple, and the city, Jerusalem, and the Valley 

of Jehoshaphat and the Valley of Hinnom, all were intended 

to be, and are, so many lessons in respect to 

the divine plan, past, present and to come— to those 

who have the eyes of their understanding opened to 

see these matters from the right standpoint— from the 

standpoint of Jehovah, who promised forgiveness and 

blessing through Abraham's seed, and who has since 

been gradually working out his great and glorious 

propositions. Although our Lord Jesus, the Head, 

and the Church which is his body, were not slain upon 

this typical rock in Mount Moriah, nor in any other 

one spot in the world, nevertheless, the lesson is a 

clear one to all who understand that the blood of bulls 

and of goats, which can never take away sin, offered 

upon this spot— typified the better sacrifices, holy and 

acceptable to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

Only those who recognize the fact that Abraham 
was a type of God (Rom. 4:17, margin), as Isaac was a 
type of Christ, can have any clear and satisfactory 
comprehension and appreciation of the incidents of 
this lesson. As Abraham was willing to offer his only 
son, in whom centered the promises, so Jehovah gave 
his Only Begotten Son, in whom centered the promises, 
that he should die on our behalf— a sacrifice to 
meet the demands of Justice, to the intent that thereby 
every promise of God respecting the blessing of 
all the families of the earth might be made possible, 
and in due time be accomplished. Although Abraham's 
hand was stayed, that he should not obey the 
Lord's command, nevertheless, the entire incident illustrates 
what other Scriptures affirm, viz., that 
"without the shedding of blood there is no remission" 
of the world's sins;— that unless the heir of the promises 
should die for man's redemption the promises 
could never be fulfilled. And this lesson is fully carried 
out in the picture before us; for although Abraham 
was not permitted to offer Isaac, a representative 
of Isaac was offered, the ram which God had 
provided. 

So, throughout the Jewish age, God permitted 
the natural children of Abraham to rejoice in his 
promise of blessing, requiring of them also that they 
continuously show forth the fact that the blessings 
could not come without a great sin-offering;— requiring 
them also to sacrifice bulls and goats, as sin offerings 
year by year continually, though these could 
never take away sin. They pointed to the great sin-bearer, 
who should also be the great deliverer. And 
now we, of this Gospel age, viewing the matter from 
the standpoint of its accomplishment, can see, as the 



Word of God declares, that the same God who in 
times past provided for the typical sacrifices has now 
provided the real one,— "by whose stripes we are 
healed." We can see also, as the Apostle explained, 
that as Isaac was so are we— the antitypical Isaac, 
members of the body of Christ— offered upon the 
Lord's altar. We see that Jesus, our Lord and 
Head, "offered up himself," and that we, covered by 
the merit of his sacrifice, are permitted to "present our 
bodies living sacrifices" upon the same altar, and to 
"fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of 
Christ."-Col. 1:24. 

What a joy, what a blessing, to see the real 
meaning and value of the antitype; and to realize that 
the death of Christ the Head, and the sacrifice of the 
Church, his body, so far from annulling or destroying 
the original divine plan, are only steps in its accomplishment: 
that in the divine order the sacrifice 
of the human nature is essential to a part in the first 
resurrection, with its glory, honor and immortality. 
It rejoices us to realize that so far from the divine 
plan being frustrated by the death of the antitypical 
Isaac it is being consummated thereby— that the 
death of the Christ is the broad foundation which 
God is laying, by which he can "be just and yet the 

R2908 : page 359 

justifier" of all them that believe in Jesus; so that 
when this glorious Messiah and his house of sons 
shall be exalted to the power intimated in the promise, 
he will be fully competent and fully authorized to 
confer upon the world the great and wonderful blessings 
which God forestated to father Abraham in an 
obscure and typical manner. 

In the light of the spirit's revelation we rejoice 
to see that the blessings which are coming through 
this "seed of Abraham" (Gal. 3:16,29) will not only 
be, first of all, the divine favor toward the Church, 
evidenced in the glory, honor and immortality bestowed 
upon every member thereof, but additionally 
the blessing also upon the natural seed of Abraham, 
Israel according to the flesh; and furthermore, the 
blessing upon all the families of the earth, as the 
Lord has promised;— the blessing of release from the 
control and deceptions of Satan, and from the dominion 
of sin and its weaknesses: so that all who will 
may hear the voice of that great Prophet, Priest and 
King, and come forth step by step, not only out of the 
prison-house of death, but also out of "the valley of 
the shadow of death,"— clear up, up, up, to the mountain-tops 
of perfect life and perfect harmony with the 
divine Creator, lost for all through father Adam by 
disobedience, but redeemed for all— for as many as 
will accept it— by the precious blood of Christ. 

Occasionally some poor creatures of unbalanced 



mind, untaught and ignorant as respects the divine 

character and plan, misapprehending the Lord's dealings 

with Abraham and his posterity as types, imagine 

that as God called upon Abraham to sacrifice his 

son, so he calls upon them to make some human sacrifice. 

Fortunately these poor deluded creatures are 

not numerous, and they call for our sympathy rather 

than for our denunciation. The friends of God, the 

children of God, will make no such mistake respecting 

the divine will, because, as it is written in the 

Scriptures, "they shall be all taught of God." Those 

who are taught of God know that human life is to be 

held very sacred. They know also not to lean to 

their own understandings, nor to dreams nor to imaginings. 

They see further that even in Abraham's 

case God did not wish the human sacrifice, but merely 

tested Abraham's faith. Nor have we such promises 

made to our children; we have, therefore no such 

faith to be tested by the death of our children; hence 

it would be impossible for God to test us thus. 

Moreover, when we see that the entire procedure with 

Abraham was typical, and when we understand its lessons, 

the entire matter is clear and plain to us. 

While the seed of Abraham, the Church, has no 
such testing as his, it has, nevertheless, many severe 
faith-trials and testings, and as these are rightly received, 
and in proportion as faith abounds and triumphs 
in respect to all of our affairs of life, we are 
more and more blessed and taught of the Lord, and 
more and more acceptable to him, and more and more 
meet for the inheritance with the saints in light, as 
Abraham's seed. 



R2909 : page 359 

"CERTAINLY I WILL BE WITH THEE." 

--EXOD. 3:1-12.-DEC. l.~ 

MOSES, at forty years of age, having been 

schooled in all the learning of the Egyptians, 

and recognized as mighty in word and in 

deed, as noted in a previous lesson, determined to 

cast in his lot henceforth with the people of God. 

He renounced his relationship to the king's family, 

"refusing to be any longer called the son of 

Pharaoh's daughter." He chose rather to suffer affliction 

with the people of God, and with them to have 

an inheritance in the promises made to their fathers. 

While with the Egyptians he was a sharer of the 

riches which were accruing to that people through the 

oppression and bondage of the Israelites; and Moses 

could no longer be a participator in the fruits of this 

wrongdoing, nor enjoy these pleasures of sin, injustice. 



We have this attestation to his moral rectitude, 
his love of justice. It indicates that he was naturally 
high-minded, noble, just. How many of the Lord's 
people, living under the instructions of the Gospel, 
and the enlightening influences of the holy spirit at 
the present time, need to take a lesson from Moses' 
course. How many would be willing to enjoy the 
fruits of sin and injustice— to continually receive and 
enjoy wealth and luxuries known to be unjustly 
wrung from poor unfortunates? How many would be 
inclined to console themselves with the thought that 
they were not directly responsible for the injustices 
and oppressions whose profits they nevertheless 
would enjoy? How noble was Moses' course, and 
how much approved of the Lord! It is proper that all 
who know and love righteousness and justice should 
take a firm stand upon these principles.— 
Heb. 11:24-26. 

It is written that Moses' course in this matter was 
the result of his "esteeming the reproaches of Christ 
greater riches than the treasures of Egypt." The reproaches 
of Messiah were heaped against the Israelites; 
for undoubtedly the Egyptians had learned that 
the Israelites believed themselves to be the heirs of 
the great promises from the Almighty made to their 
father Abraham, and repeated to Isaac and Jacob,— 
that through this nation should come the great Messiah, 
the great Deliverer, who should bless and rule 
the world. No doubt the oppressed people were frequently 
taunted upon these extravagant hopes, by 
their oppressors. But Moses, believing these promises, 
preferred to associate himself with the despised 
people, and left the courts of Egypt. As the Apostle 
explains, this was because "he had respect unto the 
recompense of the reward"— he hoped by allying 
himself with his own people to preserve his share in 
these Abrahamic promises and in the blessings which 
must ultimately come through them by a better resurrection. 
-Heb. 11:35,39,40. 

Although, naturally, Moses was meek, he nevertheless 
was not ignorant of his education and abilities; 
and these being known to the Israelites he had 
every reason to suppose that they, expecting deliverance 
from Egypt about this time (in harmony with 
God's Word to Abraham about four hundred years 
before) would rejoice in having him for a counsellor, 
a representative, a qualified law-giver, amongst them. 

R2909 : page 360 

In his zeal for his brethren, and in his abhorrence of 
the injustice practised upon them, he smote one of 
the Egyptian task-masters, and delivered the oppressed 
Hebrew. He presumed that by such a course 
he would awaken the energies and spirits of his people 
and that they would accept him as their leader 



and that the deliverance from Egypt would forthwith 
begin. But his disappointment was great when the 
next day he discovered that his kinsmen had no such 
loyal feeling toward him as he had toward them; for, 
while endeavoring to correct a dispute between two 
Israelites, the one who did the other wrong resented 
the endeavors of the peacemaker, and showed that he 
and a large class whom he represented failed to appreciate 
the conduct of Moses, and failed to accept 
him as a law-giver. The erring Israelite demanded, 
"Who made thee a judge or a law-giver over us?" 
Where is your authority? We deny that you have 
any. Would you slay me, as you did the Egyptian 
yesterday? Moses was completely disheartened, and 
fled to the wilderness of Paran. He had fondly hoped 
that his sacrifice of the throne and glory of Egypt for 
his people's sake would be appreciated by them, at 
least, but coming to his own his own received him not. 
Apparently he had made a great sacrifice, and to no 
purpose. Undoubtedly the natural meekness of his 
disposition was intensified by this rebuff. 

Thoroughly discouraged, cut off from the cultured 
class of Egypt, cut off also from his kinsmen, 
whom he had hoped to assist, Moses hermit-like, settled 
down to a life in the wilderness. His natural nobility 
and training made him chivalrous in the defence 
of women, and soon he found himself defending the 
seven daughters of Jethro, who, as shepherdesses, 
were tending his flocks. This led to his marrying one 
of these, and himself becoming a shepherd, caring for 
his father-in-law's flocks. Forty years was the period 
of this isolation, this great change of life from one of 
culture, refinement and honor amongst men, to the 
solitudes of that wilderness. Moses, so far as we 
have information, up to this time had no direct manifestation 
of God's favor. He merely had a knowledge 
of the hopes which belonged to his people 
through the promises made to Abraham. He doubtless 
regarded as a mistake his action at forty years 
of age, in attempting to become the leader of his people; 
yet from the inspired record we must suppose 
that his faith in the divine promises never faltered, and 
that he preferred to be on God's side, and an outcast 
from Egyptian society, rather than the reverse. 
Nevertheless, we can see that God's supervision was 
over all of his affairs, and that with the tests of his 
loyalty came valuable experiences, preparing him for 
the Lord's great work, in the Lord's time. It gave 
him another kind of schooling, and a valuable one, 
though he was ignorant of it at the time. We cannot 
doubt that his wandering as a shepherd over that 
wilderness for forty years made him thoroughly familiar 
with every road, every hill, every stream, in it, 
and that this was subsequently of great advantage to 
him, when, under the Lord's direction, he became the 
leader of Israel through that wilderness toward Canaan. 



Neither need we doubt that Moses' own character 
received valuable lessons of patience and humility 
and obedience to the divine will during those forty 
years. Even his marriage here to Jethro's daughter, 
who bore him two sons, would seem to have been 
overruled by the Lord for the good of his people; for 
the woman being an African, a black, the sons would 
of course be mulattoes, and would correspondingly 
have less respect amongst the Israelites than if they 
had been Moses' children by an Israelitish woman, 
for as such they might have had the reverence of the 
people in Moses' stead at the time of his death, and 
thus the tendency might have been to establish a 
rulership in his family line, which evidently was not 
the divine purpose. 

How often the Lord's people— spiritual Israelites 
—find that they have experiences somewhat along 
the line of Moses! How sometimes our efforts and 
energies and plans for good, yea, our self-sacrifices, 
seem to be rejected, their value nothing, and ourselves 
turned away from activities and opportunities 
which we had coveted as opportunities for the Lord's 
service. How disheartening we have found this, until 
later on we discovered that the Lord's hand was able 
to bring blessing out of our disappointments, and 
how we could and have learned lessons under trying 
circumstances, which we could never have learned 
otherwise. And how these lessons have been ordered 
of the Lord so as to fit and to prepare us for future usefulness 
in his service and to his people. Let us, then, 
have the more courage and the more faith and the 
more trust in God— trusting him where we cannot 
trace him, knowing that all things shall work together 
for good to them that love him— the called ones according 
to his purpose. 

It was at this time, when Moses was eighty years 
old, that the Lord sent him to deliver Israel. Perhaps 
it was not accidental that Moses' career was thus 
divided into two equal periods— 40 years of Egyptian 
training, and rejected; then 40 years' absence followed 
by his successful deliverance of God's people. 
Perhaps in this Moses was a type. So also the 
period from the time Israel started as a nation (at 
the death of Jacob, the last of the patriarchs) until the 
antitype of Moses "came unto his own and his own 
received him not" (1845 years) is the same length as 
the period of his absence, at the end of which is his 
second advent, shortly to be followed by the successful 
deliverance of all of God's people from the oppressions 
of Satan, sin and death. 

What a change the forty years wrought in Moses! 
At its beginning he was ready and anxious to lead the 
Israelites; full of modest confidence in himself, as a 
leader, a commander, a law-giver, for that people- 
no doubt realizing by faith that God had prepared him 
and educated him that he might have the proper qualifications 



to be their leader. But now, when the 

Lord's time has come, his courage is gone, his self-confidence 

is upset, and he protests to the Lord that 

he is totally unqualified. Now the Lord needs to encourage 

him, and Moses receives more deeply than 

he could have done forty years before the thought 

that Israel's deliverance was not to be by man or 

through man, but by the Lord himself,— and that the 

human agent would be merely the Lord's representative. 

What a valuable lesson Moses was learning, and 

how necessary is such a lesson to all of the Lord's people, 

especially to any and to all whom he would use in 

R2910 : page 361 

any special sense in connection with his work. We 
must learn that it is not our work, but God's work, 
not our power or ability or wisdom, or greatness or 
learning, but the divine power working in and 
through us, which is mighty to the pulling down of 
strongholds, and to the lifting up of weak, and to the 
bringing in of the great salvation which he has promised. 
The more thoroughly we learn this lesson the 
better it will be for ourselves, and for all who, in the 
Lord's providence, we are sent to assist in his way— 
to deliver from the bondage of sin and death. 

Our Golden Text, "Certainly I will be with thee," 
is an inspiration to the Lord's people everywhere and 
at all times, when endeavoring properly to do any 
part of the Lord's work, heeding his call through the 
Word. If God be for us, and if God be with us, who 
can prevail against us eventually? There may be 
with us, as there were with Moses and his service, 
various difficulties, trials, vexations and disappointments, 
—for we have the treasure of the new nature in 
earthen vessels, and the weaknesses and imperfections 
and short-sightedness of these are sure at times 
to cause us difficulties and discouragements. On 
such occasions our duty is to turn the eyes of our 
understanding to Him whom we serve, whose ambassadors 
and representatives we are, and to recall his 
promise, "Surely I will be with thee." This means 
eventual victory, though, perhaps, through devious 
ways that we know not, and expect not, which nevertheless 
will ultimately prove to have been advantageous 
to us and to our Master's glory. 

"This shall be a token unto thee, that I have 
sent thee." No doubt Moses thought now of his failure 
to interest his people when he went to them still 
covered with the honors of the schools and the army, 
and in the prime of life; and perhaps he now contrasted 
his present condition as a shepherd, forgotten 
by many who knew him in Egypt, without renown, 
without favor before the court, without influence or 
prestige; and no doubt he said within himself, If I 
could make no impression before, how could I hope 



now to accomplish as much? But, "This shall be the 
token unto thee," to prove "that I have sent thee." 
He was to know that when God sent it meant that the 
right time had come, and that all of God's good purposes 
would be accomplished. He was to know that 
without the Lord he could do nothing; that with the 
Lord he could do all things. And so all of the people 
of God, who would be useful and used in his service, 
must learn this lesson: "Without me ye can do nothing." 
Then God gave Moses the absolute assurance 
that he and his people should come forth out of 
Egypt, and should worship in the very mountain in 
which now he beheld the burning bush, and talked 
with the angel of the Lord. 

By various signs God established the faith of his 
servant. The burning bush itself was one of these 
demonstrations of divine power. Another demonstration 
was the casting of his rod upon the ground, 
and its becoming a serpent, a symbol of evil, and the 
divine power exercised again by which the serpent 
was turned again into a staff, representing God's 
power to turn evil things into good things through the 
operation of faith. Again, his hand was thrust into 
his bosom, and taken out was found to be leprous, 
and being thrust in again and taken out was found to 
be restored to health. In sending out his people in 
the present time, his ambassadors, the body of Christ, 
to service (services that are much inferior in many 
respects, yet superior in some regards), the Lord 
does not give us these visible demonstrations of his 
power, but we may be sure that none are sent unless 
first they are given some testimonies on a higher 
spiritual plane. They must behold the Lord as the 
great light; they must realize that his justice is as a 
consuming fire as respects everything sinful, everything 
evil, but that through Christ he has mercy upon 
our imperfections, and grants us to see his light and 
to enjoy it without being consumed thereby. 

Only after such lessons have been learned in the 
school of experience under our great Teacher and 
Pattern, Jesus, are we ready for the Lord's service 
in various ways, as he may be pleased to indicate 
them and to send us and use us. Let us learn 
thoroughly the lesson that our undertakings, even for 
the Lord and in the interest of his people, can only 
prosper in the Lord's time, and when we are sent of 
him; but that nevertheless every effort we may put 
forth, even in our ignorance, if done in meekness, humility, 
and with a respect for the recompense of reward, 
will surely be owned of the Lord, and blessed 
of him to our good and to our development for future 
service, even as in Moses' case. 



R2910 : page 361 



THE TEN PLAGUES OF EGYPT. 
-EXOD. 11:1-10.~DEC. 8.- 
"The angel of his presence saved them."— Isa. 63:9. 



HE WHO SEES, in the narrative of the ten 
plagues upon Egypt, and Israel's deliverance 
thereby, nothing beyond what is contained 
in the simple story recognizes only the shell, and 
not the kernel of the lesson. In the type it was 
typical Israel alone that was delivered by Moses and 
the first-born; in the antitype it will be "the groaning 
creation" that will be delivered— all such who will accept 
deliverance, under the leadership of the antitypical 
Moses, Christ, and his Royal Priesthood,— the 
elect Church of this Gospel age. In the type it was 
Pharaoh and his coadjutors that were first chastened 
by the plagues and subsequently destroyed in the Red 
Sea. Their antitype is Satan and all his coadjutors, 
—all who profit by evil; and in the beginning this will 
include many who unwittingly are under his blinding 
influence; but ultimately it will include only such 
as are wilful and deliberate servants of sin and lovers 
of unrighteousness— injustice, etc. 

A previous lesson showed us Moses, receiving 
instruction and encouragement from the Lord respecting 
his future work as the deliverer. We saw 
him at the burning bush, and noted his reverence for 
the Lord and yet his need of being thoroughly convinced 

R2910 : page 362 

that God, with his infinite power would go with 

him, if he would again go to his countrymen, and essay 

to be their deliverer from bondage. We noted 

that the Lord gave him, as a sign or evidence of his 

commission, the miracle of his rod or walking stick 

turning into a serpent, and being changed back to a 

stick; and another sign in respect to leprosy coming 

upon his hand, and being instantly healed by putting 

it again into his bosom. When Moses had been himself 

convinced he enquired of the Lord by what means 

he should convince the Israelites of his authority as 

their leader, and that the Lord would now deliver 

them. He was commissioned to introduce himself 

to the Israelites by these same signs by which he himself 

had been convinced of the divine authority and 

backing for his undertaking; and if either or both of 

these evidences were insufficient Moses was commissioned 

to take water from the Nile river, in sight of 

his countrymen, and to pour it upon the dry land, 

where it would become blood, the Lord assuring him 



that by means of some or all of these signs the people 
would be convinced and accept his leadership. 

These three signs, which were so convincing to 
the Israelites, doubtless signified certain truths which, 
in the present time, will be convincing to the Lord's 
true people at the proper time; and demonstrate to 
them that there is to be a great deliverance of all who 
trust in the Lord, from the power of Satan and the 
bondage of sin and death. Time and space forbid a 
thorough examination of the antitypical significance 
of these signs here; but in our next issue we hope to 
show that we are now living in the time when the 
antitypes of these signs are due to antitypical Israel, 
as proofs of the presence of the Deliverer and the imminence 
of the deliverance. We expect to show that 
the antitypes of these signs are now being given, and 
of what they consist. 

Moses' next mission, with Aaron, was to go before 
Pharaoh and make a demand that the Israelites 
might be permitted to go a three-days' journey into 
the wilderness to worship God and do sacrifice to him. 
Nothing was said respecting their non-intention of 
returning, nor was it necessary to do so. They were 
not in a just sense bondmen; they had not forfeited 
their liberties, either through war or debt; they had 
the same right to depart that they had to come into 
Egypt; and, if their request for a temporary absence 
were granted, they could later determine whether or 
not they would return to Goshen. The request in this 
form made the trial of Pharaoh the less severe; nevertheless, 
his refusal to grant the holiday proved conclusively 
that he would have refused to grant them 
full liberty. Instead, Pharaoh sent forth instructions 
to the task-makers to increase the burdens upon the 
Hebrews, declaring that if they were worked hard 
enough they would have no time to think, and speculate 
about holidays, etc. It was at this time that the 
Israelites were required to turn out their full quota of 
brick per day, without having a straw furnished them, 
as had previously been the custom— straw being then 
used as a binder for bricks, which were sun-dried, 
instead of being burned hard, as at the present time. 
This stage of the Israelitish bondage is fully corroborated 
by certain recent excavations in Egypt, which 
show some structures built of brick, with straw 
binder; some with brick with binders of reeds and 
rushes, and some, finally, with practically no binders 
at all, and therefore that much the more difficult to 
handle in the making. 

The effect of this move was at first to discourage 
the Hebrews and to lead them to complain to Moses, 

R2911 : page 362 

through their elders, that instead of being a deliverer 
and a helper he was bringing increased miseries. And 



so, likely, it will be with many of the groaning creation, 
in the near future. Their first efforts and aspirations 
toward the deliverance which the Lord has 
promised them will be resented by "the powers that 
be," and for a time their efforts at attainment of coveted 
blessing will seem to work disadvantageously. 
Nevertheless, the effect in the end will be to the more 
deeply impress upon all the evils of the present reign 
of sin and selfishness, and to make all the more appreciative 
of the Millennial blessings and liberties of 
righteousness, when they shall be attained; and the 
more determined that they will follow the leadings of 
the Lord, and be obedient to him, that they may attain 
that liberty. 



PHARAOH'S HEART HARDENED. 

Under the Lord's instructions Moses presented 
himself before Pharaoh, and made formal demand that 
the people be let go. Nevertheless, the Lord said to 
him, "I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my 
signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt." "But 
Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, that I may lay my 
hand upon Egypt, and bring forth mine armies and my 
people, the Children of Israel, out of the land of 
Egypt, by great judgments; and the Egyptians shall 
know that I am the Lord." 

This is perhaps as appropriate a place as any to 
consider the sense in which the Lord "hardened" 
Pharaoh's heart. And we may here also consider the 
Apostle's expression on the subject, saying: "The 
Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same 
purpose have I raised thee up, that I might show my 
power in thee, and that my name might be declared 
throughout all the earth.' Therefore hath he mercy 
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he 
hardeneth." (Rom. 9:17,18.) The Lord had raised 
up to the throne of Egypt a man of iron will and perverse 
spirit, who would not readily yield, and upon 
whom, therefore, repeated and severe judgments 
would be necessary, which would demonstrate divine 
power on behalf of Israel. Secondly, these would 
incidentally constitute a retribution against the whole 
people of Egypt, as participators in the unjust oppression 
exercised toward Israel. In a word, divine 
power would be better shown, and retributive justice 
better rendered, and a lesson for all time better written, 
by the raising up to the throne of Egypt of this 
man, than by raising up to the throne any of the 
others who might have been heirs, had they lived, or 
had he not lived. 

It should be noticed that neither here nor elsewhere 
does God interfere with the freedom of the will 
of any individual, whether amongst those who profess 



obedience to him, or others. As respects the hardening 
of Pharaoh's heart: as we look carefully into the 
narrative we find that it was accomplished through 
God's mercy only, and hence that no charge could be 

R2911 : page 363 

laid against divine justice on this account. It was 
because of Pharaoh's repenting that the Lord stayed 
one and another of the plagues brought upon him, 
and the nation which he represented. But this goodness 
and mercy of God, which should have led him to 
repentance, led him in an opposite direction, to greater 
hardness of heart. And so it is with the world in 
general today: when the judgments of the Lord fall 
severely upon the world there is a tendency to contrition, 
humility and repentance; but when the Lord's 
blessings abound there is the greater likelihood 
amongst those who are rebellious of heart to become 
hardened and unappreciative. So it was with Pharaoh, 
and so it will be with "the powers that be" in the 
end of this age; but so it must not be with those who 
are truly the children of God. To all these God's 
mercies and blessings, favor upon favor, should and 
do lead to greater appreciation, thankfulness and loving 
obedience, because they are his. 

It has been surmised that these ten plagues upon 
Egypt began about July 1st, and lasted until the following 
April,— in all about nine months. This surmise 
is based upon the character of the different 
plagues, and what is known of the climate and usual 
conditions of Egypt favorable to the plagues. The 
first three, the waters changed to blood, the frogs, and 
the lice (insects), appear to have been common to the 
Israelites as well as to the Egyptians, the land of 
Goshen being spared from the remaining seven 
plagues— flies or winged pests; murrain, or cattle disease; 
bains, or smallpox; hail and fire; locusts; darkness; 
and finally the death of the first-born. During 
this series of plagues Pharaoh relented a little occasionally 
to the extent that he agreed that the males 
of the Hebrews should go forth, as requested, to sacrifice 
in the wilderness, the females and children being 
held as hostages for their return. But this brought 
out the answer that when they would go it must be all 
of them, including their cattle and herds, and to this 
Pharaoh would not hear, until Egypt was smitten 
with the tenth plague, and all the first-born of Egypt 
(humanity and animals) died; then he urged them to 
go. The chastisement was sufficient. So it will be 
in the end of the time of trouble that is approaching, 
and which is figuratively represented by these 
plagues, especially "the seven last plagues."— Rev. 15: 

When the last plague has been poured out, as 
a vial of divine wrath, "the powers that be" will realize 
that it is useless to fight against God. And as 



Pharaoh and his people received a severe retributive 

punishment for every evil they had inflicted upon the 

Israelites, and as their first-born became retributive 

representatives of the Israelitish babes they had 

caused to be drowned in the Nile, so their flocks and 

herds, and the crops that were destroyed by the locusts 

and insects, etc., and all the troubles upon them, 

were retributive punishments, for the unjust exactions 

made of the Israelites. So we may suppose that 

the great troubles and losses which will come upon 

"the powers that be" of the present time, in the approaching 

trouble, will, in some sense or degree, be 

a retributive requirement,— an offset for a not sufficiently 

benevolent and just treatment of many under 

their control in the present time, when the blessings 

and inventions of our day should be accruing more 

generally to the benefit of the masses. 

Objection has been found by some to the statement 
that the Lord, through Moses, instructed the 
Israelites to "borrow" of their Egyptian neighbors 
jewels of silver and gold, etc., and that they did so, 
and thus "spoiled the Egyptians"— took away a great 
spoil or trophy of valuables, when they went. Two 
answers may be made to this objection. The first is 
that our Common Version translation is very inaccurate, 
and thus gives ground for the thought of a deception; 
the word in the original signifies asked, requested, 
or begged for, and should not be rendered 
"borrowed." The Revised Version renders this 
properly, "asked for." The Hebrew word is the same 
as when Solomon "asked" wisdom, and did not "ask" 
long life; neither "asked" he riches; neither "asked" 
he the life of his enemies. (1 Kings 3:11.) As it 
would be improper to render the word "borrow" in 
Solomon's case, it is equally inappropriate in the case 
of the Israelites. Similarly the word rendered "lent" 
should be "gave." The fact is that the Egyptians 
were thoroughly sore of heart under the repeated 
castigations given them by the Lord, during the nine 
months of the plagues. They were glad to learn that 
their representative and king had finally ordered the 
people to leave the country. They felt themselves 
like hastening them out, lest some further visitation 
should come upon them; or lest Pharaoh should again 
change his mind. Hence, when the Israelites importuned 
them for jewels and fine garments, etc., they 
gave them freely, hoping to be rid of them the 
quicker. The other answer to the argument is that 
in all justice the Egyptians owed the Hebrews the 
value of these jewels, and more too, for the onerous 
services they had compelled them to render; and 
hence the Israelites were not asking an alms for 
which they had given no equivalent, but were really 
asking for their back pay. 

Our Golden Text seems to be wholly misapplied. 
It seems to have no reference to Israel in Egyptian 



bondage; neither does it fully and completely apply to 
their antitype— those who will be delivered from the 
power of Satan, sin and death during the Millennial 
age. It applies merely to the overcoming Church, 
the "Church of the First-born," which was represented 
only by Moses and the first-born of Israel, 
spared during the night of the Passover. The Lord 
is specially with this class, the "little flock," the 
"elect," "the body of Christ," who shortly shall lead 
the people out of bondage into the liberty of the sons 
of God. As many as obey the voice and follow the 
leading of this great Prophet, Priest and King, of 
which Jesus is the Head, and his elect Church the 
members in particular of the body, will be fully delivered 
from the power of Satan, represented by 
Pharaoh. 

A general lesson, applicable to all persons and at 
all times, is that justice should be done; that none 
should be oppressed; that the Lord cherishes the 
cause of the oppressed, especially if they be his people; 
and that he will deliver them and will permit the 
wrath of man to work out retributive justice and punishment 
upon all oppressors. 



R2912: page 364 

AN EDITOR LECTURES CHURCHIANITY. 



REMARKABLE as it may appear, the editors 
of the secular press seem to grasp the religious 
situation much better than do the average 
ministers of the gospel or editors of religious 
journals. Perhaps this is because they are in a 
better position to see truthfully and point out tersely 
what they do see; they are bound neither by creedal 
obligations nor by "bonds of bread and butter" to abstain 
from seeing and narrating honestly, truthfully. 

In evidence, note the following, clipped from the 
editorial columns of the Cleveland Press. 

"LOVE YE ONE ANOTHER." 



"That there is a great need of revival today is 
evident to all. The church has allowed politics, business 
and speculative thought to get beyond her influence 
as a spiritual impulse and ethical standard. 
Modern reforms which have as their end the betterment 
of men's lot have sprung very largely from a 
diffused Christianity, and too often the bearing of the 
church toward them is cold and unfeeling, if not actually 



antagonistic. 

"The churches are all blessed with a proportion of 
really Christian men and women, whose giving and 
prayers and unselfish service keep the world from falling 
into ruin. These are the church. But these are 
not satisfied. They feel a deep need of revival. It 
is only the dead and frivolous and indifferent that are 
satisfied. Modern scribes and pharisees, hypocrites, 
cleansing the outside of the platter, whited sepulchers, 
self-deceived, measuring themselves by themselves, 
in daily deadly danger of crucifying their Lord afresh 
and putting Him to an open shame— these are the 
satisfied ones. 

"We need a revival of religion because of our 
lack of love. This is the center and core of Christianity. 
You love them that love you, your families, 
your friends, but what thank have ye? Do not the 
heathen the same? When you make a feast you invite 
persons agreeable to yourself, for your enjoyment 
and theirs. This is not a sin, but it is no better than 
the heathen, for they do the same. The Christian 
feast is for the poor and the homeless and friendless. 
The Christian love is for one's enemies. The Christian 
service is for the disagreeable and weak and vicious 
and unclean. The Christian duty is to all the 
world. But Christian men live under rules and 
standards that are the incarnation of selfishness. 
There is no love in business, no love in war, no love 
in modern pleasure. 

"Frivolous and selfish wives, deadening the religious 
life of husbands; worldly and godless husbands, 
making it difficult for their wives to live as 
Christians; parents a stumbling block to growing 
children and a byword to them that are without; professing 
Christians mad with lust of gold and place 
and power, silent and unfeeling in the face of social 
wrong, without compassion for the multitude, ambitious 
for social preferment, given over to vanity, 
envious, skilled in the hypocrisies and expedients of 
selfishness, denying daily in word and deed the power 
of godliness. Surely these need revival. 

"How few Christians there are who can lead an 
inquiring soul to a knowledge of Jesus! They are 
without excuse. To say that they cannot do this is 
to hide behind a lie. There is not a housewife but 
can teach her maid to cook and clean and sew; not a 
mother but can teach her children the elements of 
etiquette; not an artisan but can talk intelligently 
about the trade he has mastered; not a scholar but can 
give some account of what he knows; not a political 
partisan who is not eager to explain his views; not a 
lawyer but stands ready to argue any case, pro or 
con; not a doctor who cannot give some reason for 
the cure he prescribes; not a business man but can 
train others for his business. But many of these say 
they cannot talk to another upon the subject of 



religion. 

"For many a Christian employer to speak to his 
workmen of the love of Jesus would be to cause bitter 
mirth and deepen the conviction among them that 
he is a hypocrite. Those who do not confess Jesus 
with their lips because they consider their example 
sufficient, too often furnish an example of everything 
but Christianity. But it is the insistent, searching 
word of Jesus that every man is responsible for his 
neighbor, no matter how he may feel about the responsibility 
or how cleverly he may shirk it. 

"The spiritual energies of the modern church 
are paralyzed and neutralized by a great and plain 
contradiction between what church members say and 
do. 

"Christian gentlemen organizing great financial 
undertakings and incidentally corrupting governments, 
bribing the public, overriding the laws of the 
land; such believers would find it hard indeed to lead 
another to the Savior. Their proper method is to 
hire an evangelist, for it is very evident in this case 
that religion is religion and business is business. 

"It would seem that the next great revival will 
be a revival within the church itself. It will consist in 
an improvement in quality, rather than increase in 
quantity of church members. It will turn away from 
machinery and artificiality and organization, and will 
depend upon personality and character. It will deal 
directly as between man and man. It will be a thing 
of life; of everyday life to be lived as the hours go, 
simply and honestly. 

"A witness is useful only in so far as he knows. 
He is not permitted to testify upon what he has heard, 
or upon what he imagines, or guesses, or hopes. 
What he has seen and knows, this is his only testimony 
of any power. To what great realities does the 
average modern Christian testify? A man eager, almost 
frantic, in his striving for wealth; the frivolous, 
shallow member of some Christian church, intriguing 
and degrading herself for the sake of social preferment 
among worldlings; to what do these testify? 
Church 'service,' misnamed, wherein indolent believers 
luxuriate in enjoyment of observing with critical 
eye the intellectual gymnastics of their minister; to 
what do these testify? Cold and formal prayer meetings, 
sepulchral and oppressive, to what do these 
testify? 

"THE CHURCH EXPECTANT." 



"The brightest glory of the new century's dawn 
springs from a hope, deep and widespread, of coming 
religious revival. In the last few years a great 
change in the matter of worldliness has swept over 



Christian people everywhere, chilling into deadly torpor 

R2913 : page 365 

their spiritual energies. Worldliness has come to 
characterize those who profess to be citizens of 
heaven. 

"Earnest Christian parents are everywhere perplexed 
and saddened because church membership is 
of little aid in keeping the children unspotted from the 
world. Cash, like charity, covers a multitude of sins, 
and failure to make money is about the only hell believed 
in and feared. 

"The great contradiction between what Christians 
say and do threatens to destroy the churches. 
It is now commonly, if not universally, held that financial 
success is proof positive that a church is 
prosperous. 

"It was inevitable that the masses should find in 
the Sermon on the Mount just that moral ideal and 
standard which best expressed their unspoken aspirations 
and desires. Turning to the church, they expected 
to meet a powerful and sympathetic ally, for 
the church professed to base its life upon these very 
teachings of Jesus. But alas! stupefied with worldliness 
and prostrate under the sturdy blows of an unspiritual 
rationalism, the church had no answer for 
the masses. Mutual antagonism, suspicion, misunderstanding 
and, on the part of the workingmen, very 
often hatred, was the result. The church preached 
and professed to believe the moral ideas which formed 
the only hope for the masses and did not practice 
what it preached. The church stood for religion, the 
masses for morals; and both were wrong inasmuch as 
a half truth is not the truth. Now, these alienated 
forces are coming together. Religion has got 
as far as it can without an adequate morality; and social 
ethics has got as far as it can without religion. 

"A first feature of the coming revival will be its 
emphasis upon the teachings of Jesus. In the transaction 
of business, in the giving and taking of the exchanges, 
in the close touch and stress of politics, in 
the lighter and happier amenities of social intercourse, 
Christian men and women will endeavor to set forth 
Jesus. The new revival will powerfully affect the 
daily lives of Christians. It will make a distinction 
in the way a Christian man works and enjoys himself 
and the way an unconverted man does these things. 
It will be marked by a return to the morality of the 
golden rule." 



We fear that in the above description of "The 
Church Expectant" the writer has described what he 
hopes for rather than what he sees evidences of as approaching 



There is already such a "Church of the 

living God, whose names are written in heaven" (and 

some of these are probably to be found in all the denominations 

of Christendom, and some of them outside 

of all); but they are, as a rule, poor in this world's 

goods and not very highly esteemed among men, and 

often are spoken evil of, falsely, for their fidelity's 

sake. 

Whoever expects nominal Churchianity to reform 
and become a household of saints will be 
grievously disappointed. On the contrary the Scriptures 
clearly show us that all denominations are, and 
will increasingly be, merely moral clubs "having a 
form of godliness, but denying the power thereof,"— 
"drawing nigh unto God with their lips while their 
hearts are far from him." 

But, let it come;— it is a part of the "harvest" 
work of separating the "wheat" from the "tares." As 
the worldly spirit of formalism more and more gains 
control of all sects, it will wean and separate more 
and more the Lord's true people, who alone have ever 
been the true Church in our Lord's estimation. These 
must realize their lean and starved condition, and that 
Babylon has no substantial food for their nourishment 
and upbuilding,— only the husks and chaff of 
formalistic piety. They must realize that the doctrinal 
tables spread by Babylon are unreasonable and 
nauseating— musty and putrid "traditions of men" 
(Isa. 28:8), before they will look beyond Babylon's 
bondage of sectarianism and creedal fences, and leap 
the barriers to freedom and the feast of fat things 
spread for them now by our present Shepherd. 



R2912: page 365 

THE WIDE-MARGIN LINEAR BIBLE. 



THE ARRANGEMENT of the Tower and Dawn 
references, for the margins of these Bibles, has 
proven to be much more of a task than was at first 
anticipated. The work is progressing, though slowly, 
and none must expect the Bibles before February, 
1902— though we will do our very best to have them 
a month earlier. 

In one way the delay has been to the advantage 
of some of our readers: had we met with no 
obstacles the edition would have been far too small. 
We first thought of 1,000 copies— then concluded to 
risk 2,000; but the orders have rolled in on us until 
now they exceed 3,000. We felt sure the Bible would 
be what every Watch Tower student would need; but 
were not sure to what extent all would appreciate 



our efforts and trust our judgment. The evidences 
are gratifying to us, as we are sure the books will 
be appreciated by you, and profitable to you in Bible 
study, when you have received them and learned to 
use them. 

We had fixed October 1, as the limit of the time 
during which we would receive advance orders at the 
prices already mentioned— $2.00 for "French Seal" 
(sheep) binding, and $3.00 for the "Persian Morocco" 
(tougher leather) binding; however, we have concluded 
to allow all who will to place their orders at 
the same prices up to November 15, next. We will, 
meantime, order some more than we expect orders 
for; but as there will be some financial risk in so doing, 
the tardy must pay for this, and the prices will 
then be $1.00 additional on each kind.— Still, however, 
they will be the cheapest Bibles in the worlds- 
worth double. On the other hand, the coming orders 
may again be more than we expect, and the 
tardy may get none,— for the orders must be filled 
in rotation as received. 

We regret that we cannot encourage our British 
readers to hope for these Bibles. The "Oxford Press 
Co.," of England, has notified us that they will not 
allow the book on British soil, as they hold exclusive 
copyright privileges for Great Britain and Ireland on 

R2912: page 366 

the "Revised Version," which constitutes a feature 

of the Linear edition. We have written them explaining 

this edition, and offering a royalty, and will 

get them to our British friends, if possible. They 

may send in their orders to our British Branch 

(prices, 9s. and 13s.); we will include these in our orders 

anyway. 

Money may be remitted later— anytime before 
January 1st, 1902. Books not paid for by then will 
be granted to others, if the supply be short. 



page 366 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FRIENDS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I am very glad to inform you that we, that is, those 
of us who attended the Richmond, Va., Convention, enjoyed 
the meetings very much. We reached the hall on 
Sunday morning, when you were about half through your 
discourse on Baptism, regret that we were not in time to 
hear it all. The afternoon Sermon on "Salvation" was 
grand, and gave us impressions which shall be as lasting 



as life. I thought of the large number of people in Richmond, 

and yet so few, comparatively, to listen to the 

discourse. 

I informed you some months ago that I had rented a 
space in the ferry house where I placed a box for the 
distribution of Tracts. We were arranging for continuing 
it for another month when the Agent informed me that 
he had taken tracts from the box, to his wife, who had 
become very much interested; and desired him to refund 
the money which I had paid as rent, and also to continue 
the box in the ferry house at her expense. This, you 
must see, was very encouraging. 

A brother at the Richmond meeting from this locality 
testified there that he had become interested through reading 
tracts taken from the boxes in the Ferry waiting 
rooms. We are quite sure that large numbers of people 
are reading the tracts, seldom do we find one cast aside 
or destroyed. 

Your Brother in the blessed truth, 

GEO. M. TURNER.-Virginia. 



R2913 : page 366 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

Maybe you will remember that, coming home on the 
train from the Richmond Convention, I mentioned to you 
my friend who lives in Vermont. I think I spoke of 
feeling somewhat anxious, because I had not heard from 
her for some little time. Two days after that I received 
a letter, a long one, from her, from which I wish to quote 
just a bit. She says: "For myself— I can truly say, Margaret, 
that I now see clearly what our high calling is. I 
realize that once having seen it, and made a full and complete 
consecration of ourselves, we have surrendered all 
hope of life on the human plane— that if we fail then to 
be "faithful unto the end," nothing is left for us but eternal 
death. I have "counted the cost"— I have laid my 
little all upon the altar. It is too late for me to draw back 
now. You will not think I have been hasty. It is seven 
months now since I began to study these things for myself. 
Slowly, but surely, I have come into the light. The 
Truth has held me and I could not escape. I know it is 
God's own truth. And oh, Margaret, how could I do anything 
else but yield to my King fullest allegiance!" 

You can understand what joy it gave me to hear this 
—in fact I cried for joy (and I am not easily moved to 
tears) to know that she has made the consecration, and 
has begun to realize joy and peace. She says further 
along in the letter: "With prayer and humility for weeks 
I have been counting the cost; and it has been a solemn 
and a glad surrender. I realize how utterly I am nothing; 
I know I am weak— but I know that I have His almighty 
strength to lean upon. It has brought such a blessed 
peace and rest and joy. I need not tell you, for you know 



it. And yet I must tell it— only I have not words to express 
it. I cannot see why He should have chosen me, 
and loved me, and taught me, but I know He has. I do 
not know where or when or how my trials will come. I 
dare not say I am ready for them, only as He gives me 
strength. I am not worrying about it. There is no room 
for worry in this strange, glad peace that fills me." She 
had read Vols. 1, 2, 3 and 5, and when she wrote had just 
finished chapter eleven of Vol. 4. I can see she is not 
clear on some points yet, she does not yet realize that all 
who are truly the Lord's are called to "come out"— but I 
believe it will not be long before she will see this. 

Pardon the length of this letter, but I wanted you to 
know this, because I am sure you will rejoice with us. 

We have just enjoyed our Pilgrim Draper's stay with 
us, and feel it has been a season of refreshing. 

With much Christian love, I am your sister in the 
Lord, 

MARGARET SMITH.-Washington, D.C. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

I do not often have opportunity to express to you my 
appreciation of your great benefits to me, for my time is 
taken up very much and I am studying the Bible with 
those wonderful helps, the Dawns. 

Since my coming into the truth, one year ago last 
month, my views, plans, ambitions, hopes, condition of 
heart, knowledge in serving Christ, attitude toward mankind, 
and attitude toward many other things, have changed. 
What blessed truths the Lord has provided for his 
humble servants at this time! 

I think one of the brethren wrote you that there were 
thirteen believers immersed here at Washington, Sunday, 
August 25th. There were three sisters and ten brothers, 
and I am happy to tell you that I was one of the ten that 
symbolized their consecration to the Lord. 

My dear brother, I know your time is taken up in 
something greater, grander than reading letters; but I 
wish to say a word in connection with the spreading of the 
truth. Since starting out in the one hope and faith, one 
year ago, I see what wonderful progress the truth is making 
in separating the wheat and tares, the Lord's true 
people from the world. Truly the way is narrow and few 
will find it, but that few are in such an attitude of heart 
that they look for a "thus saith the Lord," for every step, 
so that they can follow the leading of the truth which we 
find in the Scriptures. I can see and testify that this 
light is doing the work it was sent to accomplish; and as 
the great time-lock that holds the time prophecies is now 
open it enables the true virgin class to obtain a much 
better understanding of God's word. 

Trusting that you may continue to be "the steward 
of Christ," upholding all truth, I am your brother in 
Christ, 



MARSHALL G. ELLIS,-Heights, D.C. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

To let the brethren know what may be accomplished 
by a little with the Lord's blessing, and to encourage the 
brethren who read the Tower to send out to their friends 
and relatives "Dawns," "Towers" and tracts, I send you 
the following short sketch of how the Lord gave us the 
light and gospel of peace, and how it has grown in so 
short a time. 

Three years ago this winter a brother in Wisconsin 
sent a "Dawn Vol. I." to a brother in Spokane, Wash. At 
that time, so far as I have been able to find out there 
were but two "Dawn" and "Tower" readers in the city, 
and they were not acquainted. That one "Dawn" was the 
means of starting the work which has brought together a 
class of eighteen brothers and sisters, all of whom have 
been engaged in the "Volunteer" work, so far as circumstances 
would permit. All are now firm believers in the 
Gospel of Peace (Eph. 6:15); and together they have distributed 
about eight thousand sample tracts, booklets and 
"Watch Towers," and there are many others who are 
brothers who do not take part in the "Volunteer" work. 
So my dear brethren, be not discouraged if you see no results 
from your efforts (1 Sam. 18:7). Continue in the 
good work for it is indeed handing forth "meat in due 
season" to the household of faith. 
Your brother in the Lord, 

CHAS. E. BELL, -Washington. 



R2914: page 367 

A USURPATION OF AUTHORITY. 



CONGRESS is the law-making branch of the 
United States Government: the President and 
his Secretaries are the executive branch— whose 
duty it is to enforce the laws as Congress makes them. 
Congress passed the present postal laws nearly thirty 
years ago, and all Postmasters General since, until 
now, have enforced them faithfully, even though 
several of them have appealed to Congress to change 
the laws, so as to prevent so general a circulation of 
cheap periodicals. Congress in every case has refused 
to change the laws which have done so much to make 
the American public "wide awake." 

Now, however, we have a Postmaster General 
who attempts to usurp the law-making functions 
of Congress and to ride rough-shod over the will of 
the people as repeatedly expressed through their representatives 



in Congress. The duty of the people is to 
resent such unlawful disregard of their rights; and 
the protests should properly go to the President of 
these United States, who undoubtedly is quite unaware 
of this piece of injustice and lawlessness being 
practiced under his administration. 

Postmaster General C. E. Smith, and his third Assistant, 
E. C. Madden, who have engineered this nefarious 
violation of the law, and who are glorying in 
their shame, show clearly that they are not men to 
be trusted, when they plan for ruling the people and 
decide what liberties the people ought to be allowed 
and what disallowed. 

What is the remedy? It is to make such conduct 
odious to all lovers of liberty— to all who love justice. 
And the best way to do this is to promptly inform 
President Roosevelt (addressing him at Washington, 
D.C.), telling him that the credit of his administration 
is involved by the conduct of these his representatives, 
and calling for their dismissal and for the appointment 
of men who are not of their lawless (anarchous) 
cast of mind. Send postal cards or letters, 
or if convenient get up general petitions and obtain 
as many signatures (of old and young) as you can. 
All are interested, and all have a right to protest 
against the infraction of the laws favorable to "the 
poor of this world," who are the chief users of the 
paper-bound pamphlets whose circulation is being 
interfered with. The rich buy cloth-bound books, 
which are not affected by these acts of these 
pseudo-law-makers. 

We do not claim that the Postmaster General is destitute 
of good impulses in this matter: his claim is that 
he wishes to save the people's money. But our reply is 
that the people do not wish him to economise at the expense 
of violation of the people's laws. They do not need 
a paternal government. They are able to change the 
laws, through their representatives when and how they 
please. 

If the laws of the land were being enforced we 
should not have one word of remonstrance to make, 
however much their enforcement might injure us. 
But when, under divine providence, the laws are on 
our side it would be wrong for us to submit without 
protest and thus to encourage still further violations 
of law in disregard of the rights and wishes of the law-makers 
—the people. Office holders should be held to 
account as the public's servants;— otherwise they will 
be justified in concluding that the people are serfs and 
desire to be ruled by Czars. 

SOME SUGGESTIONS. 



Many need no suggestions from us, but are quite 



competent to express themselves forcefully and cogently. 
Others, however, may be helped by the following 
general suggestions as to brief forms, which 
each may change and modify to suit his own tastes. 

Hon. Theo. Roosevelt, Washington, D.C.: 
Respected Sir:— 

Doubtless you are unaware of the gross injustice 
being done the poor by your subordinates— the 
Postmaster General and his Third Assistant. They 
have undertaken to make "rulings" respecting pamphlets 
(2nd class mail), which are gross violations of 
the laws of Congress of nearly 30 years standing. We 
call upon you to cleanse your Cabinet of such law-breakers. 
Give us examples of obeyers of the laws 
in their stead, and we will esteem you, for your justice, 
accordingly. 

(Signature.) 

To the President of the United States, 
Washington, D.C. 

Your Excellency is respectfully petitioned to 
overrule recent Postoffice legislation against second-class 
mail matter. 

(Signature.) 

To the President of the United States: 
Washington, D.C. 
Your Excellency: 

We call upon you to redress the grievance of the 
poor, and at the same time uphold the Postal Laws 
of Congress, by causing the unlawful act of the Third 
Assistant Postmaster General to be set aside and its 
perpetrators ousted. We refer to the recent illegal 
"rulings" respecting pamphlets, refusing them second 
class mail privileges such as Congress designed and 
expressed; and such as they have enjoyed for the past 
30 years. The acts of your subordinates must be regarded 
as the acts of your administration. We hope 
to have this wrong speedily righted. 
(Signed.) 

To the President of the United States. 
Washington, D.C. 
Hon. Sir:~ 

We, the common people, hold you responsible 
for the violation of our Postal Laws at the hands of 
your Postmaster General and his Third Assistant. 
Congress enacted the law for second class mail in the 
interest of education and intelligence amongst the 
poor and the middle classes. It is robbery and fraud 
for these men now to frustrate that law which the people, 
by their representatives in Congress, have now 
three times refused to alter. We urge you to dismiss 
these law-breakers and to put in their stead men who 
will obey the laws as the people, through their representatives, 



enact them. Thus you will win the esteem 
of lovers of law and equity. 

(Signature.) 



page 369 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. DECEMBER 1, 1901. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 

The Czar of Russia and the 
World's Peace 371 

The Troubles of the Scientists 373 

The Universal Meridian 373 

Beloved Son Timothy's Return 374 

The Justice of Our Contention 374 

The Voices of the Three Signs 375 

Christ Our Passover Was 

Sacrificed for Us 380 

Crossing the Red Sea 382 

page 370 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



PILGRIM VISITS ARE FREE OF ALL CHARGES. 

We find that some of the friends have refrained from requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits because they supposed they would 
be expected to contribute for his railway fare and also for his 
support. This is a mistake: the services of the preaching 
"Pilgrims" laboring under the auspices of the WATCH TOWER 
BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY are absolutely without charge;-nor do 
they take up any collections. The Society pays their railway 



and all other expenses out of its funds, which are all voluntary 
donations, from such as are able and anxious to serve thus. 

All we ask of the friends visited is that they provide a 
parlor, hall, school-house or church building for the meetings 
and that they board and lodge the "Pilgrim" during the two 
or three days of his visit. We attend to all else. 

RENEW REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM-SERVICE, 1902. 

The Pilgrim routes are made out months ahead; so it is too 
late to write us, as some do, when they learn from last page 
that a Pilgrim is coming to their vicinity. If you desire visits 
write us a Postal Card (or on a card of that size) answering the 
following questions: (a) Have you regular meetings now? 
(b) How many usually attend? (c) Who are the chosen leaders 
of the class? (d) Did the class vote its desire for Pilgrim 
visits? (e) Are you able and willing to secure a suitable room 
for private meetings? (f) Could you arrange also for one public 
meeting? and what number could probably be gathered? 

You can answer briefly, thus: (a) Yes. (b) 14. (c) John 
Smith and Amos Brown, (d) Yes. (e) Yes. (f) Yes: 100 to 300. 

When you see a notice of a "Pilgrim Visit" near you and 
do not know the meeting address, enquire of us by Postal card 
immediately. Those arranging for "Pilgrim meetings" will 
please notify us early respecting their arrangements. If off the 
railroad, name nearest station and further conveyance. 



R2914: page 371 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



THE CZAR OF RUSSIA AND THE WORLD'S PEACE. 



THE FRANKFURTER ZEITUNG, one of 
the most reliable newspapers of Europe, is the 
authority for the following report of an interview 
between the Czar and a German Admiral, while 
the Czar as the guest of Emperor William witnessed 
the maneuvers of the German fleet in the Baltic Sea, 
—the Admiral being in command of the fleet. It is 
important as showing the opposing arguments on the 
preservation of the world's peace, which all men 
agree is desirable— essential. 

We agree with the Czar's line of argument, but 
hold that in the nature of things it is impossible of 
realization. The arming and drilling and building 
of ships will continue until the people of Europe are 
thoroughly awakened, when they will refuse to be 
fought and taxed, and a revolution in favor of Socialism 
will ensue— resulting, however, in Anarchy, as 



the Scriptures indicate, preparing the way for Christ's 
Millennial Kingdom. 

The conversation, as reported by the Zeitung 
follows: 

Admiral— Your Majesty is pleased to confer 
too great an honor upon an old sea dog like me. I am 
delighted to think that your Majesty received a favorable 
impression of our army and navy, for, your Majesty 
may rest assured, we strain every nerve to keep 
the army and navy abreast of the times, which is the 
ideal thing for every good government to do. 

The Czar— There I differ with you, Admiral. 
According to my own views the ideal thing to do 
would be to reduce standing armies and navies instead 
of keeping on increasing their strength. This 
so-called preparedness for war— arming on a great, 
and ever greater, scale is overburdening the peoples 
of Europe. All governments should strive to lessen 
their expenses for the army and navy. As long as 
they do the opposite, they are simply upholding and 
perpetuating an intolerable situation. 

The Admiral— A humane and extremely generous 
thought, your Majesty, but— 

The Czar— (interrupting)— not a thought only, 
Admiral. I am devoting my life to the realization of 
the peace idea. 

The Admiral— Indeed, your Majesty's big-hearted 
endeavors permit of no misinterpretation, but the 
other powers, your Majesty, the other powers. Your 
Majesty won't believe for a moment that the other 
powers will find it to their interest to reduce their armies 
and navies! 

The Czar— I am convinced that a condition such 
as I have outlined will serve the true interest and conform 
to the just aspirations of all the powers. 

The Admiral— May it please your Majesty, don't 
you think that a perfect army and navy, an army and 
navy ready to move against the enemy at a moment's 
notice, so to speak— doesn't your Majesty think that 
such weapons as those constitute the best guarantee 
of peace? 

WAR PREPAREDNESS MUST STOP. 

The Czar— In order to establish true and permanent 
peace it is absolutely necessary that the nations' 

R2915 : page 371 

war-preparedness, as constituted by their armies and 

navies, be limited. The nations durst not go on forever 

increasing their war strength and heaping up 

war material. There should be no further progress, 

so-called, in the art of killing men and animals, destroying 

ships, interfering with commerce, and laying 

waste provinces. All that has to stop. The nations 



want a rest; they have been clamoring for the 

cessation of war scares, produced by the announcement 

that A has better guns than B, or that X is 

building more and better ships than Y can afford to 

do— they have demanded a letup in war preparedness 

for twenty years! On that point the civilized nations 

are fully agreed, and international policy, my dear Admiral, 

will eventually compel the permanent peace. 

Policy, I say, and not armies and navies. 

Admiral— I beg to assure your Majesty that my 
government, like that of St. Petersburg, strives for 
peace most earnestly. To preserve peace is its sincerest 
wish, believe me, your Majesty. But to preserve 
peace our army and navy must be in the best 

R2915 : page 372 

possible shape; we must increase and augment them 
steadily to keep pace with the growth of population 
and the armament of other peoples. Your Majesty 
knows the old saying: Si vis pacem para bellum. God 
forbid that we increase the army and navy with the 
idea of carrying war into our neighbors' land. It's 
all done in the interest of peace. For peace's sake 
we are willing to make any sacrifice. 

PEACE NOT WITHIN REACH. 

The Czar— Yes, I heard this story before. You 
compel your people to bleed itself to death to furnish 
ways and means for keeping up a tremendous force 
on land and sea, and for adding to it constantly in a 
manner heretofore, happily, unknown. Neither Napoleon 
I. nor Frederick the Great, neither Alexander 
nor Peter, neither Louis XIV., nor our own Catherine 
ever dreamt of such armies and navies in war time 
as are now established while Europe enjoys the blessings 
of peace. But all your arming and the whole immense 
apparatus afoot and afloat, eating millions day 
by day, don't amount to a row of pins as an actual 
guarantee of peace. The nations of Europe are today 
as far as ever from declaring the permanency of peace. 
Despite your armies and navies, the blessings of a 
world's peace are not yet within reach. 

Admiral— True enough, your Majesty, armed 
peace demands great sacrifice; we have to pay heavily 
for the maintenance of peace by a grand army and 
navy, but your Majesty, the people are glad to contribute 
to the welfare of Europe even at considerable 
expense. 

PUBLIC WELFARE THREATENED. 

The Czar— Maybe, Admiral, but the thing can't 
go on! The sacrifices demanded of the taxpayer are 
constantly growing, financial troubles, owing to the 



expense of the army and navy, are increasing day by 
day. I tell you, this thing spells disaster. The public 
welfare is threatened at its roots. 

The Admiral— Your Majesty is pleased to leave 
many things, stamping armed preparedness as a 
blessing to the people, out of your calculations. Big 
armies and grand navies compel the nations to work 
and strive; they banish idleness and call for honest 
competition. Nowadays every people in Europe is 
trying to produce the best weapon, the finest ships. 

The Czar— But it's not humanity's business to 
produce means of destruction. We were put upon this 
earth to build up, not to do the other thing. All the 
money spent for the army and navy above a certain 
necessary amount is money diverted from its real 
purpose, money invested in unproductive labor. 

Admiral— Your Majesty was pleased to admire 
our fine quick-firing guns; you have seen those mysteries 
of the sea, boats that travel under water, the 
iron-clads yonder, our incomparable flotilla of torpedo-boats 
—all these wonders of twentieth century 
technique, are they not evidence of marvelous progress? 
Doesn't your Majesty recognize that our people 
give their best thought, their brightest endeavors 
to the fatherland? I repeat it, in my humble opinion 
our army and navy is the best guarantee of peace, 
while the money invested therein pays abundant interest 
by the maintenance of peace. The people's 
money could not be more profitably invested than in 
securing peace as we do. 

BEST TO-DAY, USELESS TO-MORROW. 

The Czar (shaking his head)— Indeed, and what 
about those hundreds of millions you are spending 
for means of destruction, to-day labeled the "best and 
latest," while to-morrow you must admit that they 
are valueless because something new, something to 
offset them, was invented? A fine investment, 
Admiral. 

Admiral— I will not deny that we are frequently 
doomed to disappointment of the sort your Majesty 
referred to. But if your Majesty will permit me, I 
dare say the competitions of inventors benefits our 
home industry and consequently the people that live 
by industry and commerce. 

The Czar— Your argument is illogical, Admiral. 
Powder and guns, torpedoes and sub-marine vessels, 
ships, not destined for commerce— all such things are 
false values; the persons engaged in their manufacture 
contribute neither to the world's betterment nor 
to their own happiness. Ironclads, grapeshot, swords, 
and lances are not agents of progress by any means; 
their wholesale manufacture presupposes a deficit in 
the making of articles that stand for culture and economical 
advancement. Besides, it is easy to prove 



that the system of armed preparedness is largely responsible 

for the financial depressions that crop up 

from time to time in all countries turned into camps. 

The Admiral— But, your Majesty, what has preserved 
peace during the last twenty and more years, 
if it was not our grand army? If we hadn't been so 
well prepared as to number of soldiers and ships, as 
to the latest pattern of guns and other war material, 
hostilities might have broken out on several 
occasions. 

The Czar— Hypothesis, my dear Admiral! There 
isn't an atom of proof for what you say. I am convinced, 
on the other hand, that your grand collection 
of war material is a permanent menace to peace. 

The Admiral— On that point I beg to differ with 
your Majesty, and the people, I am sure, think as I 
do. They love the army and value it for the protection 
it renders the nation. And for these services 
they are willing to pay. 

The Czar— It is unfortunate that you and armed 
war preparedness enthusiasts generally will not see 
things in their proper light. As a matter of fact, 
standing armies and big navies are obstructing national 
development everywhere, and the people, staggering 
under the weight of overtaxation for army purposes, 
hate and loathe the institution, while fearing it 
at the same time. I tell you, Admiral, if things go on 
as they have been going, the catastrophe which you 
hope to avert will occur sooner than you think. The 
disaster will be awful— the thought of it might make 
an honest man shudder. 

The Admiral— I beg your Majesty's pardon. I 
am only an old sea dog trying to do my duty. Now 
duty, as I take it, compels the state to do everything 
in its power to keep the army abreast of the times, 
increasing and equipping it in the best manner possible, 
so that, in the hour of danger— 

MAY INVOLVE THE WORLD. 

The Czar— No, no, no. It's the state's duty to 
avert war by other means than by laying up war material, 
that must necessarily lead to war. Don't you 

R2915 : page 373 

know that the war of the future, of which we stand 
in such dread, may involve the whole world? 

The Admiral— Is your Majesty thoroughly in 
earnest? 

The Czar— Most thoroughly. I regard it as my 
sacred duty to secure permanent peace for the world 
by persuading the nations to disarm. At the same 
time I am not blind to the fact that this grand purpose 
can only be achieved by the co-operation of all 
civilized peoples. 



This ended the conversation, the Czar rising and 
giving the signal for the dismissal of the fleet. 

THE TROUBLES OF THE SCIENTISTS. 



Those who reject the divine revelation, the Bible, 
are continually in trouble— contradicting themselves 
and each other. The following from the Chicago Inter-Ocean 
will trouble evolutionists. Yet the learned 
Professor by the change noted is, however, probably 
no nearer the truth than before. He confuses his 
reason and handicaps it by assuming a false premise, 
rejecting the inspired one. 

The article mentioned follows:— 

MONKEYS WERE MEN, NOT MEN MONKEYS. 

That Professor Ernst Haeckel, the distinguished 
German naturalist, and the world's greatest living 
advocate of the biological theory of evolution, has reversed 
his views of half a century and taken a stand 
with Professor Rudolf Virchow in opposition to Darwinism 
is the startling announcement made in Paris. 

It is stated that during his expedition to Java, 
begun last year, Professor Haeckel has found striking 
evidence in support of the theory, advanced for 
the first time only a few months ago by Virchow, that 
monkeys are descended from man, and not man from 
monkeys. That, in fact, monkeys are nothing less 
than degenerate humans. 

"If Professor Haeckel has made any such discovery," 
said Dr. Edward Grant Conklin, professor 

R2916 : page 373 

of zoology at the University of Pennsylvania, "or if 
he has recanted his former multitudinous writings 
and lecturings sufficiently to make any such statement 
it means that one of the most remarkable revolutions 
in biological science has taken place. 

"I can not credit the announcement. It seems too 
extraordinary to believe that Haeckel, of all men, 
should take this stand. I do not know if he has returned 
from Java, but he went there to study and 
make further researches into the pithecanthropus 
erectus, discovered by Dr. Dubois, with a view to 
further substantiate the theories he laid down in his 
'Phylogeny,' tracing the descent of man. 

"Haeckel may have discovered fresh remains of 
the pithecanthropus; if so, their nature has not been 
announced, and I can not speculate upon them, but 
any fresh finds along that line can not fail to be of the 
utmost interest to scientists." 

To understand thoroughly the revolutionary 



change accredited to Professor Haeckel, it is only necessary 

to review briefly the history of his part in 

the exploitation of Darwin's theory and the causes 

that led to his recent exploring visit to Java. 

Ernst Haeckel, now professor of zoology at Jena 
University, was the first distinguished scientist to fully 
accept Darwin's theory when the "Origin of Species" 
was published. The scientific world was trembling 
on the brink of the revolution he caused later 
by the publication of "The Descent of Man," when 
Haeckel anticipated Darwin in his most far-reaching 
conclusions, and in a measure prepared the world for 
the startling doctrines hinted at in the "Origin of 
Species" and fully promulgated in "The Descent of 
Man." 

Since then Haeckel has been the most advanced 
among the evolutionists. He has long asserted that 
the history of man is complete in all its essential details, 
and that all that now remains to be done is to 
fill in here and there such concrete evidence as zoological 
and paleontological research shall reveal. 

In his "Systematic Phylogeny," a monumental 
work in three volumes, he made a theoretic systematic 
arrangement of the vegetable and animal worlds 
living and extinct on the basis of the law of evolution. 
The work has been called a vast pedigree tree, 
with man at the top and the lowest non-nucleated cell 
at the bottom. In this pedigree there were no empty 
or unaccounted spaces. Haeckel constructed hypothetical 
animals or organisms, and to him, in theory, 
there were no missing links. 

Twenty-five years before the discovery of Dubois' 
pithecanthropus Haeckel had forseen in his 
phylogeny such a creature, and he had christened it 
"pithecanthropus alius," or the apelike man before 
language. He gave to it a place midway in the order 
of life between the highest ape and the lowest human. 

In every library, in every language devoted to 
zoological works, there are books by the shelf-full 
bearing the name of Haeckel. They stand beside and 
support the "Origin of the Species" and "Descent of 
Man" and "Man's Place in Nature" (Huxley). 
Haeckel has been the apostle of Darwinism, the most 
trenchant fighter in the years when the theory was 
battling for a right to existence in the scientific world. 
Virchow, the world-famous pathologist, found 
Haeckel in his fight against Darwinism, and now that 
the champion should go to the other extreme is incomprehensible 
to those who have followed his 
career. 

Professor Ernst Haeckel is now sixty-seven 
years old, and is a native of Potsdam. For thirty-five 
years he made his home in the quiet, sleepy little 
town at Jena, except for occasional expeditions and 
trips to scientific congresses. He has been a prolific 
writer, and is a most accomplished artist. All the 



drawings and illustrations for his works have been 
made by himself, and their marvelous accuracy has 
made his books of two-fold value. The extravagance 
to which he has carried some of his theories and the 
imagination he has infused into his driest and most 
scientific dissertations have in a measure cut him off 
from absolute confidence on the part of his followers, 
but no naturalist has earned fame by harder work or 
deeper study.— Chicago Inter-Ocean. 

THE UNIVERSAL MERIDIAN. 



The meridian of Greenwich, England, is everywhere 
accepted as the starting line from which to 
reckon longitude and time all over the earth, and all 
our maps and astronomical calculations are made accordingly. 
Suggestions have been made from time 
to time, however, that a better starting-line might be 

R2916 : page 374 

found. Some of the Italian scientists, for example, 
have seriously objected to Greenwich, on account of 
the clouds and bad weather that frequently interfere 
with astronomical observations there. They recommend 
that the civilized world adopt Jerusalem as the 
standard meridian, because the skies are clearer there, 
and the possibility of making Palestine neutral territory 
would eliminate political objections. 



R2916 : page 374 

"BELOVED SON TIMOTHY'S RETURN; 



WE HAVE PLEASURE in announcing the 
safe return of dear Brother E. C. Henninges 
(and his faithful helpmate) via the steamer 
"Etruria," on November 16. During his absence, of 
nearly two years, his energy on behalf of the harvest 
work in Great Britain has been greatly blessed by the 
Master, as reports from the British Branch from time 
to time have abundantly demonstrated. The work 
there is on a far better footing than it has ever been in 
the past; and under the care of our new representative 
there, Brother Jesse Hemmery, it will, we doubt 
not, continue to prosper and gather much ripe 
"wheat" into the Lord's "garner." 

As for Brother and Sister Henninges, we can 
readily find room for them in the Allegheny office. 
Indeed the general work is spreading grandly (and 



we expect it to expand much more during the next six 
years) and the addition of these efficient helpers to 
our present force is quite opportune. We trust it will 
give the editor an opportunity to proceed with the 
preparation of the VI and VII Volumes of Millennial 
Dawn, from which he has been greatly hindered 
by the expansion of the various departments of the 
work during the past two years. 

The dear friends in Great Britain will miss our 
dear Brother and his untiring energy on their behalf; 
but we trust they will find in dear Brother Hemmery 
a faithful and good substitute. We commend him 
to them all. We have every confidence in respect to 
his character and ability— else we would not have esteemed 
him the Lord's choice for the position he now 
occupies. We urge that the British friends support 
him by their prayers and co-operation accordingly. 



R2916 : page 374 

THE JUSTICE OF OUR CONTENTION. 



WE TRUST that hundreds of our subscribers 
in all parts of these United States have 
written letters or postal cards (or gotten up petitions) 
for the protection of the public's rights under the laws 
as they are, and as they have existed for thirty years. 
Each one is responsible in this matter. Let each do 
his duty, and then be content with the results whatever 
they may be. We urge all who appreciate the 
present law, and who have not already done so, to 
send a letter or card at once. See page 367 of last 
issue. We give below our Appeal, which has been 
unjustly refused. 

Allegheny, Pa., U.S.A., October 11, 1901. 
James A. Grier, Esq., Postmaster, Allegheny, Pa. 
Dear Sir:— 

Your favor of the 4th is at hand, enclosing a 
copy of the Hon. E. C. Madden's instructions to your 
office, citing us to show cause, as the publishers "why 
the Millennial Dawn series should not be excluded 
from second-class rates of postage, on the 
ground that it has the characteristics of a book." 

To this we reply: That the term "book" is a very 
broad one. In legal usage a "paper book" is a pamphlet 
which may vary in size from five to five hundred 
pages. In the usage of the United States Patent 
Office the term "book" is applied to any pamphlet 
or printed matter of one page or upwards. In 
the usage of the United States Post Office, ever since 
the establishment of the second-class, the term 
"book" has been applied only to printed matter substantially 



bound— in cloth or leather. 

A reference to Webster's Unabridged Dictionary 
and the Standard Dictionary shows the original distinction 
between the terms "pamphlet" and "book" 
to have been that a pamphlet consisted of a number 
of sheets of paper stitched together, not substantially 
bound, nor too cumbersome to be held in the 
hand; while the term "book" applied to literature in 
substantial binding, and particularly to such as was 
too heavy for use in the hand. 

In modern usage the rulings of the United States 
Post Office during the past thirty years, that any 

R2917 : page 374 

printed document in substantial binding, whether of 
few or of many pages, constitutes a book, while the 
same pages unbound constitute a pamphlet, have become 
practically a law. Nor can we conceive of a 
better method of distinction between books and pamphlets 
than this. Under this law, as it has been interpreted, 
we think wisely, justly, the binding, and 
not the number of pages, decided the matter. To 
change this arrangement, and to deny that the binding 
distinguishes what is a book from what is a pamphlet, 
and to arbitrarily decree that a certain number 
of pages should constitute a book, while a less number 
would constitute a pamphlet, would involve the 
Department in an inconsistency, should it attempt to 
decide as heretofore that pamphlets could not be such 
if put up in substantial binding, though acceptable as 
to number of pages. 

Respecting the issues of our journal, known as 
the "Millennial Dawn" series of special issues. 
These have been issued under the present laws 
of the United States since 1886. They are of different-sized 
pages from our regular issues, and were put 
into this form for the greater convenience of our readers. 
They each represented several issues of our semi-monthly, 
Post Office rulings to the effect that one 
issue could not bear date as representing several having 
been promulgated since any of these pamphlets 
issued. 

We hold that these pamphlets are entirely within 
our rights under the law; that nothing in the law in 
any sense of the word restricts us, either as respects 
the number of pages or the size of the page. These 
back numbers of our journal are constantly in demand 
amongst our subscribers and their friends, and 

R2917 : page 375 

any restriction of our rights and privileges as heretofore 
construed and as defined under the law will 
make serious hardship and righteous indignation 
amongst these over twenty-five thousand intelligent 



adults whose case we represent in this paper. 

The fact that these special issues of our journal 
have a colored cover, while our regular issues have 
not, should not be construed as a violation of the 
law, because there is no law governing the subject, 
except the restriction that the cover should not be 
a substantial one. As a matter of fact, the leading 
journals of this and every land are in the habit of issuing, 
especially in the holiday season, special numbers, 
which usually have colored covers, as well as 
other features distinguishing them from the regular 
issues. 

Moreover, the Post Office Department has for 
years recognized as second-class matter what is known 
as the "Official Postal Guide," issued monthly under 
various colored covers, and ranging in pages from 
32 to 1 132. It will not do to say that this is a Government 
publication, for that would not be true; the 
most that can be said for it is that it is a publication 
very convenient to the Post Office Department, one 
which saves the Government from getting out a publication 
of its own. But even if it were a Government 
publication, what jurist would undertake to say 
that the Government is superior to its own laws, and 
that the law governing the meanest citizen does not 
govern also the highest one, and every official and 
every act of the Government? If the annual issues 
of the "Postal Guide" are not books, but pamphlets, 
then surely the Millennial Dawn series of special 
issues of our journal, less than half the size of 
the annual "Postal Guide," are also pamphlets and 
not books. 

Are we told that the Post Office Department 
could frank the "Postal Guide," and thus send it 
through the mails free? We reply that it can not; 
because there is no law of the United States permitting 
them so to do. Before this could be done it 
would be necessary that Congress should pass a law 
to that effect. Likewise, of course, Congress could 
pass a law permitting all religious matter to go 
through the mails free, but we do not anticipate that 
Congress will ever pass either of these laws. The publishers 
of the "Postal Guide" can as well afford to pay 
postage as can other publishers throughout the 
United States. 

Further, we submit that no law-making power 
claims to enact retroactive laws, that will go back 
of the time of their making, and take hold upon legal 
transactions of the past. If, therefore, the United 
States Post Office Department should now or at any 
time conclude that it has the right and the power to 
make new laws and regulations these, in all justice, 
must take hold as for the future, and can not in any 
sense of the word affect our vested rights as represented 
in electroplates and large editions of our special 
issues published under the full sanction of the 



law and of the Post Office Department. At very 
most, the new law or regulation could forbid us from 
henceforth publishing such special editions of our 
journal, or otherwise regulating as respects the number 
of pages, whether they shall be cut or uncut, and 
whether they must be of uniform color as to cover. 

In the above plea we have made no claim for 
preference of consideration on the ground of our publications 
being strictly religious, because, although we 
believe that this plea would have weight in the minds 
of all moral and well-intentioned people, we prefer to 
stand strictly upon the basis of our rights under the 
law. 

We understand that under the new law the Post 
Office Department intends henceforth to restrict 
lodge and society publications to literature or news, 
prohibiting the publication of advertisements. We 
wish to call the attention of the Department to the 
fact that our journal and its special issues would all 
come under this head also. Our subscribers are recognized 
as members of our Society— the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society, chartered by State 
of Pennsylvania, and our publications contain no advertisements 
whatever, but are strictly confined to 
Biblical exegesis, cultivation of good morals, and in 
general the publication of the Gospel— "good news," 
"good tidings"— the message which is new every 
morning and fresh every evening, and which more 
than any other news in the world is helpful to, not 
only the Lord's people, but in general to civilization— 
"Good tidings [news] of great joy, which shall be 
unto all people." 

Trusting for a just and generous consideration of 
our plea foregoing, we remain, Respectfully yours, 
Watch Tower Bible & Tract Society. 



R2917 : page 375 

THE VOICES OF THE THREE SIGNS. 



WHEN PREPARING the Sunday School lessons 

relating to Moses and his two presentations 

of himself to the Israelites, as their deliverer 

from Egyptian bondage, we noted the fact 

that "these things were written aforetime for our admonition 

upon whom the ends of the ages are come." 

(1 Cor. 10:11.) And, considering the matter from this 

standpoint, we perceived, as we had never done before, 

that the three signs by which the Israelites were 

convinced that God's deliverance of them was at hand, 

at Moses' second presentation, must have been intended 

to typify some corresponding three signs or 



testimonies at the second advent of Christ; testimonies 
which will be convincing to the true spiritual Israelites. 
In the type these three signs or testimonies 
preceded the plagues upon the Egyptians; and this 
in the anti-type, must mean that the three signs or 
testimonies to spiritual Israel respecting the second 
advent of our Lord, and respecting the great deliverance 
which he is to accomplish, must precede the 
plagues, the great time of trouble, coming upon the 
world in general shortly. 

At first we were perplexed, and said to ourself: 
"The Scriptures clearly show us that we are now 'in 
the days of the Son of Man;' our journal has borne 
as its sub-title, Herald of Christ's Presence, since its 
institution, 1879; yet where are these three signs? 
Already twenty-seven years of the forty-year harvest 

R2917 : page 376 

have passed, and but thirteen remain, in the last four 
of which we confidently expect the plagues upon the 
world— anti-typical Egypt. Where are these signs 
or testimonies, which the type teaches us we should 
expect at this time, to convince all the true 
Israelites?" 

For a time we were inclined to look for miraculous 
tokens, but subsequently realized that this would be 
out of the Lord's order, as the anti-type is always on 
a higher and grander scale than the type: as for instance 
the typical Passover lamb but feebly foreshadowed 
the Lamb of God, and the great things accomplished 
through his sacrifice. Feeling confident of 
the times in which we are living, "in the parousia of the 
Son of Man," we concluded that in all probability 
these signs had already been given, or were in process 
of giving at the present time. Still we could not recognize 
them, and feeling that the matter must now be to 
the Lord's household "meat in due season," we besought 
the Lord earnestly and repeatedly for light 
upon the subject, while continuing our studies. No 
light coming, we mentioned the matter to the Bible 
House family at the dinner table, requesting the prayers 
of all upon the subject, and that if any had 
suggestions to offer they would feel free to present 
them. Seemingly it was in line with the divine 
purpose that we should thus come to the point of 
making confession of inability to solve the riddle, 
and that our reliance for wisdom was wholly upon 
the Lord: for within two hours after this acknowledgment 
the entire matter became clear and lucid to our 
mind, as we shall endeavor now to lay it before you 
all. 

(1) Our Lord declares Moses to have been, in 
some particulars, in some of his transactions, a type 
of himself, saying, "Moses wrote of me." Moses 
himself declared, "A prophet [teacher] shall the Lord 



your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like 
unto me." Peter quotes this last expression in his 
sermon, and emphasizes it. (John 5:46; Deut. 18:15; 
Acts 3:22.) Moses did not typify Christ in all of his 
doings, however, nor was his life as a whole a type 
of the life of Christ. For instance, in his smiting of 
the rock, contrary to the divine command, he became 
a type of those of Christ's followers who put him to an 
open shame, and who, in consequence, will die the 
Second Death; and as a type of these Moses was not 
permitted to enter into the land of promise. (Num. 20:11; 
Deut. 32:5 1,52; Heb. 10:29.) He typified Jehovah 
at times also; but in the present instance we 
are specially interested in considering his conduct 
with the Israelites in connection with their deliverance 
from the bondage of Egypt. In this type we 
see him distinctly as a representative of Christ Jesus. 
Moses was rich, a prince in high honor, learned in 
all the learning of his times, but for Israel's sake he 
renounced these, left them all, and they being bondmen, 
he took his place amongst them, to be their leader 
and deliverer. How like this is to the description 
given us in the Scriptures of our Lord's course! He 
left the glory of the heavenly condition and spiritual 
plane of being; he took a bondman's form and was 
found in fashion as a man. He came to deliver his 
brethren from bondage.— Phil. 2:6-8, Diaglott. 

When Moses came to his own people they rejected 
him, and he fled for his life to the land of Midian, 
from whence he came to them a second time. 
So Christ came to his own, and his own received him 
not (John 1:12); and he went into a far country, even 
heaven itself, from whence he has now, a second time, 
come, and will deliver all who are true Israelites indeed 
from the bondage of sin and death. Moses was 
forty years in coming to the point where he offered 
himself to Israel the first time; then he was absent 
from them an equal period of time, forty years, and 
came again and delivered them. There is a type or 
parallel in this time feature also; it illustrates the 
length of the Jewish and the Gospel ages, as being 
equal. From the time of the beginning of typical Israel 
as a nation, waiting for the coming of Messiah, 
down to the time when Jesus actually presented himself, 
was a period of 1845 years, and from that time, 
when he died and left them, until the period which 
the Scriptures show us marked his second coming 
(October, 1874) was a like period of 1845 years,— corresponding 
exactly to the two periods at which Moses 
offered himself in the type.* 

THE VOICE OF THE FIRST SIGN. 



(2) At Moses' second presentation to Israel he 



did not address them personally and directly, as at the 
first, God having said to him, "Aaron shall be thy 
prophet or mouthpiece, and thou shalt be a god unto 
Aaron." This item of the type would seem to imply 
just what we see to be the fact of the case now, viz., 
that the Lord Jesus does not address himself to the 
true Israelites in person now, as at the first advent, 
but through his agent, through a mouth-piece. 
Aaron, the mouth-piece or agent of the Lord, we 
would understand to represent the Royal Priesthood 
—those of the Lord's consecrated people still in the 
flesh, still sacrificing,— who have not yet passed beyond 
the vail into glory. The type, then, seems to 
say that the signs or testimonies which will convince 
all true Israelites now living respecting the presence 
of the Lord and his mighty power to deliver, his ultimate 
victory over Satan, sin and death, will be of 
or from our present Lord, but by or through the living 
members of his body, his brethren, represented in 
Aaron. 

(3) The first sign or testimony to Israel was the 
casting of the rod upon the ground, and its becoming 
a serpent, and the taking of the serpent by the tail, 
and its becoming a rod again in the hands of Aaron. 
It was Moses' rod, and Aaron was merely his representative 
in every act. The natural Israelite merely 
saw this as a miracle, and discerned in it no teaching; 
but the spiritual Israelite is not to expect a larger 
rod and a larger serpent, as the anti-type, but 
should expect to comprehend the meaning of the rod 
and of the serpent as an anti-typical instruction or 
testimony today. 

A rod symbolizes authority. Moses' rod was 
frequently used in connection with the plagues, as 
well as in connection with the signs, as signifying divine 
authority. A serpent is a symbol of evil— of sin 
and all its consequences, evil in general. The lesson 
for the spiritual Israelite today is that he is now 
to understand that all the evil there is in the world is 



*MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. CHAP. VII. 

R2917 : page 377 

the result, directly or indirectly, of God's having let 
go of his rod or authority; and they are to understand 
further that it is God's intention or purpose, as it is 
also his promise, to take hold upon the present evil 
conditions, which have lasted now more than six 
thousand years, and to bring order out of confusion: 
—to re-establish his authority in his own hand. 

These acts or signs are said to have "voices" or 
to be testimonies. (Exod. 4:8,9.) Hence our query 
must be, Is this sign or testimony now being given to 



God's people throughout the world? We answer, 

Yes. Has it been always recognized and presented 

thus? We answer, No. Was it ever thus presented 

before this harvest-time? We answer, No. Heretofore 

it has been a matter of speculation amongst peoples 

and theologians of all classes and shades of Christian 

belief, but a question without an answer,— Why 

did God permit evil in the world? Some have blasphemously 

held that God has caused the evil, that 

good might follow; but this God himself most emphatically 

denies, and everything pertaining to his 

character refutes it. He declares that every good and 

every perfect gift is of him, with whom is no changeableness 

or variableness. "His work is perfect." 

Others have claimed that a conflict is in operation, 

between God and Satan, between good and evil, and 

that each side is doing its utmost to conquer the other 

—with evil and Satan predominant in the world, on 

account of which it is spoken of as "the present evil 

world," in which there is "none righteous, no, not 

one." But whatever the standpoint of view, it has 

been confusion only, until the harvest-time, when the 

true light upon the subject began to shine forth, 

showing that when sin entered the world God gave 

mankind over, let them take their course, let the rod 

of divine authority drop, "rested from his own work," 

permitting sin and evil to flourish— not, however, intending 

that it should flourish forever as a serpent, 

but fully intending, predestinating, and even foretelling, 

that in due time he would set up his Kingdom in 

the person of the Messiah, who should lay hold upon 

that old Serpent, the devil and Satan, and restrain 

his power. Showing, too, that he will ultimately 

bring all evil conditions back to subjection and harmony 

with the divine authority and law,— destroying 

the evil connected therewith. This teaching, then, 

is the sign whose "voice" or testimony was typified by 

Aaron casting the rod upon the ground, its becoming 

a serpent, and his taking it back into his hand 

again. How much grander the anti-typical teaching 

than the typical sign! How much more forceful! 

Who of the true Israelites who has heard this testimony 

is any longer in doubt respecting the speedy deliverance 

of all of God's people from the power of 

Satan, sin and death? 

We would avoid personality as far as possible, 
but believe it to be in the interest of the truth and of 
the true Israelites that we point out that this sign has 
already been given. Zion's Watch Tower and Herald 
of Christ's Presence was founded in 1879, and the 
"voice" therefrom, to the true Israel of God, announced 
that the second advent of our Lord, as the deliverer 
of the world, had already taken place— that he was 
present but invisible, a spirit being not possible to be 
seen by any, even his Church, until they should be 
"changed" and made like him in the first resurrection. 



The message further declared that he was present for 
the purpose of establishing his Kingdom, and delivering 
his saints and the whole groaning creation from 
the bondage of corruption,— as many as will obey 
him. And it is very remarkable that very shortly a 
special number of this journal was issued, bearing the 
significant title, "Food for Thinking Christians, 
WHY EVIL WAS PERMITTED."* This voice 
or testimony was spread abroad amongst the spiritual 
Israelites in an extraordinary manner,— over a 
million and a half copies being circulated through 
the mails and at church-doors in the United States, 
Canada and Great Britain. And the voice or testimony 
of this first sign, token, teaching, is still being 
repeated from one to another of the Lord's people 
throughout the world, and now in various languages. 
In that pamphlet for the first time, so far as we know, 
was shown that the evil in the world, the bondage to 
sin and death, and the reign of iniquity and the various 
oppressions to which the whole groaning creation 
is subject, are the results of God's having let go 
his authority (rod), and not the result of his inability 
to hold the authority, nor in any sense the outworking 
of the authority in his hand. It showed also how 
complete will be the restraint of evil and its complete 
annihilation when again the Lord shall take unto 
himself his great power and reign. Could there possibly 
be a greater or a grander anti-type for the sign 
which Moses and Aaron presented to Israel through 
the rod and the serpent? Is not the truth on this 
subject much more convincing to the spiritual Israelite 
today than any natural signs or wonders or miracles 
could possibly be? Does not the knowledge 
now granted the Lord's people respecting the divine 
plan of the ages, and its purpose, and the result, satisfy 
our longings as nothing else could do, and assure 
our hearts that deliverance is nigh? 

THE VOICE OF THE SECOND SIGN. 



(4) The second sign to be given to the Israelites 
was that of the leprous hand. Hidden in the bosom, 
when revealed it was leprous; but when hidden 
again, and revealed a second time, it was whole. 
Again we say that the natural Israelite discerned nothing 
but the natural sign, but it was intended of God 
that the spiritual Israelite should discern a much 
grander lesson, and that a testimony through this 
grander lesson would be still more convincing to him 
than was the typical sign to the typical Israelite. A 
hand is a symbol of power. In this case the hand 
represented divine power. Leprosy is a symbol of 
sin. The teaching, therefore, would seem to be that 
divine power was first manifested without sin or imperfection 



or blemish; secondly, that the same divine 
power, hidden for a time, was afterward manifest in 
sin and imperfection; and thirdly, that the same divine 
power, hidden again for a time, will subsequently be 
manifest without sin. 

What teaching or testimony is this? We answer 
that it is in harmony with the previous teaching respecting 
the permission of evil, but does not apply 



*Since this publication two other tracts have been issued, 
bearing portions of the same title; No. 12, "The Divine 
Plan of the Ages: Why Evil was Permitted," No. 52, "Food 
for Thinking Christians: Our Lord's Return," etc. 

R2917 : page 378 

to evil in general, but rather to sin in particular; does 

not apply to the world in general, but specially applies 

to the people of God,— to those whom God uses as his 

agents or representatives, his hand, his power in the 

world. God's power originally was manifested unblemished. 

But during this Gospel age he has been 

represented by his consecrated people, the members 

of the body of Christ, who are his ambassadors and 

representatives; but they are leprous, actually imperfect, 

though reckonedly perfect in Christ. As the 

world sees them they are blemished, but from the 

divine standpoint their blemishes are all hidden, covered 

with the merit of Christ's righteousness. 

Nevertheless, these have been the hand or power 

of God in the world for more than eighteen centuries; 

but by and by they are to be received into his bosom 

again, and "changed" in the first resurrection, so that 

when manifest again in the future they will be without 

sin, "without spot or wrinkle or any such thing," 

and will again be used of the Lord as his agent in 

stretching forth his rod and bringing the plagues 

upon Egypt, and delivering the residue of God's people 

from the bondage of sin and death. 

And is this also a sign or a testimony peculiar to 
this time in which we live, and was this subject never 
clearly seen before? We answer, it is peculiar to our 
day, and was never clearly seen before. In the past 
many have seen something of justification, something 
of sanctification, something of a coming deliverer; 
but never before have these subjects been seen in the 
clear light in which they are now seen as related to 
each other. Never before was the relationship distinctly 
seen between justification and sanctification 
and deliverance; that justification is of divine grace, 
accepted through faith; that sanctification implies 
works and sacrifice, based upon justification; and that 
to these justified and consecrated ones, who faithfully 
overcome, by the grace of God in Christ, shall be 



granted a share in the "glory, honor and immortality" 
of the divine nature in the first resurrection. 

But has the voice or sign of this testimony gone 
forth in any particular channel, as did the preceding 
voice or testimony? We answer, Yes: in the Millennial 
Dawn series of volumes, the first of which 
was published in 1886. The united testimony 
of these relates to the Church, showing original sin, 
the first step out of it into justification, through faith 
in Christ, the second step of sanctification, and sacrifice, 
and the ultimate change, in the first resurrection 
to the divine nature, and glory and join t-heirship. 
These volumes deal specially with this subject from 
its various standpoints, the ransom-sacrifice of our 
Lord, on account of which the cleansing will come to 
us in due time, being everywhere prominently set 
forth; and also the fact that no absolute purity is to 
be expected until the Lord shall take us to himself 
in our "change." 

Supplemental to the teaching of the Dawns on 
this subject, and to assist in emphasizing their "voice" 
and making clear their testimony, the Pilgrim service 
has been instituted under which various brethren 
travel from place to place explaining and demonstrating 
the lesson taught by the leprous hand and 
its healing, and all of our readers, having heard the 
testimony are daily giving it forth to others. 

THE VOICE OF THE THIRD SIGN. 



(5) Another sign was to be given, the Lord 
clearly intimating that it would be necessary, and that 
all of his true people would not hear or heed the 
"voice" of the first two testimonies. To natural Israel 
the third sign was the taking of the water from 
the river, and pouring it upon the earth, where it became 
blood. They saw merely the sign, the miracle; 
they read not its meaning, as the spiritual Israelite 
must seek to do. In explanation of the symbolical 
teaching of this type we suggest that water is here, 
as elsewhere, a symbol of the truth; and that the earth 
is here, as elsewhere, a symbol of society.* The pouring 
of the water upon the earth would ordinarily mean 
the refreshment of the earth, a blessing; and the pouring 
of the truth upon society would ordinarily be expected 
to mean a blessing to society; but in the symbol 
the water turned to blood, repulsive, abhorrent, 
symbolizing death; and this, in the anti-type, would 
signify that in the present time the pouring out of the 
truth upon society will produce an effect contrary to 
what might ordinarily have been expected. Society, 
civilization, has been claiming, especially within the 
past century, to be searching high and low for the 
truth. But this type says that the time has come 



when these professed truth-seekers (the word science 

signifies truth) will reject the truth, disdain it, and 

to them it will seem obnoxious, loathsome, intolerable. 

Our readers will here possibly call to mind our 

Lord's words respecting this present time, "The sun 

shall be darkened and the moon shall be turned into 

blood." We have elsewhere shown the significance 

of this:+ that the moon is the symbol of the Jewish 

Law, as the sun is the symbol of the Gospel message; 

and that the Gospel message will become darkness 

to the eyes of society in general, through the sophistries, 

higher criticism, evolution theories, etc., of this 

boastful day; while the Law, represented by the moon, 

will be viewed as bloody— that its sacrifices will not 

be esteemed as types, nor appreciated as such, but be 

regarded as the work of misguided Jews, who 

slaughtered their animals by the thousands because 

of their ignorance and superstition, and that the commands 

which they obeyed were not of God, but of 

their own conjecture and of priestly connivance. The 

same thought attaches to this sign or testimony of 

the water of truth being poured upon the social earth. 

It will be resented, as bloody, instead of being absorbed 

as truth. 

Is there any thing corresponding to this sign now 
in progress in the world, that could be esteemed a 
sign or testimony to the true Israelites, such as never 
was before given? We answer, Yes, there is. A very 
remarkable movement has been in progress amongst 
us during the past ten years, during which the Watch 
Tower Bible and Tract Society has supplied tracts free 
in any quantity to those who would promise to use 
them judiciously. You have the annual reports, 
showing the millions of pages which have thus been 
circulated— the truth being thus poured upon the 
symbolical earth, society, liberally in many lands and 
in many languages. But especially has this pouring 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. I., pp.66-71. 
+Millennial Dawn, Vol. IV., pp.590-594. 

R2917 : page 379 

out of the water, truth, progressed wonderfully during 
the past three years, under what we have designated 
the "Volunteer" work, in which hundreds of the 
Lord's consecrated people have systematically, season 
after season, distributed to Christian people 
tracts and booklets which our Society has supplied 
freely— the donations covering the expense coming 
in without urging or even request. 

But what is the effect of this pouring out of the 
water upon the most enlightened peoples of the 
world, professed truth-seekers? Is it gladly received, 



joyfully absorbed? Only by the few,— the vast majority 

seem to be angered, as the scribes and Pharisees 

and doctors of divinity at the first advent were angered 

when they perceived that the Lord and the apostles 

were teaching the people, and that without money 

and without price. (Acts 4:2.) Nothing can be more 

evident than that the professed teachers of Christendom 

do not want to be taught themselves and do not 

want their people to be taught the truth. They bitterly 

oppose it, and persecute and speak evil of those 

who in this way are seeking to do good. More and 

more they are getting so changed from the simplicity 

of the Gospel of Christ to the theory of evolution and 

higher criticism and sectarian pride and worldliness 

that the truth seems repulsive to them, undesirable, 

bloody. They not only view the typical sacrifices as 

bloody, but they resent the thought that the anti-typical 

sacrifice for sins was the death of Christ— they resent 

the thought that divine justice required this sacrifice, 

and that "without the shedding of blood there 

is no remission of sins," as the Apostle declared. 

(Heb. 9:22.) It does not fit with their theories. According 

to their theories man was created next to the 

monkey, and has been evolving as a race grandly up 

to the present time, and will continue to evolve and 

develop until he becomes a god, and hence needs only 

to be let alone, needs no Savior, no deliverer from 

the present condition of things, which are not seen to 

be evil. They put evil for good, and good for evil, 

darkness for light and light for darkness. To these 

the truth of God's Word respecting the fall, respecting 

the ransom, respecting the coming deliverance 

and restitution blessings which God has provided in 

Christ, through the Millennial Kingdom for all the 

families of the earth,— these are all objectionable, contradictory 

to their theories, hateful, bloody. 

As the "voice" of the third sign or testimony was 
to bring conviction to all of the true typical Israelites, 
so in the anti-type this last testimony or evidence 
will ultimately bring conviction to all of the Lord's 
true people today in the world. They will discern 
that the systems and theologians in whom they have 
trusted are going further and further, day by day, 
away from the appreciation of the true Gospel— the 
truth as it is in Christ Jesus— into the outer darkness 
of the world. All who are loyal to the Lord, as they 
perceive this condition of things, as they recognize the 
cleavage between belief and unbelief, from the Scriptural 
standpoint, will thus be helped, convinced, and 
enabled to take their stand for the truth accordingly. 

It will be remembered that when Moses and 
Aaron presented themselves before Pharaoh they performed 
the first of these signs in his presence— the 
rod turned into a serpent and being reclaimed was a 
rod. Pharaoh called for his magicians (types of theologians 
of today, whose minds— not morals— have become 



corrupted, and who are reprobates, not morally, 
but as respects the faith— 2 Tim. 3:8), he explained 
to them that Moses and Aaron claimed that this sign 
was an evidence of divine power and favor, and asked 
them if they could not show the same evidences. 
They replied, Yes, and cast their rods upon the 
ground, and their rods also became serpents; but 
Aaron's rod-serpent swallowed up all of these. What 
would this signify? It might mean that so far as the 
world is concerned the first sign or testimony which 
convinced the Hebrews will be claimed to be nothing 
new; it will be claimed that theologians all along have 
declared and thought that God blesses evil things, so 
that they result in good. But we answer that the 
view of this subject which God has now displayed to 
his people is so much more complete that it quite 
swallows up all these suggestions and theories of the 
past. What the Lord is now showing proves to his 
people conclusively, not only that some accidents are 
overruled of the Lord for good, but that all evil of 
every kind is the result of absence of the divine control, 
and that when the Lord shortly shall put forth 
his hand, and again take control of earth's affairs, its 
evil conditions will give place to conditions in accord 
with the divine character and authority. 

It will be remembered, also, that the first plague 
which came upon the Egyptians was the turning of 
all the water of Egypt into blood— the river, ponds, 
etc.— so that the Egyptians could not drink of the 
water, but digged for themselves wells near the river. 
As the water represents truth, the thought here conveyed 
would be that from the worldly standpoint very 
soon all truth will become repulsive— every feature of 
truth connected with the divine plan, as represented 
in the Word of God, will become abhorrent; and the 
digging of wells would seem to imply that, rejecting 
the Word of God, the world (Christendom— Churchianity) 
will seek for truth in various ways of their own. 

WHAT SHALL WE SAY TO THESE THINGS? 



It should be a great encouragement to us all to 
find so clearly expressed in the type what we had 
vaguely and indistinctly hoped for, viz., that the 
Lord's people of the Royal Priesthood on this side 
the vail are being used of him in various ways in the 
accomplishment of his purpose of separating the people 
of God from others,— the wheat from the tares. 
It is remarkable in this connection that none but the 
consecrated have ever been successful in connection 
with the circulation of any of these testimonies. Of 
the more than a million copies of Millennial Dawn 
now in circulation remarkably few have been circulated 
by any but those who are believers in their 



testimony, and who have circulated them through 
a desire to be instruments and mouthpieces of the 
Lord in giving forth his word,— even as was Aaron to 
Moses. 

Let us, then, dear brethren and sisters, feel encouraged, 
as, looking into the type, we see so clear a 
fulfillment in our day of the things written aforetime 
for our admonition. Let us with fresh courage show 
forth to all whom we have any reason to believe are 
Israelites indeed the secret of the divine plan— Why 

R2917 : page 380 

Evil Was Permitted. Let us prosecute also the work 

of showing them respecting the hand, the instrumentalities 

which God has used during this Gospel age in 

this service; respecting the justification which covers, 

in God's sight, though it does not transform us in the 

sight of men, pointing out also the final victory of 

the consecrated. Let us persuade the first-born of 

Israel to faithfulness until our "change" comes, when 

we shall be made like the Lord and fit to be his servants 

and representatives. Let us continue also to 

pour out the water of truth; whether others hear or 

whether they forbear. The Lord's assurance is that 

this sign, this testimony and its contrary results ultimately 

shall influence all Israelites indeed. Let us 

remember that the opposition of the worldly, even, 

will prove to be co-operative influence, in deciding 

the Israelites indeed that the deliverer and the deliverance 

are at hand. And finally let us apply to ourselves 

the Lord's assurance to Moses respecting himself 

and Aaron, "Certainly I will be with thee." 

R2917 : page 380 



"CHRIST OUR PASSOVER WAS SACRIFICED FOR US. 

-EXOD. 12:1-17.-DEC. 15.- 

PHARAOH'S heart seemed to grow harder and 
harder under divine mercies, as one plague 
after another was stayed at his request, 
through Moses. The goodness of God, instead of 
leading him to repentance, would seem to have made 
him only the more determined, as God had foreseen 
and foretold. God, however, informed Moses that 
the tenth and final plague would be sufficient to break 
down the opposition of this hard man, and compel 
his acquiescence with the requirement that Israel 
should go free. Before the infliction of this plague 
Moses enquired whether or not Pharaoh were willing 
to let Israel go, and upon receiving the negative response 
he warned Pharaoh that in consequence a dire 



calamity would befall the Egyptians. Apparently he 
immediately departed for the land of Goshen, there to 
put the people in readiness for the exodus. Their 
Egyptian neighbors gave them liberally jewels of gold 
and of silver and various articles of value, evidently 
anxious to have them go, and regretful that their 
ruler was so stubborn. They realized also, no doubt, 
that in some sense God was with the Israelites, and 
against the Egyptians, a matter which it seemed difficult 
for Pharaoh, their king, to discern. 

How much time they may have consumed in 
preparation for the journey we know not, but we may 
well suppose that this was a time of suspense upon 
Pharaoh and all who knew of the last threat presented 
to him by Moses and Aaron. We are certain that the 
preparations required several days, if not weeks, because 
amongst other instructions each family was 
to select for itself a representative male lamb of the 
first year, unblemished, as the foundation for the religious 
ceremony, known as the Passover, ever since 
observed by that nation. The lamb was to be selected, 
accepted, separated from others, and cared for 
specially from the tenth day of that month, Abib (later 
known as Nisan), and on the fourteenth day of the 
month it was to be killed between evenings (between 
six o'clock the one evening and six o'clock the next 
evening— the usual Jewish day). Its flesh was to be 
roasted for eating the following evening, and its blood 
was to be preserved for sprinkling upon the lintels 

R2918 : page 380 

and door-posts,— the door frame, above and at either 
side. It was in the night following the fourteenth 
day that the roast lamb was to be eaten, with bitter 
herbs, the eaters being gathered in family groups, and 
all in expectation for the journey, sandals on their 
feet, and staff in hand, etc., ready to depart out of 
Egypt early in the morning of the fifteenth. 

The story, as recorded in Exodus, is an interesting 
one, and has ever been one precious to the Hebrews, 
the law concerning it serving as one of the 
most prominent landmarks in the history of that nation. 
But to the Christian the meaning of this incident 
is of still greater importance. To him, as the 
anti-typical Israelite, the whole transaction speaks of 
the anti-typical deliverance at the hands of the anti-typical 
Moses at the close of the anti-typical night, 
and at the opening of the anti-typical Passover day. 
Our Golden Text, "Christ, our Passover, is slain for 
us" (1 Cor. 5:7), identifies the Lord Jesus as the anti-typical 
Lamb, and identifies the sacrifices which he 
gave with the deliverance which we are now hoping 
for, as near, even at the door. This fact is recognized 
by Christians of all denominations, and our Lord's 
Supper is recognized as the commemoration of the 



anti-type of the Passover supper, especially by the 
Catholic Churches and the older denominations of 
Protestants. As the Hebrews celebrate the Passover 
annually, so these churches celebrate annually "Good 
Friday," by an emblematic supper known as the 
Eucharist or Lord's Supper, commemorative of the 
death of "the Lamb of God" and the divine mercy 
consequently extended to "the Church of the first 
born." 

Let us go backward, and look at some of the 
minutia, and the meaning of these to us, the spiritual 
anti-typical Israelites. The taking up of the lamb 
on the tenth day of the month found its correspondency 
at the first advent of our Lord Jesus, when he 
presented himself to Israel at the close of his ministry, 
as their King, riding upon the ass, exactly on the 
10th of Nisan. It was then that that nation should 
have accepted him, should have received him; but instead 
"they hid, as it were, their faces from him," and 
saw not in him the beauty for which they were seeking, 
as a nation. It was on the fourteenth day of 
Nisan that our Lord partook of the Passover with his 
disciples, early in the evening. Later on in the same 
night he was betrayed. The next morning of the 
same day he was condemned and crucified. Later in 
the same day he was buried. All this was on the 
fourteenth day between evenings, between six p.m., 
where the day began, and the next six p.m., where 
it ended, and it was on the next day, the 15th, in the 
evening, that the Passover feast of the Jews was celebrated. 
We celebrate that feast anti-typically, continuously 
feasting and rejoicing in the grace of God 
toward us. But the Lord's Supper belongs to the 
14th of Nisan and commemorates the killing of the 
Lamb of God. That night in which the Passover 
feast was eaten represents this Gospel age— a dark 
time, in which sin and evil still triumph, and darkness 

R2918 : page 381 

is abroad, and in which the Lord's people feed upon 
the merit of Christ, our Passover Lamb, slain for us, 
and realize that his "flesh is meat indeed." 

Along with the Lamb the Jew partook of unleavened 
bread, pure, unadulterated, figuratively separate 
from sin; it symbolized the precious promises which 
come to us from the Heavenly Father through our 
Lord Jesus Christ. "This is the bread that came 
down from heaven, whereof if a man eat he shall never 
die." (John 6:50.) And, as the Hebrews ate their 
bread and lamb, so the anti-typical spiritual Israelite 
partakes of Christ's merits and graces freely, but 
with them receives also the bitterness of persecution, 
trials, difficulties, misrepresentation and suffering 
symbolized by the "bitter herbs." As the Hebrews 
ate shod and ready for their journey in the morning, 



so the true Israelites of this Gospel age partake of 
these spiritual favors, feeling the while that we are still 
in Egypt, and longing for the promised land; and they 
indicate by the conduct of life that they are pilgrims 
and strangers in this country, the world, and that 
they are seeking the heavenly country. But the deliverance 
did not come in the night in which the Passover 
was eaten, but in the morning which followed it. 
And so the deliverance of the spiritual Israelite does 
not come during the night of sin and trouble in which 
the god of this world reigns. It comes in the Millennial 
morning, for which we wait and hope and pray, 
"Thy Kingdom come." "God shall help her, early in 
the morning."— Psa. 46:5. 

It is the mistake of some to suppose that the 
Passover refers, either directly or indirectly, to the 
passing of the children of Israel across the Red Sea. 
Nothing of the kind. The name was given with reference 
to the passing over or sparing of the first-born 
of Israel during that night in which the lamb was 
being eaten, and during which the blood was on the 
door-post without. The death-messenger was abroad 
throughout the land of Egypt, and the first-born of all 
Egypt were smitten, and the first-born of Israel were 
saved only upon condition that the blood should be 
sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels of the houses 
in which they were. Any Israelite who did not respect 
the divine command, and place the blood-marks 
upon the front of his door, as directed of the Lord 
through Moses, would suffer, just in the same manner 
and just as surely as the Egyptians— the blood was the 
mark of distinction between those who were the 
Lord's people and those who were not his people. 

What does this signify now, to the spiritual Israelites? 
We answer that the sprinkling of the blood 
symbolizes an acknowledgment of faith in the redemptive 
merit of our Lord Jesus' sacrifice, as our 
Passover Lamb. Whoever recognizes the Lord's word 
in respect to this matter realizes that without the 
shedding of blood there is no remission of sins, and he 
who thus realizes the importance of the death of our 
Savior is expected to confess it, as symbolized by the 
sprinkling of the blood upon the outside of the dwelling. 
And its being upon the door signifies that all who 
were within that door were trusting in the blood, were 
under its efficacious merit. It is remarkable that 
while this doctrine of the redemption through the 
blood of Christ has been held with more or less clearness 
for centuries, it is now, in the close of this age, 
being called in question by some who are still naming 
the name of Christ, and by some who profess to be advanced 
teachers, and higher critics. All such are, 
from the Lord's standpoint, Egyptians, not Israelites. 
All whom he will recognize as his people, Israelites indeed, 
will be such as will recognize him, his Word, and 
the work which he has accomplished for them through 



the shedding of the precious blood of our Passover 
Lamb, Christ Jesus. 

The doctrine of substitution is made most emphatic 
in this type. As the blood represents life while in the 
veins, so it represents death when shed; and so, as the 
sentence of death was against our race, it was needful 
that Christ should die for our sins. Hence also 
the Lord has made it incumbent throughout this age 
that each one whom he would recognize must be one 
who would trust in and confess the atonement, the 
redemption which is in Christ Jesus. The blood was 
to be for a token, for a witness, for a sign, as evidence 
of the faith of those who were in the house on which 
it was sprinkled. It was not God's token, but man's 
token. God would do the sparing, but every Israelite 
who would be spared must see to it that his part of 
the program was carried out. 

Let it not be overlooked that not all of the Israelites 
were in danger of death, but only the first-born; for 
this is a striking and prominent feature of the type. 
It teaches that while the deliverance that is to be accomplished 
in the morning will be deliverance for all 
who love the Lord and love righteousness, the first-born 
as well as all the rest, yet a special trial or testing 
comes during the night— before the Millennial 
morning— and this special testing or trial will affect 
only the first-born ones. Who are these first-born 
ones? We answer, they typified "the Church of the 
First-born, whose names are written in heaven," the 
"little flock," begotten to a newness of nature, and to 
joint-heirship with our Lord Jesus in the coming 
Kingdom. Others will be delivered from the power 
of Satan and the oppression of sin, as represented in 
the deliverance of all Israel from Pharaoh and his 
power and bondage, but the only ones who will be in 
danger during this night, the only ones who will be 
passed over or spared, during this Gospel age, will be 
the little flock, the Church of the First-born. This 
is distinctly the language of the type, nor can it be 
otherwise accounted for. It will be remembered that 
after the Passover, in the new order of things, the 
first-born ones spared in this Passover became representatively 
the Levites, amongst whom, in turn, 
were the priests, a little flock; and even so the Apostle 
declares of the Church of the First-born, "Ye are a 
Royal Priesthood."- 1 Pet. 2:5,9. 

As already remarked, this Passover lamb found 
its anti-type in Christ, our Passover Lamb, who was 
slain for us, and of whom we partake. Our Lord instituted 
for us, the spiritual Israel, a commemorative 
service to take the place of the type observed by fleshly 
Israel. It was instituted on the same night in 
which he was betrayed, the same night in which he ate 
the Passover supper, as a Jew, and after the eating 
of the Passover supper. He took bread and wine to 
represent himself, as the true, anti-typical Lamb of 



God, who taketh away the sin of the world, and he 
enjoined upon all who were truly his followers that 

R2919 : page 382 

they henceforth, instead of any longer, as the Jews, 
celebrating the typical Passover, should henceforth 
celebrate the anti-typical Passover. "As often as ye 
do this [celebrate the Passover] do it in remembrance 
of me [and not any longer in remembrance of the typical 
deliverance]." And from year to year this celebration 
has been handed down to the present time, 
and is still commemorated. 

Some of God's people, however, having become 
confused upon the subject, and having lost sight of 
the fact that it is a commemoration of the anti-type of 
the Jewish Passover, feel quite at liberty to set for its 
observance times and seasons of their own, without 
any authority from the Lord. They are excusable to 
a considerable extent, because, during the eighteen 
centuries since the institution of the ordinance the 
great Adversary introduced many doctrines and false 
practices amongst the followers of Jesus— amongst 
others, the doctrine of the Mass, which purports to 
be a repetition of Christ's sacrifice, performed by 
the priests, re-creating Christ in the flesh, they claim, 
and sacrificing him afresh in the Mass, for the sins of 
those for whom it is performed. Protestants, coming 
out from Papacy, have rejected the doctrine of the 
Mass, but because the Mass had come to be frequently 
performed they imagined that the Lord's Supper, 
as they celebrate it, is also without any limitation as 
to time and season. Moreover, even those old 
churches which still observe the Passover date for the 
Lord's Supper have adopted a new method of reckoning 
it, contrary to the method in use by the Jews— one 
in which the memorial day always falls upon the Friday 
which is nearest to the true date, so that the Sunday 
following, Easter, will symbolize our Lord's resurrection 
on the first day of the week. 

The next proper anniversary of the celebration of 
the Passover, according to the Jewish reckoning of 
time, as used by our Lord and the apostles, and by 
some of the Lord's people since and today, will be 
after sundown, April 20th, 1902. 



R2919 : page 382 

CROSSING THE RED SEA. 

-EXOD. 14:13-27.-DEC. 22.- 

"I will sing unto the Lord for he hath 
triumphed gloriously."— Exod. 15:1. 



SKEPTICS have railed greatly against the 
truthfulness of the Bible record of Israel's deliverance 
—crossing the Red Sea, etc. They 

object that so rapid an exodus of from one to two million 
people, with their flocks and herds, would be an 
impossibility; and they object, secondly, to the testimony 
that God miraculously delivered them by making 
a path for them through the sea. As to the first 
objection: We can readily see that if the Egyptians 
had been opposed to their going the difficulties would 
have been much greater. We are to remember, on 
the contrary, that after suffering the chastisement of 
the plagues they were willing, nay, anxious, for their 
departure, Pharaoh himself sending a message to 
Moses, even in the night in which the first-born were 
slain, saying, "Rise up, and get you forth from among 
my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go 
and serve the Lord, as ye have said; also take your 
flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone; 
and bless me also." 

We are to remember that the Israelites were in a 
measure organized; their tribal and family relationship 
having been maintained. The narrative shows 
that they went forth in military order,— either five 
abreast or in five companies. (Exod. 13:18, margin.) 
Evidently all were under the command of the heads 
of the tribes, "the elders of the people." Several days 
elapsed before their journey brought them to the Red 
Sea. The great wall of Egypt, called Shur (somewhat 
similar to the great wall of China), is supposed 
to have hindered their making a more direct route. 
Besides, this wall was in the midst of a sandy desert, 
where there would be no sustenance, either for themselves 
or for their cattle; while the route taken, passing 
through the borders of Egypt to the head of the 
Red Sea, was evidently the most favorable one as respects 
pasturage, etc. 

Various comparatively shallow places in the Red 
Sea, near its head, are suggested as possible ones by 
which the crossing may have been effected, and the 
description given would indicate that the passage was 
made on such a sandbar, which perhaps ordinarily 
would have from five to twelve feet of water upon it, 
according to the condition of the tides. The presumption 
is that the strong east wind spoken of, operating 
with the tides, laid bare this sandbar, and thus gave 
the Israelites a passage. 

But while Pharaoh, under the sting of the last 
plague, was anxious for the departure of the Hebrews, 
nevertheless, as his grief assuaged and he considered 
the loss his empire was sustaining in the departure 
of over a million subjects, intelligent and ingenious 
and docile, and when he considered further that they 
were an unarmed host, and impeded in traveling by 
their flocks and herds, he evidently felt that he had 



been too generous in permitting them to go, and concluded 
that in the few days' march they had already 
experienced something of the difficulties and trials 
of the journey, and that by this time they were not 
only discouraged, but hemmed in by the northern 
tongue of the Red Sea, and the Egyptian wall, while 
on either side were mountains. He concluded that 
they could be easily retaken, and would feel that they 
had had enough of their "outing" and perhaps would 
return to their labor more docile than ever. Consequently 
the Egyptian troops of the capital were 
started in pursuit. 

The Israelites, who for years had learned to dread 
their Egyptian masters, heard of the pursuit, and 
cried unto Moses despairingly, Moses in turn crying 
unto the Lord on behalf of the people. The Lord's 
response to Moses' prayer is a striking one, from 
which spiritual Israelites may also take a lesson. It 
was, "Wherefore criest thou unto me? Speak unto 
the children of Israel, that they go forward." (Exod. 14:15.) 
There is a time to pray and also a time to act 
and thus to co-operate with God who is answering our 
prayers. When the Lord's time for answering our 
prayers has come and we know it, it is for us to manifest 
our faith in him by going forward. Too many 

R2919 : page 383 

spiritual Israelites, after hearing the Lord's message, 
instead of going forward in obedience are disposed 
to tarry and pray to the Lord that he give them some 
special message not common to others. Such 
through weakness of faith are in danger of losing 
their standing. "Without faith it is impossible to 
please God;" and obedience is merely a demonstration 
of faith. 

Apparently the Israelites got a glimpse of the 
Egyptians in the distance, before sundown. This is 
implied in Moses' statement, "The Egyptians whom 
ye have seen this day ye shall see again no more forever." 
The account declares that the pillar of fire, 
by which the Israelites were miraculously led, removed 
to their rearward, so as to be between them and the 
Egyptians,— a pillar of cloud and darkness to the latter, 
and a pillar of fire or light to the former. Apparently 
there was a great storm that night, the east 
wind blowing furiously; outside narratives, such as 
that of Josephus, declaring that it rained, thundered 
and lightened appallingly. But whether this was 
merely upon the Egyptians, from the pillar of cloud, 
or whether it was also upon the Israelites, would be 
merely surmise. What we do know is that during 
that night the windstorm blew across that upper neck 
of the Red Sea in such a manner as to leave the sandbar 
bare for a considerable breadth, so as to permit 
the rapid passage of so large a body of people. The 



Israelites knew, through Moses and their elders, what 
miracle had been performed, and hastened to escape 
from their pursuers. The latter probably were totally 
unaware of the miracle, and perhaps unaware that 
they were crossing the ordinary bed of the sea, and 
therefore, without trepidation, hastened onward in 
pursuit, impeded, however, by various accidents to 
their chariots, which sank into the comparatively soft 
sand of the sea bottom. They, no doubt, concluded 
that where the Israelites had gone they could go. 
Nevertheless, ere they had crossed they became so 
discouraged with the opposition, of what they probably 
at first considered accidents, but afterward recognized 
as divine providences on Israel's behalf, that 
they resolved on a return— to give up the pursuit, 
saying that the God of the Hebrews fought for them. 
By this time it was nearly daybreak, and Israel having 
crossed over Moses stretched forth his rod over the 
sea, and winds and tide, etc., being favorable, the waters 
came again upon the Egyptians, that they were 
drowned. It is said that wonderful storms, somewhat 
analogous to this one, frequently occur in this vicinity, 
and that Napoleon and a troop of soldiers were 
very nearly overtaken at about the same place that 
Pharaoh's chariots were lost, by a sudden cessation 
of storm and rising of the tides. 

A critical writer suggests that Pharaoh's charioteers 
were probably intent upon heading off the Israelites, 
and thus turning them backward, and that the sea 
waters were a wall on either hand, in the sense of being 
a flank protection, hindering the troops from getting 
ahead of the Israelites, turning their flank. He 

R2920 : page 383 

says, "The wall would not, by any Oriental, be supposed 
to be an actual wall rising up beside them, any 
more than 'the wooden walls of Great Britain' are 
board fences about the island; or 'the hedge about the 
law,' which the rabbis built by their precepts, was a 
growth of vegetation." 

There are numerous lessons connected with this 
narrative, profitable to the spiritual Israelites. As 
already suggested, the experience of the Israelites 
and the Egyptians at this time represented the experience 
of the world in the close of this Gospel age, 
and in the dawn of the new dispensation— the period 
of deliverance of God's people, too, from bondage to 
sin and death, which will be accomplished at the dawn 
of the Millennial age. We may reasonably understand 
that the last or tenth plague upon Egypt symbolizes 
the bitter experience of the world at the close 
of the present age, and that these experiences will be 
favorable to the Lord's people, and unfavorable to 
others, down to a certain point where the contest will 
be abandoned, and those in authority in the world will 



agree to the full liberty of all who love righteousness 

and who desire to walk in the Lord's way. Quite possibly 

"the powers that be" may concede for a time the 

demands of the weak and the helpless, and subsequently 

repent, and attempt their re-capture under 

the slavery of selfishness, and so through a Red Sea 

of trouble the Lord will then administer a final chastisement 

upon all those who oppose his deliverance 

of the poor and the needy and they that have no helper, 

and who cry for righteousness, and follow the leadings 

of his representative, Messiah. 

Surely, when the new dispensation has been 
opened up, and the silver trumpets of the Jubilee 
shall sound release and restitution throughout all 
the world, there will be great rejoicing amongst all 
who love righteousness, and, in the language of our 
Golden Text, they may say, "I will sing unto the Lord, 
for he hath triumphed gloriously." And already 
the spiritual Israelite can by faith thus rejoice and 
realize his release from sin and death. 

Another thought we may draw from this narrative 
is the unlimited power of God, who has promised 
us that if we are his, and will follow the leadings of 
our Master, the anti-type of Moses, all things 
shall work together for good to us. We are to learn 
that nothing is too wonderful for our God to accomplish, 
and in proportion as faith increases our joys 
will increase, and we will have the full assurance of 
faith, the full assurance of victory, for "This is the victory 
that overcometh the world, even our faith." We 
are to learn that while the wicked may triumph for 
a time the Lord is against them. He is on the side 
of the poor and oppressed, who are seeking to know 
his will and to do it, and though he bear long with 
them, as represented in the parable, yet, finally he will 
avenge them of their Adversary: their enemies shall 
then become the enemies of the Lord, and the enemies 
of the Lord shall bite the dust— be destroyed.— Luke 18:7; 
Micah7:17. 



page 383 

REVIEW OF THE QUARTER. 

-DEC. 29TH.- 

GOLDEN TEXT: "If God be for us, who can be against us. 
-Rom. 8:31. 

A review of the year, its blessings and its trials, 
will be in order, on this the closing Sunday of the 
year. We trust that all our readers may be able to 
apply the Golden Text to themselves with confidence 
and rejoicing. 



page 385 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 
VOL. XXII. DECEMBER 15, 1901. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 

Liberty Enlightening the World 387 

Federation of Methodists and 

Others 387 

The Pope's Views 388 

Watch Tower Bible and Tract 

Society's Report 388 

Kept for the Master's Use 392 

Tarrying Until Endued with 

Power from on High 392 

Speaking With Other Tongues 396 

page 386 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH, 131 GIPSY LANE, FOREST GATE, LONDON E. ENGLAND. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



BRITISH FRIENDS who find it more convenient may send 
"Good Hopes" and all orders to our London office. 

R2920 : page 386 

APPROVAL, WHETHER SUCCESSFUL OR NOT. 



We know not to what extent the Lord may be pleased to use 
and bless our united efforts to keep open the door of opportunity 
afforded by present favorable postal laws. But in any event 
we feel sure that he will appreciate our humble efforts in this 
direction. Any who have not yet written to the President, as 
suggested in our issue of Nov. 15th, we advise to do so at once. 
Let us do our part and then rest content. The law is there, 
all right, and even the humblest foreigner has a right to appeal 
to it, and for its benefits; and to protest against its violation. 
But there we will let it stop. If protest is unavailing we will 
reckon that it is the Lord's will that we endure the wrong 
cheerfully. 

page 386 

BEGIN THE NEW YEAR PROPERLY. 

As soon as each little group has chosen its leaders, advise us, 
and if "Pilgrim" visits are desired, answer the queries propounded 
in our last issue, page 2. Mention your places and 
hours of meetings, also. 

If you desire the visits of the Watch Tower continued, advise 
us promptly please; whether you can send the subscription 
price or not. 

MARKED NEW TESTAMENTS. 

We have been much disappointed by the publishers of the 
Marked New Testament. They have been promising us books 
for nearly six months but have none ready yet. All waiting 
orders will be filled promptly as possible when they come to us. 

"ZION'S GLAD SONGS" IS OUT OF PRINT. 



R2920 : page 387 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 



"LIBERTY ENLIGHTENING THE WORLD." 



WE HAVE no sympathy with Count Tolstoy's 
unscriptural religious views for which he was 
ex-communicated by the Greek Catholic 
Church; yet we note with surprise that his published 
reply to his ex-communication has been forbidden 
sale by the Public Prosecutor of Leipsic, Germany. 
A cable dispatch to the New York Sun says: 

"The reason given for the seizure is that the work 
is calculated to bring the Church into contempt, and 



the prosecutor's action is based on a paragraph of the 
German penal code, which imposes a maximum penalty 
of three years' imprisonment on anybody publicly 
insulting one of the Christian churches or other 
religious communities enjoying in Germany the privileges 
of a corporation. Perhaps the most remarkable 
feature of the incident is that Count Tolstoy's indignant 
reply to his ex-communicators is allowed to 
circulate in Russia, the Holy Synod refraining from 
prosecution, while the officials of the country which 
indorsed Luther's protest against the Roman 
Church seek to extinguish the words of the Russian 
reformer. " 

There are any number of people, in all countries, 
of similarly narrow soul we have every reason to believe. 
Fallen human nature though not inclined to 
claim for itself perfection, loves to wield power and 
to destroy its enemies or those against whom it is 
prejudiced; although uncertain as to what is truth 
it is ready to decide what is error upon very slight 
evidence. 

Who can doubt that God's providence held back 
America until the due time, when its discovery 
opened a door of freedom for the oppressed and 
priest-and king-ridden of Europe. "Liberty enlightening 
the world" has been a fact for now more than a 
century. No well-informed person will doubt that 
much of the liberty enjoyed by the peoples of Europe 
to-day are the result of the influence which has 
gone back to the "fatherland" from the liberty-loving 
people who commingling here have learned to think 
more justly and more broadly than they or their 
fathers could think under their old environments. 

Custom becomes law: the illustration of American 
liberty with prosperity compels a liberty in Europe 
which otherwise would not exist to-day. But 
it looks as though the pendulum has swung its full 
length liberty-ward, even in America, and as though 
it had started in a return movement. We believe 
that the next few years will witness a serious curtailment 
of liberty on the part of those in power, and 
that the general spirit of liberty and alertness to its 
defense is so deficient among the masses, here as 
well as in Europe, that its wings will be clipped rapidly, 
in the name of law, order, expediency— until 
the people finally awakening to the situation, in fear 
of a return to complete serfdom will revolt in 
anarchy. 

How comforting the thought that the bright lining 
to this cloud is the Millennial Kingdom which 
will promptly be established on the ruins of "the 
present evil world"— on the ashes of present civil, religious, 
political institutions. We who thus hope for 
the salvation of the world which God has promised 
can possess our souls in peace as respects these matters, 
waiting and hoping for a share in the new order 



of things— the new heavens and new earth— wherein 
will dwell righteousness.— 2 Pet. 3:13. 

FEDERATION OF METHODISTS, AND OTHERS. 



Rev. Dr. George Elliott, pastor of the Central 
Methodist Episcopal Church, who has just returned 
from attendance upon the Methodist Ecumenical conference 
in London, England, says that the recent assembly 
was especially marked by its constant response 
to spiritual religion and by the utter absence 
of dogmatism. Perhaps the most important matter 
that came before the assembly, which consisted of 
some 500 Methodists from all over the world, was 
that of church unity. As a result of the ecumenical 
conference, held in Baltimore ten years ago, all the 
Australian Methodists are now united in a single 
body. At the late conference in London all the 
smaller English bodies signified their willingness to 
unite with the Wesleyan church, which is the strongest 

R2920 : page 388 

branch of the denomination in the British Isles. 

Dr. Elliott thinks the outlook good for a consolidation, 

or at least for a federation, of the different 

branches. 

The advance in this direction, however, was not 
so noticeable among the delegates from the United 
States, although some progress was made. The delegates 
from the Methodist Episcopal church south, 
which left the main body at the opening of the civil 
war, had little to say on the subject. 

Half a day was spent in considering the matter 
of a federation similar to the church federations in 
this country, which should include the Presbyterians, 
the Congregationalists, the Baptists and the Methodists. 
There already exists a free church catechism 

R2921 : page 388 

which all these denominations use in common, and to 
a great degree they are already joining in plans for 
mutual work.— Detroit Free Press. 

THE POPE'S VIEWS. 



Die Information, the clerical organ in Vienna, 
says: "The pope addressed the Catholic Bishops 
Sunday and declared that the late President McKinley 
was a victim of the excessive freedom granted to 
the people of the United States. He urged that it was 



the duty of society to oppose the spread of socialism, 
freemasonry, Judaism and anarchism." 



R2921 : page 388 

WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY'S 
REPORT FOR THE YEAR ENDING DECEMBER 1, 1901. 



"GIVE THANKS unto the Lord, for he is 

good!" is the expression of our hearts as 

we sum up the activities of the fiscal year in 

the harvest work— from December, 1900, to December, 

1901. We have not in all respects attained to 

our ideals set for the year just closed, but perhaps 

this was partly because of our high appreciation of 

the work and the workers, and of a laudable ambition 

to have each year exceed its predecessor in efforts 

and in results. And indeed, as the itemized reports 

will show, the work in all its branches has made good 

progress, and in some directions has exceeded that 

of any previous year. We have nothing but thanks 

to offer to our gracious Master for the privileges enjoyed 

at his hands in connection with his service, 

the service of the truth and of the brethren— and for 

his blessing so richly bestowed upon our humble 

efforts. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

One of the most encouraging features of the work 
is the substantial increase in the number of Watch 
Tower readers— our list now numbering about 
14,000. We had hoped that by this time it would 
have reached 16,000; we evidently were too sanguine. 
The Watch Tower list may properly be regarded 
as a sort of barometer respecting the progress 
of the truth, because the terms on which it is supplied 
surely permit all of the interested to be on its list- 
there are none so poor that they cannot have it if 
they will but comply with the standing offer which appears 
on the second page of each issue. We not only 
offer it free to the Lord's poor, but we offer credit to 
those who hope to be able to pay later; and we offer, 
further, that if they cannot pay later a postal card request, 
at any time, will secure a cancellation of the 
account. These being the terms we are considerably 
surprised to find, from time to time, many people who 
have considerable interest in the truth, and who have 
read and appreciated one or all of the Dawn volumes 
whose names are not on the list. An offer in 
our last issue we hope will correct this matter; and 



our proposition that each one now on the list shall 
act as a solicitor will, we believe, bring good results. 
We hope, with your co-operation, to be able to announce 
in our next annual report that the list has increased 
to sixteen thousand or above. Indeed, if 
each one could feel respecting this matter as we do- 
me importance of the regular semi-monthly visits of 
the Tower to those of the interested who are more 
or less disposed to be overcharged with the cares of 
this life— and if all would consider the matter as a 
service to the Lord, and to the brethren, and would 
at once proceed to do what they can in this direction, 
we have no doubt that our list would speedily run up 
to 20,000. We do not want the Tower to go to 
any one who would not appreciate and read it, but we 
are more than willing— we are anxious— to have all 
the interested on our list, regardless of their ability 
to pay for it— the extra expense will be cheerfully 
met out of the contributions to the Tract Fund. Let 
each make this a matter of prayer, and then do what 
he can in this direction, as a service unto the Lord 
and unto the brethren. 

THE COLPORTEUR WORK. 

We continue to esteem the colporteur branch of 
the service one of the most important— in many respects 
it is the foundation of the work, so far as the 
public is concerned. It should be borne in mind that 
this is not a book-agent business, but a ministry of the 
truth of the true gospel; and the sixty-nine colporteurs 
now engaged in the service are in it, not for 
wealth nor for health, but for their love of the Lord 
and for their desire to lay down their lives on behalf 
of the brethren— to assist in extricating the Lord's 
people from the bondage of error and darkness, and 
to assist them into the marvelous light now shining 
for the people of God who are walking in the narrow 
way, the path of the just. Such being the motives 
of the service it will rightly be seen that the large 
number of books circulated by these dear friends does 
not by any means measure their service for the truth; 
for they deliver very many brief discourses in various 
homes where they fail to arouse sufficient interest 
to dispose of a book— an interest, nevertheless, which 
the days or weeks or years to come may bring to 
fruitage, as it has done to our knowledge in many 
instances. 

The total number of copies of Millennial Dawn 
circulated during the last year is slightly less 
than the number for the previous year, but the decrease 
is in the foreign translations. The English 
edition shows an increase of about 9,000 copies. A 
condensed statement follows:— 

R2921 : page 389 



Dawns Circulated— English 93,214 

" —German 2,464 

" -Swedish 2,373 

" —French 681 

" — Dano-Norwegian 216 

98,948 

Booklets circulated— English 37,155 

Foreign 19,247 

57,402 

Grand total 156,350 

This is a branch of the service in which there is 
always room for more— and the better the colporteur's 
education and general address the better both 
for himself and for the work. This ministry closely 
resembles that which the Lord instituted at the first 
advent, and, as then, it is usual for the friends to go 
in pairs. The message proclaimed is identical— the 
long-prayed-for Kingdom of Heaven at hand. And 
now, as then, authority and power go with these servants 
of the Lord, to assist those to whom they minister, 
who are exercising faith, by opening the blind 
eyes, unstopping the deaf ears, and casting out evil 
spirits. Only now it is the eyes of the understanding 
and the ears of the heart that are opened, and it 
is the spirit of selfishness and sin that is rebuked and 
cast out, in proportion as the spirit of the Lord is 
received. It is but proper that we should expect thus 
to see a higher work performed now than that done 
at the first advent, because this is the harvest of 
spiritual Israel, while that was the harvest of fleshly 
Israel. 

We have no doubt that there are very many more 
of the dear friends of the truth who have consecrated 
their hearts and time and talent and influence to the 
Lord, who are carefully considering the great opportunities 
presented in this colporteur service, and making 
ready their arrangements to take part therein. 
We are glad to hear from such from time to time, 
and will co-operate with them in every way possible 
—for their entrance into and prosecution of this 
work. 

THE "VOLUNTEER" WORK. 

This branch of the service circulated, during the 
past year, about a million of the free tracts, "Food 
for Thinking Christians." This was good, excellent, 
grand— about the same number as the previous year; 
nevertheless, it was disappointing to us, because we 
had expected that the interest in this Volunteer work 
would have increased at least a half; not that the 
former workers could do more than they had already 
done, but that we expected others to gradually become 



more zealous, and thus to increase the effectiveness 

of this service. This has been true in some places, 

where practically the entire congregations engaged; 

but in many places there has apparently been a little 

slackening of the hands, a little cooling of the ardor. 

Let us pray the Lord's blessing upon ourselves and 

upon each other in connection with the glorious opportunities 

of the harvest work and full appreciation 

of the privileges of a share therein; and that the Lord 

will send forth more laborers into his vineyard, to 

their spiritual profit and to the furtherance of his 

cause. 

The Volunteer distribution represented a total of 
over eighteen and a half million pages. Surely all 
who took part in any measure have cause for gratitude 
to God for the privilege enjoyed and improved. 
Although there is no earthly reward connected 
with this service there surely is a spiritual 
reward experienced in the present time, as well as an 
exceeding great and precious one laid up for these 
faithful soldiers of the cross. We are well aware that 
it is not possible for all to engage in this service, and 
we are offering no criticism of those who do not engage. 
We merely desire to encourage those who 
have already had opportunity, and have availed 
themselves of it, and have taken up their cross in 
this service. We are sure that they are stronger 
spiritually for the efforts put forth. 

THE "PILGRIM" SERVICE-ORAL PREACHING. 

We recognize no such divisions in the Church as 
are commonly, in the nominal churches, denominated 

R2921 : page 389 

"clergy" and "laity." We hold that the Scriptures 

teach that the entire Church is a priesthood: "Ye 

are a royal priesthood,. ..that ye should 

show forth the praises of him who hath called you 

out of darkness into this marvelous light." (1 Pet. 2:9.) 

We hold, therefore, that the Colporteurs, who 

take the Dawns and booklets and tracts from house 

to house, and the Volunteers, who make distributions 

of free literature every Sunday, and the brethren 

and sisters who have no such opportunities, but 

who find other ways of serving the Lord, the truth 

and the brethren, either more publicly or more privately, 

are all priests, ministers, preachers, as any 

may be pleased to term the Lord's servants. All 

have the same message to give forth, and all are ordained 

of God— anointed with the holy spirit, for 

this very purpose; as an authority to preach the good 

tidings. It is the privilege of each to serve according 

to his talents and opportunities, and all are acceptable 

to the Lord as ministers of the new covenant 



who faithfully seek to serve, not self, but the 

Lord and the brethren. It is not, therefore, to be 

understood that those who go forth under the auspices 

of our Society, to give their time specially to 

oral preaching (public and private) are any more authorized 

or ordained for the ministry in holy things 

than any others of the same "Royal Priesthood." 

We do not expect these brethren whom we designate 

as "Pilgrims," to be received as any more commissioned 

and authorized than any other of the Lord's 

brethren. You may understand, however, that when 

such come to you, they are so far as we have been 

enabled to know them, sound in the faith, apt to 

teach, possessed of good character, and fully consecrated 

to the service of the Lord, the truth and the 

brethren. Our judgment in this matter is not infallible, 

however, and even if it were, the Scriptural injunction 

is that the Lord's people are to test whatever 

they receive as truth by the sure standard, the divine 

Word, whoever presents it. 

Sixteen* of these Pilgrim brethren have done considerable 
service throughout the year, their routes of 
travel being noted in the Watch Tower since 
June 1 issue. Their service is not for filthy lucre's sake 
—none of them are paid salaries, though all are comfortably 
provided for in every necessity out of the 
Society's funds, and in some instances provision is 



*Five serve week-days in the Tower office, preaching on Sundays. 

R2922 : page 390 

also made for their families. This, in a general way, 
was the method which prevailed at the first advent. 
Had the practice, of serving merely for expenses 
continued, we have every reason to believe that the 
nominal church would not be in its present condition 
—that its public servants would be freer to study 
the truth, and freer also to declare what they would 
learn. 

The amount of Pilgrim service during the past 
year is in excess of that of any previous year, as will 
be seen by the following statement:— 
Number of persons giving more or less of their 
time in this Pilgrim service during the 

year 16 

Number of miles traveled in the service 63,149 

Number of churches visited 634 

Public meetings held 1,141 

Private or parlor meetings held 745 

Cost of this branch of the work $3,255.28 

We notice with pleasure that the number of private 
or parlor meetings held is proportionately more 



than last year, and the number of public meetings 

proportionately less. The public meetings are valuable, 

very favorable to deepening impressions which 

you have already made upon your friends and neighbors, 

by private conversation or through reading 

matter; but the private meetings we esteem to be the 

more valuable for the development of the household 

of faith already fairly clear in doctrinal matters. 

They are valuable as giving opportunities for bringing 

up points and questions which may have arisen 

in connection with their private or class studies. We 

are trusting that, under the Lord's providence, a 

great blessing will be upon this "Pilgrim" branch of 

the service for the coming year. All requests for 

"Pilgrim" service should be renewed now. See second 

page of our last issue. 

CONVENTIONS OF THE YEAR. 

This may be considered a part of the Pilgrim 
service deserving a special report. We held but one 
general convention, at Cleveland, O., a report of 
which has already been laid before you. We are of 
the opinion that these annual conventions furnish 
excellent opportunities for the Lord's people to assemble 
together. Such assemblies were provided 
for during the Jewish dispensation— we remember 
how our Lord and the apostles attended the feasts 
of Passover, etc., at Jerusalem. One special blessing 
which seems to result now, as then, is that representatives 
of the Lord's people in various quarters 
attend and carry home with them some measure of 
the love and zeal with which they become imbued, 
and thus in many directions the flame of sacred love 
is more brightly enkindled. 

One-Day Conventions, addressed by the Editor, 
seem to continue popular with the friends, and, so 
far as we are able to judge, they are stimulating and 
helpful. The main service is always for the public, 
upon some theme calculated to arrest and fix the attention 
of new as well as old hearers. They serve 
also to advertise the meetings of the Church at each 
place, and to draw together the interested. Twenty-four 
of these conventions were held during the year, 
covering over twelve thousand miles— generally in 
places accessible by one night's travel, thus consuming 
as little of the Editor's time as possible from 
other departments of the service. 

GENERAL TRACT DISTRIBUTION. 

Hundreds of thousands of tracts are distributed 
free outside the regular "Volunteer" work noted 
above. Some have opportunities for using tracts 
amongst their friends or neighbors, and some enclose 
them with their correspondence. We are glad 



to co-operate with all in any such service, and from 
time to time hear of some upon whom impressions 
have been made by books or tracts thus circulated. 
In various ways the Lord seems to be reaching all 
who have the hearing ear, and in various ways also 
each, as he receives the truth, seeks to dispense it to 
others, according to his talents and opportunities. 
Each faithful one is blessed. Notice the total number 
of tracts circulated in the various ways, as stated 
in another column. 

THE CORRESPONDENCE DEPARTMENT. 

We esteem this one of the most helpful channels 
of service. Many write us, and upon a large variety 
of subjects— theological and practical; and their letters 
are welcomed and answered to the best of our 
ability. The Editor has three valuable assistants in 
this department of the service; nevertheless, he gives 
his personal attention to all important and doctrinal 
questions. While foolish questions are, of course, 
not desired, nevertheless we esteem that no question 
is trivial which may seem to any of you to have 
a bearing upon the character of your daily lives or 
your future prospects. Therefore be free to write us, 
and to permit us to assist you in any manner possible, 
freely, as unto the Lord. 

Letters and cards received during the year... 40,417 
Letters and cards sent out during the year... 28,601 

CONDENSED STATEMENT. 

Copies of Millennial Dawn circulated at cost. 98,948 
Copies of booklets circulated at cost 56,402 

CIRCULATED AT EXPENSE OF TRACT FUND. 

Copies of Zion's Watch Tower 455,741 

Copies of Old Theology tracts 2,591,500 

These figures, expressed in the usual form 
represent in tract pages 83,675,000 

THE FINANCIAL SIDE-TREASURER'S REPORT. 

TRACT FUND EXPENDITURES. 

Cost of above matter circulated free, including 

freight, gas, help, etc $14,904.56 

Pilgrim expenses, etc 3,255.28 

Lastyear's deficit 3,025.91 

Total $21,185.75 

TRACT FUND RECEIPTS. 

From Good Hopes donations $19,770.09 



From other sources 6,226.70 

Total $25,996.79 

The financial showing, dear brethren, is remarkable, 
when it is remembered that no appeals are made 
for money and no collections taken up by the Pilgrims 
at any of their meetings, and no private 
solicitations made by them, or through the 
columns of the Watch Tower. Every donation, 

R2922: page 391 

we therefore safely say is in the best 

and heartiest possible sense a voluntary one. 

We do not mention these things as though 

the amount were large. It would be considered ridiculously 

small, by other Bible and Tract Societies, 

principally heard from through appeals for money, 

and whose active collecting agents are usually given 

one-half of their collections as salary. The entire 

amount out of which we publish millions of tracts 

and pay the expenses of sixteen travelling preachers, 

etc., etc., would generally not be considered enough 

for the salaries of the principal officers. 

Some may wonder, indeed, that we make mention 
of so small an amount at all, in view of the fact that 
we frequently see in the newspapers mention of single 
collections for religious and missionary work which 
amount to from three to six times the amount of our 
entire year's receipts from the Lord's people in all 
parts of the world. Our reply is that so far as we 
know the large proportion of those interested in present 

R2923 : page 391 

truth are poor in this world's goods, rich only in 

faith toward God and in zeal for his cause. As the 

Lord esteemed the two mites of the widow as "far 

more" than all the gifts of the rich, so we (and we 

believe the Lord also) esteem very highly the contributions 

sent us by the Lord's faithful; and we 

publish these annual statements that the dear friends 

may know how we strive to make every dollar do full 

duty— expending it according to our best judgment 

of what would be the divine will. 

We want to mention incidentally that although 
we do not put money first in any case, nor recommend 
that the money talent is the superior one, nevertheless 
we wish to encourage those who are seeking 
to use their financial talents, by saying that in 
our judgment the Lord will be pleased to bless those 
who serve his cause financially, as well as those who 
serve otherwise— by oral or other preaching. Nevertheless, 
we encourage everyone of the Lord's people 
not to be content with the use of any one talent, 



but to seek to bring into active exercise as many 
talents as he finds himself possessed of. 

May the Lord's blessing rest richly with us during 
the year beginning, giving more and more wisdom, 
that we may do those things pleasing in his sight; 
that we may be useful in his service; not as those 
who merely beat the air, but as those who accomplish 
something to the praise of our Lord and to the 
profit of his people. 

We trust, dear friends, that you continually pray 
for the Editor and his colaborers in this service, that 
the Lord will use more and more your and our united 
efforts for his cause; and that he will bless and refresh 
us all while we do what we can to pour out blessings 
also upon others in his name. 

The following report of the British Branch will 
be of interest. It closes the year with November 1st, 
when Brother Henninges turned over his charge there 
to his successor, Brother Hemery. A comparison 
with the report which appeared in our issue last year 
shows that our dear brother's faithfulness in the service 
there was abundantly blessed by our Lord. True, 
the financial statement shows a deficit of considerable 
amount, but this was fully anticipated and fully 
authorized by us, with a view to putting the work 
there upon a better footing. We congratulate 
Brother Henninges upon his success, and trust that 
in the Lord's providence his return to the Home 
Office will mean a shouldering by him of much of its 
responsibilities and a corresponding relief and greater 
liberty for the President of this Society (the Editor) 
for other departments of the work. 

The items below are included in the foregoing 
general statement. The report follows: 

REPORT OF MANAGER OF BRITISH BRANCH. 

LONDON, November 1, 1901. 
Dear Brother Russell: 

I have the pleasure to hand you the report of the 
Tract Fund receipts and expenditures for the British 
Branch of the Society, November 16, 1900— October 
31, 1901: 

EXPENDITURES. 

L. s d 

Deficit from previous account 425. 1. 4 

Paper and printing 201. 11. 3 

Carriage and other expenses 46. 15. 9 

Pilgrim work 42. 16. 5 

Total 716. 4. 9 

Receipts from Great Britain 178. 19. 10 

Deficit 537. 4. 11 



Report of Literature Circulated. 

Copies of Millennial Dawn 15,740 

Copies of Booklets 2,918 

Total 18,658 

Tracts sent out free 498,675 

Sample Watch Towers free 49,500 

Total copies sent free 548,175 

These represent Tract Pages 14,774,400 

Letters and cards received 3,047 

Letters and cards sent 4,071 

Total 7,118 

In sending this report, we must acknowledge the 
Lord's gracious answers to prayer, and the operation 
of his Spirit in his dear people in this country, as 
shown in the substantial increase over the previous 
year of Dawns and Tracts put into circulation. The 
Lord has also sent more laborers into the harvest, in 
every department, sending forth such as can spend all 
their time and energy in the blessed service of colporteuring 
from house to house, and stirring up the 
zeal of those who cannot have this privilege in full 
measure, but can spend some time in this way. May 
their numbers and efficiency be further increased to 
the glory of God! The field is really white to harvest, 
and the time is short. 

The "Volunteers" also deserve special mention 
for their faithfulness in conditions favorable and unfavorable. 
It will be observed that the number of 
tract pages freely circulated in Great Britain in the 
last twelve months is less than the total in our previous 
report, though the number of copies is more 
than twice as great. This is due to the smaller number 

R2923 : page 392 

of pages in "Food for Thinking Christians," as 

compared with the Volunteer Towers previously distributed. 

This great mass of free literature could not 

have been circulated here, but for the generous cooperation 

of the Allegheny office; and it might be remarked 

that our financial report takes no account of 

the expenses of printing the tracts received from 

America, and sent out from here. These represent 

298,675 of the above mentioned copies of tracts sent 

out free. 

Our successor, Brother Hemery, takes charge of 
the office from this date. We are sure that the 
friends of the truth in the territory served by this 
Branch will find in him a zealous and efficient co-laborer 
in every matter that would advance the interests 



of the work entrusted to him. As the brother 

is quite well known to most of the Tower readers 

in this country, more need not be said by us. We commend 

him to the grace of God, and to the prayers and 

active co-operation of all who love the truth. The 

church at Forest Gate has unanimously requested him 

to take up the pastoral duties vacated by us. 

In retiring from this portion of the field we (speaking 
for Mrs. Henninges as well as myself) return 
thanks to God for the privileges we have had in connection 
with the work. Some "light afflictions" have 
befallen us, but we can give thanks for them also, 
since they have ministered to the increase of our 
joy in the Lord and his service. It has been a great 
pleasure to labor with and for the friends of the truth 
here, whom we have learned to love dearly in the 
Lord; and we desire at this time to assure them 
again of our grateful appreciation of the efforts they 
have put forth to make our sojourn among them 
pleasant and profitable. Though many miles may 
separate us, our intense interest in the welfare of 
the harvest work and workers in this land will not 
slack. May the Lord's favor be even more manifest 
to them in future than in the past! 

With love to you and all the co-laborers, and 
trusting to see you soon, I remain, 
Yours faithfully, in Christ, 

E. C. HENNINGES. 

"KEPT FOR THE MASTER'S USE." 



Keep my life, that it may be 
Consecrated, Lord, to Thee. 

Keep my moments and my days; 
Let them flow in ceaseless praise. 

Keep my hands, that they may move 
At the impulse of Thy love. 

Keep my feet, that they may be 
Swift and "beautiful" for Thee. 

Keep my voice, that I may sing 
Always, only, for my King. 

Keep my lips, that they may be 
Filled with messages from Thee. 

Keep my silver and my gold; 
Not a mite would I withhold. 

Keep my intellect, and use 

Every power as Thou shalt choose. 



Keep my will, oh, keep it Thine! 
For it is no longer mine. 

Keep my heart; it is Thine own; 
It is now Thy royal throne. 

Keep my love; my Lord, I pour 
At Thy feet its treasure-store. 

Keep myself, that I may be 

Ever, only, ALL for Thee.— Frances Havergal. 



R2924 : page 392 

TARRYING UNTIL ENDUED WITH POWER FROM ON HIGH. 

-ACTS 1:1-11~JAN.5.~ 

"While he blessed them he was parted from them, 
and carried up into heaven."— Luke 24:51. 



BIBLE STUDIES of the International series, 
begin the new year with studies in the Book 
of Acts, and after six months will return us 
again to Old Testament studies from Moses to 
Samuel. 

Luke, the physician, who wrote the Gospel of 
Luke, was the author of the Book of Acts. In the 
latter he takes up the narrative substantially where 
he left it in the Gospel— the ascension of Christ. He 
recapitulates, however, to the extent of giving us a 
narrative of the conversation immediately preceding 
our Lord's ascension. The account is evidently addressed 
to a friend, of the then common name, Theophilus, 
who was supposed to have been a person 
of considerable dignity and influence, inasmuch as he 
is elsewhere styled "most excellent," a title which 
implied a considerable social or political rank. Luke 
was not one of the apostles, and his records are not, 
therefore of apostolic authority. Such authority or 
plenary inspiration was not necessary, however, in 
the recording of plain, simple facts such as the Gospel 
of Luke and the Book of Acts present. It requires 
no inspiration to record a fact, though it does 
require some ability, and it is reasonable to assume 
that since the Lord used Luke's abilities in connection 
with the work of recording the facts of that time 
he was guided of the holy spirit in the ascertainment 
of the facts, which his education and natural talents 
eminently qualified him to state succinctly. Luke 
was guided of the holy spirit, in the same sense that 



all of the Lord's consecrated people are guided by 
his spirit, which is to a different degree from that 
plenary inspiration granted to the twelve apostles- 
Paul taking the place of Judas. 

The first verse refers back to the Gospel of Luke, 
as a treatise of the doings and teaching of Jesus from 
the time he began his ministry to its close; and some 
have assumed that the word "began" might reasonably 
be understood to imply that our Lord continued 
his ministry after his ascension, speaking and 
acting, through his apostles, and those believing on 
him through their word. This is true enough 
whether it was what Luke meant or not; for the 
Scriptures invariably teach that the Church of Christ 

R2924 : page 393 

in the flesh is his representative: as the Apostle Paul 
says, we "fill up that which is behind of the afflictions 
of Christ, for his body's sake, which is the Church." 
(Col. 1:24.) And as we have to do with the suffering of 
the anointed one, so we have to do with the witnessing 
or ministry by which the members of the body are 
to be called out from the world, separated, instructed, 
and thus prepared for a share in the glorious 
Kingdom and the great work of judging the world, 
which it will inaugurate. It is in this sense that our 
Lord declared, "Ye shall be my witnesses, both in 
Jerusalem and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto 
the uttermost part of the earth." Primarily, the 
apostles were the witnesses who testified to us respecting 
our Lord's words, his death, his resurrection 
and ascension, and His promises of a return to 
accept his faithful to a share in his kingdom, when 
he shall take unto himself his great power and 
reign. In a secondary sense all who receive the 
apostolic testimony and declare the same to others 
are likewise Christ's representatives and witnesses. 

It was in order that the apostles might fill this 
position of witnesses, and might be enabled to give 
us, and all, a clear testimony on the important subject 
of Christ's death and resurrection and ascension, 
which constitute the foundations for hope, that our 
Lord was present with them after his resurrection, 
and, as Luke declares, demonstrated the fact of his 
resurrection by "infallible proofs"— explaining to 
them meanwhile things pertaining to the coming 
Kingdom, for which he had already taught them 
to hope and to pray, "Thy Kingdom come," and a 
share in the throne which he had already declared 
would be for the faithful. This explanation respecting 
the Kingdom was necessary, because, as Jews, 
they had properly looked for an earthly Kingdom, 
and now needed to be informed that before the earthly 
Kingdom could be established a heavenly Kingdom 
must first be inaugurated; and that they were eligible 



to a place in the heavenly Kingdom, through which, 
in due time, the blessing would come to an earthly 
Kingdom, and ultimately extend to all the families 
of the earth. This information was not due to them 
so long as the old or Jewish dispensation remained— 
up to the time of our Lord's death. It would only 
be "meat in due season" after the Jewish nation, 
through its representatives, the priests and doctors 
of the law, had rejected Christ and crucified him. 
But now that the new dispensation was fully inaugurated, 
it was "meat in due season" to the faithful to 
know that God, having rejected fleshly Israel from 
being his peculiar people, for a time, to gather 
a spiritual Israel, to be the holy nation, the peculiar 
people, the royal priesthood, to show forth his praise, 
and to constitute his chief agents for the blessing 
of the world in due time. This work of calling the 
spiritual Israelites, and of inducting such as would 
heed the call into the new relationship, was the work 
being committed to the apostles— the things pertaining 
to the Kingdom of God, which our Lord unfolded 
to the disciples in such measure as they were able to 
appreciate them— leaving to the future the work of 
guiding them into all truth, into the deep things of 
God, under the ministration of the holy spirit, which 
he had previously promised would show them things 
to come.— John 16:13. 

Our Lord wished the apostles to distinctly understand 
that they were not then in the condition to 
undertake the new work, and that the proper time for 
action had not yet come— that they would not be prepared 
until they should receive the holy spirit, a 
power and unction from the Father, which would 
specially qualify, enable and guide them in the important 
service of their commission. Moreover, it 
would be to them, and to all believers through them, 
a divine evidence or attestation; first, respecting our 
Lord's work, that it was approved of the Father, and 
constituted a basis of reconciliation by which sinners 
might return to harmony with their Creator; and evidence, 
further, to those consecrating themselves to 
the divine service, and receiving the holy spirit, that 
they were accepted of the Father in the Beloved, and 
owned as children and heirs of his promises, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ their Lord, if so be that they 
would suffer with him that they might also be glorified 
together, in the Kingdom, when the due time 
should come.— Rom. 8:16-17. 

It was appropriate at this time, and in view of the 
Lord's instructions respecting the Kingdom and the 
preparatory work for it, which the apostles were 
commissioned to do, that they should wonder and 
inquire respecting the time of its establishment; and 
not knowing that he was about to leave them, they 
inquired respecting the ancient promises of Israel's 
restoration, whether or not these were now due to be 



fulfilled— whether or not Israel was to be released 
from the domination of the Romans, and to become 
the great nation of the world, and to be used of God 
in the blessing of other nations. 

It is worthy of careful note that our Lord did not 
rebuke the apostles, nor tell them that the thoughts 
represented in their question were foolish, and would 
never have a realization. On the contrary, his 
answer clearly implies that their expectations at least 
approximated the truth; but that as respected the 
time of their fulfillment He was not at liberty to gratify 
their curiosity. The things they referred to, which 
God had promised, would be fulfilled in due course, 
but the times and the seasons were not for them to 
know, the Father retaining them in his own power, 
not being pleased as yet to reveal this feature of his 
plan. Our Lord, however, clearly indicates that before 
the restoration of Israel to divine favor must 
come in the mission of his apostles, to which he was 
now appointing them. He would not inform them 
whether their mission would be quickly accomplished 
or not, but as a matter of fact, we see that it has already 
extended over more than eighteen centuries. 
The restoration of Israel to divine favor cannot take 
place until Christ, and his apostles, and all his faithful, 
shall first have accomplished the work of witnessing 
to the world, and of selecting the full complete 
number of the "elect"— spiritual Israel. This 
is the work of chief concern: the times and seasons 
for the fulfillment of God's promises to Israel after 
the flesh, and to the world, are to be left in God's 
power, with the assurance that when the due time 
shall come the brethren shall not be in darkness on 
this subject, but be guided by the holy spirit into this 
and all other truths, as they become meat in due season 

R2925 : page 394 

for the household of faith. 

The witnessing properly began at Jerusalem, the 
center of Judaism, which God himself had chosen, 
as represented in the Temple. It properly began 
with those who had knowledge of Jesus and his 
crucifixion,— amongst whom were the most devout 
Jews from all quarters of the earth. It was appropriate 
that the truth respecting our Lord's resurrection 
and ascension and glorification with the Father, 
and respecting the gathering of spiritual Israel, and 
our Lord's second coming to receive them and to 
exalt them with himself in the Messianic Kingdom, 
should be declared to those who had been witnesses 
and instigators of his ignominious death. 

This, like the other features of the Gospel, is totally 
unlike anything else known in history. Never 
before, either in fact or in conjecture, did people ascribe 
divine honors to one who had been put to death 



as a criminal. Worldly sentiments would be to the 

R2925 : page 394 

contrary of this, as being unwise, and wholly unlikely 
to appeal to the sentiments of the people. And 
further, worldly wisdom, even if it had adopted as a 
leader one who had been publicly executed as a criminal, 
would never have thought of beginning the testimony 
close to the scenes of the ignominy, but would 
have gone afar off to proclaim that an innocent one 
had been betrayed and unjustly sacrificed. God so 
arranged the matter that the truth should stand forth 
for acceptance or rejection by the Jews in the most 
unfavorable light, so that only those who were Israelites 
indeed, and ready to sacrifice every earthly 
advantage as Jews, and to make themselves of no 
reputation, and thus take up their cross and follow 
the Lamb,— these alone would be appealed to, or incline 
to follow the cause of Jesus— defamed as a 
Nazarene and as a malefactor, and as specially cursed, 
as it is written, "Cursed is everyone that hangeth 
upon a tree." Thus would the Lord hedge his cause 
about, and keep out of it, through unpopularity, as 
well as by subsequent persecutions, all who were not 
Israelites indeed:— thus the Church was kept, not 
only free from doctrinal errors, but also comparatively 
free from tares, until the apostles fell asleep, 
and the enemy came in and sowed tares amongst 
the wheat. -Matt. 13:25. 

The witnessing has progressed, until at the present 
time at least a cursory knowledge of the facts 
upon which the Lord's message is based obtains 
throughout the habitable world. This fact of itself, 
if there were no other evidences, would seem to imply 
that the witnessing time had about expired, and hence 
that the object of the Gospel age had about been 
accomplished in the selection of the full elect number 
of the faithful witnesses, and that their work of blessing 
the world would soon be due. The expression, 
"Unto the uttermost parts of the earth," is not to be 
understood as implying every quarter of the globe, 
but rather a term of that day corresponding in meaning 
to our present expression, "everywhere." 

Apparently much misapprehension prevails to-day 
respecting the character of the testimony or witnessing 
to be done. Many of those who preach and of 
those who hear have lost sight of the real message, 
the real witnessing, and especially rejoice in and promulgate 
other gospels— evolution, science, philosophy, 
human uplift, political regeneration, churchianity, 
socialism, etc. They may think that they are witnessing 
in harmony with the Lord's direction, but we cannot 
assent to this. The Lord's disciples were to bear 
witness to him, and not to themselves nor to human 
institutions; they were to bear witness to his testimony 



respecting the Kingdom, and not to bear witness 
to various human theories, snares and sophistries. 
It is well that all who are inquiring for the "old 
paths," in which the apostles followed the Lamb, 
should note this point, and should see to it that their 
daily witnessing, in word and in deed, testified of 
Jesus; of the fact that he is a living Savior, whose 
power, through his word and spirit, works in his followers 
to will and to do his good pleasure, and to 
show forth the praises of him who has called them 
out of darkness into his marvelous light; out of the 
kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of his dear 
Son, which Kingdom they are to hope for and to wait 
and prepare for, to the intent that they may be meet 
for this, "the inheritance of the saints in light." 

The instruction that they should tarry, and not 
begin this work of witnessing until endued with 
power from on high in a few days, implied their unfitness 
for the work as natural men; and we see abundant 
evidence of this in many respects. The narrative 
is that they were men of humble birth and limited 
education— "unlearned men"— and this was apparent 
in some respects, even after they received the holy 
spirit, for their friends, as well as their enemies, bore 
witness to it, while acknowledging also their ability 
under the new conditions. The Apostle Paul, who 
took the place of Judas, as one of the twelve, being 
a talented and learned man, did not, we may suppose, 
show forth the peculiar powers of the holy spirit so 
remarkably as the other eleven, who were unlearned. 
He had the holy spirit in equal measure, or, indeed, 
we may say, that because of his natural abilities and 
talents he was enabled to enjoy and use in the service 
a still larger measure of the holy spirit than the 
others; but this power of God, working in him, would 
not be so manifest to the observer as in the case of the 
unlearned, because the divine wisdom and power 
would to some extent be accredited to his natural 
ability and talents. Herein, then, we see another 
manifestation of the divine wisdom in so selecting the 
twelve foundation stones of the New Jerusalem (Rev. 21:14), 
as to demonstrate to all that the truth, as presented, 
was not of their concoction and elaboration. 
And yet it was needful to have amongst the apostles 
a man of learning, qualified to be an able minister of 
the truth, and to present it under the direction and 
guidance of the holy spirit in such a manner as to be 
a further testimony that the truths declared were of 
divine origin, and worthy of all acceptation. 

While claiming that the twelve apostles were 
unique, separate, distinct, in the divine plan, from all 
the other members of the Church, we believe, nevertheless, 
that the divine plan of operation in respect to the 
general work is outlined in this, our Lord's declaration, 
"Tarry— until ye be endued with power from on 
high"— before participating in any sense of the word 



in public witnessing. Our thought is, that while all 
men may properly be called to repentance, reformation 
of life, temperance and every good work, and 

R2925 : page 395 

may be called to faith in Christ, as the Great Redeemer, 
nevertheless, none are called to be God's witnesses, 
mouth-pieces, representatives, ambassadors, etc., except 
those who have gone still further, and recognizing 
themselves as bought with a price, even the precious 
blood of Christ, have made full consecration of 
their every power and talent to the Lord and to his 
service. These consecrated ones should then wait 
until they experience something of the divine power 
working in themselves to will, and, as far as possible, 
to do the Lord's good pleasure, before beginning to 
bear witness to others. 

And the Lord's sheep should be careful to select 
as leaders, etc., only such as give evidence of having 
come under the influence of the holy anointing of the 
spirit of God. And this, no matter how much of natural 
ability the would-be leader may possess; indeed, 
the more his natural ability the more danger from 
his leading. Only those anointed of the spirit are to 
be recognized amongst the Lord's people as in any 
sense of the word representatives and mouth-pieces 
of the head. As it was the spirit of the Lord God 
upon our Lord Jesus that anointed or qualified him 
to preach the Gospel, so it must be the same anointing 
received of him that will qualify any for this service 
of preaching or witnessing, in a manner that will be 
acceptable to the Lord and profitable to his flock. 
(Isa. 61:1.) All who are not in the attitude of full 
consecration to the Lord, full submission to the divine 
will, are in opposition, to some extent; and to 
the extent that they are in opposition they are wrong, 
or wicked. "And unto the wicked God saith, What 
hast thou to do, to take my words into thy mouth, 
seeing that thou hatest instruction (refusing to submit 
themselves to the Lord's arrangement) and castest my 
words behind thee [neglectfully]?"— Psa. 50:17. 

The narrative is brief, and we cannot even conjecture 
how amply the Lord discussed these matters 
with the disciples, but when he had explained them 
amply— or at least to the extent that they (the holy 
spirit not yet having come upon them) were able then 
to receive instruction— he was taken from them up 
into a cloud, gradually receding until lost to their 
sight. 

This matter of our Lord's ascension was evidently 
arranged, as were all the other features of his 
manifestations to the disciples after his resurrection, 
with a view to the establishment of their faith as natural 
men; and with the view to the establishment of 
the faith of all other natural men who might be seeking 



a basis of faith in this witnessing. As we have already 
seen, our Lord at this time was quickened in 
spirit, and not in the flesh. (1 Pet. 3:18.) Yet he was 
appearing in the flesh, even as angels have ofttimes 
in the past appeared as men. These appearances in 
different bodies were not deceptions, but demonstrations 
of a fact— the fact that he was no longer dead, 
but alive. They were demonstrations in the best 
manner possible, because as natural men they could 
not see a spirit being without injury to their sight, 
and without a corresponding trepidation, which would 
have quite disqualified them for cool reflection and 
for instruction such as our Lord wished to impart. 

The two men in white apparel who suddenly appeared 
in their midst were unquestionably angels, 
manifested in human form. It was no more a deception 
of the disciples for the angels to appear as men 
than it was when the Lord appeared as a 
man. Again the object desired was better 
served by this manner of appearing, than if 
they had been miraculously enabled to see 
two shining beings, bright above the brightness of 
the sun at noonday, upon whom they could not have 
looked, and before whom they would have fallen, as 
dead men. But beholding them as men, yet knowing 
from their glistening garments, etc., that they were 
really spirit beings manifested in the flesh, the disciples 
were able to control their feelings, so as to receive 
their message,— "Ye men of Galilee, why stand 
ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which 
was received up from you into heaven shall so come 
in like manner as ye beheld him going into heaven." 

This was a suitable conclusion to the wonderful 
series of events of those forty days. It furnished a 
miraculous heavenly attestation that their senses had 

R2926 : page 395 

not been deceived— that their Master, "changed," had 
really been with them, appearing in various forms during 
these forty days, and that he had now gone from 
them. It consoled them, too, in reminding them that 
he had not left them forever, but had already promised 
them that he would come again and receive them 
unto himself. This evidently was the hope of their 
hearts through coming dreary days and dark hours 
of tribulation, persecution, defamation and suffering. 
They not only endured, as seeing him who is invisible, 
but as servants who hope for and wait for the 
return of their Lord, and the nuptial feast and Kingdom 
blessings then to be instituted. 

We find this longing for and hoping for and waiting 
for the coming King in the writings of all the 
apostles. It is John who exclaims, "Come, Lord 
Jesus!" It is James who says, "Be patient, brethren, 
unto the coming of the Lord." It is Peter who encourages 



the brethren, by pointing out that shortly, 

when the Chief Shepherd will appear, they shall receive 

a crown of glory, which fadeth not away. It is 

Jude, who speaks of the Lord's coming, with myriads 

of his holy ones. It is Paul who urges faithfulness, 

and assures the brethren that not only himself, but 

all who love his appearing, shall then receive a 

crown of righteousness.— Rev. 22:20; Jas. 5:7; 1 Pet. 5:4; 

Jude 14; 2 Tim. 4:8. 

And if this hope so encouraged, strengthened 
and upheld the early Christian Church, should its 
influence be less today, upon us who remember that 
"now is our salvation nearer than when we first believed?" 
Nay, verily! Indeed, when the light of 
present truth, shining on the pathway, shows us that 
he who was to come has come, and has not tarried— 
that the promises of God through the prophets, written 
aforetime for our admonition, are fulfilled; that 
we are living in the harvest-time of this age; that the 
Chief Reaper is present; that the gathering of the 
"wheat" into the barn, and the bundling of the 
"tares," for the coming fiery troubles, is in progress; 
and when, the eyes of our understanding being 
opened, we see these things in evidence about us, 
what manner of persons ought we to be in holy joy 
and faithfulness, and courage, and zeal;— to be, to do, 
to endure, whatsoever things our present Lord and 

R2926 : page 396 

Master, in his infinite wisdom and love, may mark 
out for us! As he declared, "The cup which the 
Father hath given me to drink, shall I not drink it?" 
So may we, with implicit confidence, say that whatever 
cup of experience our present Lord and Head 
may pour for us, his disciples, we will cheerfully partake 
thereof, and thus fill up the afflictions which are 
behind; and shortly, with all the faithful, enter into 
the glories of the Millennial Kingdom, which God 
hath in reservation for them that love him. 

We have already commented upon the expression, 
"In like manner as ye have seen 
him go,"* pointing out that the manner was 
not a noisy one— not with either worldly or 
celestial commotion;— that the world was in ignorance 
of our Lord's going, so that only his faithful 
few recognized the fact, and that in like manner 
he will come again, unknown to the world, without 
commotion;— that his presence will be known only to 
the faithful ones, whose eyes of understanding are 
being opened;— until, having gathered his elect, his 
presence will be manifested to the world gradually in 
the symbolical flaming fire of the great time of trouble 
—in the overthrow of present institutions, preparatory 
to the establishment of the Kingdom of 
light and love. 



The disciples apparently abode together in Jerusalem, 
where they were all comparative strangers, 
their home being in Galilee. Our Lord's mother, and 
others of the faithful sisters, were of the company, 
who, in harmony with the Lord's promise, waited at 
Jerusalem for power from on high. Doubtless those 
days of waiting were not only essential to the going 
of our Lord into the Father's presence and the presentation 
before him of the merits of the ransom 
sacrifice, and the application of these for the benefit 
of mankind, but the time was necessary also for the 
development of the apostles— in faith and trust, 
through the influence of the promises the Lord had 
left them. It required some time for them to consider 
and to reason over the wonderful things they 
had heard from the Master's lips, and thus to get 
their hearts into the condition where they would be 
best prepared for the blessings they were expecting. 

Hope is a valuable factor in Christian development 
still, although the object of the hope may vary 
from time to time. For instance, we are no longer 
hoping for the Pentecostal blessing, believing that 
it came at the time appointed, and that it has been 
with the Church, as a Church, ever since; and that 
we, in becoming united to the Lord, come under this 
blessed influence of the holy spirit. But while that 
hope has reached fruition other hopes have taken its 
place in our case. We are waiting also; not waiting, 
as the groaning creation is waiting, "for the manifestation 
of the sons of God," either; but we are waiting 
for our adoption, to wit, the deliverance of our 
body— the body of Christ, which we trust will shortly 
be completed, and ourselves be amongst those who 
will be "changed" to be of it. (Rom. 8:23.) What an 
anchor to our souls is this hope! How it makes all 
other interests and affairs of life comparatively insignificant! 
Wealth and fame, and all the things 
which the human heart can desire and appreciate, 
grand and good as some of them are, pale before this 
grand epiphania (bright-shining) in which we, as 
members of the body of Christ, hope soon to share. 



*Millennial Dawn, Vol. II., P. 153. 

R2926 : page 396 

SPEAKING WITH OTHER TONGUES. 

-ACTS 2: 1-11. -J AN. 12.- 
"The promise is unto you and to your children."— Acts 2:39. 



WAITING FOR the power from on high, the 

eleven apostles (and with them apparently 

a considerable number of believers— possibly 

120— (Acts 1:15) were rewarded with the blessing 

of Pentecost. They were "with one accord in one 

place;" they may have been expecting the blessing 

during the preceding nine days of their assembling, 

but Pentecost being a specially holy day it may have 

appeared to them as probable that it would bring the 

consummation of their hopes, and with one accord 

or agreement the full number were all present at the 

time. There is a thought here respecting the propriety 

of the Lord's people being at one, or in accord, 

in respect to the things they are seeking for 

and waiting for. It is to this end that the Lord has 

exhorted us, through the Apostle, that we forget not 

the assembling of ourselves together, and so much 

the more as we see the day drawing near— not the 

day of Pentecost, but a still greater and still grander 

day: Pentecost brought merely the first fruits of the 

spirit, while the day we wait for is the day of the consummation 

of all our hopes and of all God's promises 

in respect to the Church, as the Bride and joint-heir 

of his Son. 

We cannot all come together in the literal sense, 
as did the apostles and the early Church on Pentecost, 
but we can come together into one place in another 
sense; we can come into the holy place, into 
the sanctuary or consecrated condition of heart and 
of life, and thus into oneness and fellowship with the 
Lord, and with all who are in the same holy condition, 
and partakers of the same blessing of the inner 
light of the golden candlestick, and the inner food of 
the table of shew-bread, and the inner communion 
with the Lord, represented in the golden altar and its 
incense. Our natural dispositions are various and 
their crooks and twists different; but our new natures 
are one, begotten of the same Father, through 
the same spirit. We are to seek accord as new 
creatures, and are to restrain, mortify and cast out 
the weaknesses of the flesh and the contentiousness 
of disposition which may be ours, accordingly— that 
as new creatures we may be one with the Lord and 
with all who are his body or Church, under the one 
Head or Lord, infused or energized by one spirit of 
obedience to the one Father, and under the control 
of the one law of Love. 

It is not said that the holy spirit was imparted in 
connection with a rushing wind, but merely that there 
was "a sound as of a rushing wind." Neither is it 
said that flames or tongues of fire rested upon them, 
but that tongues or flames having the appearance of 

R2926 : page 397 



fire, as in the case of the burning bush, rested upon 
them. The holy spirit is an invisible power, and its 
impartation need not of necessity have any outward 
demonstration. But God's purpose was the contrary 
of this. He desired to accompany the holy spirit with 
certain manifestations which would be convincing to 
the apostles themselves as respected their acceptance 
with him, and their identification as his ministers, 
ambassadors of the new dispensation; he wished also 
to make manifest the nucleus of the Gospel Church to 
others, to devout Jews then in Jerusalem, attending 
this feast; and we think it quite probable that it was 
God's intention also by these gifts to manifest who 
were the apostles and to indicate their special office 
in the Church. 

It is not stated specifically upon whom the tongues 
rested; "upon each of them" might mean upon each 
of the eleven apostles, or it might mean upon each 
of the one hundred and twenty present. Whoever the 
tongues sat upon were filled with the holy spirit, and 

R2927 : page 397 

they began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit 

gave them utterance; and this preaching with other 

tongues seems to have been done only by the eleven 

apostles, for the multitude, hearing them, exclaimed, 

"Are not all these which speak Galileans?" As for 

the eleven apostles, they were all Galileans, but as for 

the remainder of the one hundred and twenty, it is 

probable that the majority of them were Judeans, residents 

of Jerusalem. We incline, therefore, to suppose 

that while the whole room in which they were 

present was filled with the holy spirit, and the entire 

company present made partakers of the holy spirit, 

and immersed into it, and blessed thereby, yet, nevertheless, 

these outward manifestations of tongues and 

speaking miraculously were at first only given to the 

eleven, for the purpose of designating them as God's 

chosen instruments in connection with the new dispensation. 

We know that it was so subsequently; so 

that whoever received gifts of the holy spirit received 

them through the laying on of the hands of the 

apostles. 

From the construction of the Greek text it is 
evident that these were not split tongues, on the heads 
of the favored ones, but rather that they were tongues 
of flame cloven or split off from a central or luminous 
body, tongues which emanated from one common 
center, and went to the heads of those for whom intended. 
It was not fire, however, but light. The 
tongues represented nothing akin to destruction, 
which fire would symbolize. They represented, on 
the contrary, enlightenment, knowledge, intelligence, 
and implied that a holy intelligence or light from the 



Lord had come upon the recipients, marking them as 
the Lord's mouthpieces; indicating that from henceforth 
their tongues should show forth his praise, to 
the blessing and enlightenment of the world. And so 
indeed it has been; those poor fishermen, illiterate, 
unlearned as respects earthly education, under the 
power of the Lord's spirit became mighty indeed in 
the pulling down of strongholds of error, and the 
scattering of darkness by the illumination of the 
minds of those prepared for the word of God's grace. 

Some have made the mistake of supposing that 
these tongues of flame were fulfillments of the prediction 
of John the Baptist, who said of Christ, "He 
shall baptize you with the holy spirit and with fire." 
(Luke 3: 16.) This was the fulfillment of only the first 
part; it was merely the baptism of the holy spirit; 
it was not the baptism of fire;— the baptism 
of fire and destruction was for a totally different class. 
The faithful of the Jews were to receive the baptism of 
the holy spirit, and the unfaithful majority of them 
were to receive the baptism of fiery trouble, and they 
did receive it a little further along. After the holy 
spirit, coming upon the infant Church at Pentecost, 
had searched, sifted and winnowed out of the Jewish 
dispensation all of the true "wheat," gathering it into 
the garner of the Gospel (spirit) dispensation, then 
the fire came upon the "chaff." (Luke 3:17.) The 
Apostle speaks of this, calling it wrath, saying "Wrath 
is come upon them to the uttermost."— 1 Thess. 2:16. 

The tongues of light which came upon the faithful 
at Pentecost did not continue with them,— even as 
the dove, which was seen descending upon Jesus, did 
not continue to be seen. Both the dove and the flame 
of light were merely outward representations, not to 
deceive, but for the purpose of teaching a great lesson, 
for the purpose of convincing that the promised 
blessing and power had come. The Lord's people 
who since come under the influence of the holy spirit 
have neither signs of flames nor doves, nor sounds 
of rushing wind; nor do they speak miraculously. 
They, nevertheless, come into and are made partakers 
of the holy spirit, which no longer uses these 
outward manifestations because they are no longer 
necessary; the Church having been established, and 
the fact of the holy spirit's impartation having been 
demonstrated, we now are to accept the same by 
faith, and to permit it to dwell in us richly, and to 
cultivate in our hearts and lives the fruits of the 
spirit, instead of expecting them or other things as 
miraculous gifts. 

The tongues of light are a forceful illustration of 
the fact that God purposed to use human tongues as 
his agencies in promulgating his message and calling 
out his elect from the world. An energy of soul evidently 
went with the outward demonstration, giving 
a courage to the apostles of which previously, as 



humble and unlearned men, they were naturally deficient. 
Note, for instance, how it led Peter, who, 
fifty-three days before had denied the Lord, saying, 
"I know not the man," for fear of the Jews, to now 
courageously stand up in the midst of those very 
Jews, and to proclaim him as his Master, as the Son 
of God risen from the dead and ascended up on 
high; as the great Mediator and High Priest of the 
new order. It gave him the courage to charge home 
to the hearts of his hearers their responsibility for 
the crime. So also the other disciples, who previously 
had fled from their arrested Master, were 
now courageous to tell forth his praise. Not only 
had they become convinced, by the proofs received, 
respecting his resurrection and his ascension, but 
now these proofs were added to by the fulfillment of 
his promises, evidencing the fact that he had ascended 
to the Father, and that he had been favorably 
received, and that these gifts of the spirit were 
evidences of the return of divine favor toward them, 
—of their acceptance in the Beloved One, and of 
their right and authority to go forth in his name and 

R2927 : page 398 

to declare remission of sins to all the penitent who 
would come unto the Father through him. 

At this particular season of the year the city of 
Jerusalem was crowded with visitors from various 
parts of the world. We are to remember that millions 
of the ten-tribed kingdom, called Israel, were 
taken captive, and later millions more of the two-tribe 
kingdom, called Judah, was also taken captive, 
to Babylon; and that these millions were scattered 
as immigrants in the various districts of Assyria and 
Babylonia, where they settled down, making these 
strange lands their home, so that when the opportunity 
for returning from captivity came in 
the days of Cyrus, and by his edict, only a 
very small proportion of the two tribes, and 
a still smaller proportion of the ten-tribes, 
returned to Palestine— the great majority 
preferring to remain in the countries where 
they at one time had been captives, but where, during 
their long exile, they had become at home and 
formed attachments. From that time on all distinction 
as between Israel and Judah was at an end; 
and all were recognized as at first, as Israelites, and 
all came under the general name of Jews. Thus it 
was that our Lord and the apostles addressed the 
people as Israelites and Jews, using the terms interchangeably, 
and that they spoke of the dispersed 
ones indiscriminately, as Jews and as Israelites also. 

It was at seasons like the Passover and Pentecost 
that numbers of devout Jews, not only from all parts 
of Judea and Galilee, went to Jerusalem, but also the 



"dispersed" Jews of devout spirit from the surrounding 

countries came thither, to worship the Lord and 

to obey the command requiring all his faithful to assemble 

themselves before him at Jerusalem. Thus it 

was that at the time of these visits the city would 

sometimes have a crowded population of from two to 

three millions of people, chiefly adults. The city was 

crowded at the time of this Pentecostal blessing, and 

a great concourse of people was drawn together by 

the miraculous manifestation of divine power 

amongst the disciples. Some of these, hearing the 

apostles speaking in various languages which they 

could not understand, passed on, declaring that they 

had no interest in the matter, and that probably the 

speakers were intoxicated, and did not know what 

they were saying themselves; but others recognized 

their own tongues and dialects, some apostles speaking 

in one tongue, some in another; and when they 

perceived that all of the speakers were Galileans they 

were astounded, especially in view of the fact that 

they were unlearned men. The miracle helped to 

impress the situation upon their minds, and we may 

be sure that the words spoken were also powerful. 

We cannot suppose that the Lord would make a 

special manifestation of power without an equal manifestation 

of wisdom. Indeed, wherever we find people 

claiming various gifts and powers, and find these 

to be accompanied by nothing that is reasonable and 

logical and comprehensible, we are justified in doubting 

that the matter is of the Lord at all. It is reasonable 

to suppose that when the holy spirit gives utterance 

it will utter that which is good and reasonable 

and sound of logic, and not folly. And so we read 

that the hearers said, "We do hear them speak in our 

tongues the mighty works of God." 

The words of their discourse are not given us in 
detail here, but we can readily discern that the mighty 
works of God which filled their own hearts and minds 
were those wonderful things which they had just been 
learning from the Lord, viz., that God's time had 
come for conferring the blessing long before promised 
through Abraham;— that Jesus was the Messiah, 
whom the Father had sent, and whose death was 
necessary in order to the carrying out of the plan, as 
our Lord had declared to them, "Ought not Christ to 
have suffered these things, and to enter into his 
glory?" (Luke 24:26.) It was theirs further to declare 
another wonderful work of God,— that in addition 
to Messiah, the Head, God was about to gather 
out of the people a little flock to be joint heirs with 

R2928 : page 398 

Messiah, in the Kingdom, preparatory to its establishment 

for the blessing of the world. We may be 

sure that it was the true Gospel that they preached, 



and not the terrible mixture of confusion about hell 
torments, which since "the dark ages" has falsely 
claimed the right to be called the Gospel of Christ. 
They preached the Gospel of salvation, and not a 
message of damnation; and their message was in the 
power and demonstration of the spirit. 

The miraculous gift of tongues is no longer with 
us, yet the same spirit, received by us, dwelling in us 
richly and abounding more and more, gives us utterance, 
also, in respect to the wonderful works of 
God. This is still true of all the Royal Priesthood, 
the consecrated. As the Apostle expressed it in his 
day, "Whether it be right in the sight of God to 
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye (for 
yourselves); for we cannot but speak the things 
which we have seen and heard." (Acts 4:19,20.) 
The enlightenment of our understanding has shown 
us Jesus as the Redeemer of the world, and our share 
in his redemptive work; and also our acceptance 
with the Father, through him, to be his joint-heirs in 
the Kingdom, and to be fellow-servants with him in 
the present time, in bearing the reproaches of the 
true Gospel in this time, when the great Adversary 
is deceiving the world in respect to these matters, 
putting light for darkness and darkness for light. 

More and more we, too, speak with other tongues. 
Those whose tongues had blasphemed the holy name 
now give thanks and praise; those who had 
ignorantly misrepresented the divine character 
and plan now vie with each other in showing 
forth the praises of him who has called 
us out of darkness into his marvelous light. 
The influence of the holy spirit transforms 
our sentiments and expressions respecting the 
brethren also, and respecting the world, so that instead 
of hatred and anger and malice we have love 
and gentleness and patience; and instead of our 
tongues showing forth envy and bitterness and pride, 
worldly ambition, etc., they show forth the new mind 
in gentleness and wisdom, in helpfulness and love— 
toward all men, and especially toward the household 
of faith. These, our new tongues, and the new living 
epistles which they represent to our families, our 
neighbors and the world, are beautifully expressed by 
the Prophet to be our "song"— our praise, our acknowledgement 
to God for his grace and truth; as it 
is written, "He hath put a new song into my mouth, 
even the loving kindness of our God." 



R2928 : page 399 

INTERESTING LETTERS. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

Many, many times have I been going to write to you, 
both last year and this year, but did not like to trouble 
you with any of our depressing affairs. I did once mention 
something to you of our troubles, but always hoped 
that we would have good news to tell you, and thus delayed 
writing till now. 

But although we cannot rejoice in worldly prosperity, 
we do rejoice in Christ Jesus and in the fact that he died 
for our sins according to the Scriptures and that through 
Christ we are strengthened and enabled to rejoice in all 
that passes over us, knowing that all things work together 
for good to them that love God, to them who are called 
according to His purpose, and may we be amongst that 
number. 

Being made perfect through suffering is a wonderful 
providence of the Lord. I saw very clearly and quickly 
God's "plan of the ages," and rejoiced in it and at once 
came out from human organizations, and rejoiced to be 
counted worthy to suffer anything in connection therewith, 
but to go through these last two years were altogether 
unlooked for, and from our view point would seem 
in no way satisfactory either toward God or man, and although 
our way has thus been hedged in, and our whole 
course changed, and that not by our own doing or choosing 
but rather the opposite, nevertheless I see that unless 
there were a need for it, in some way, it would not have 
been permitted. I now see it is no light matter to essay 
to take up the Ark of God, or to put one's hand thereto. 
That those who will ascend into the hill of God must have 
clean hands and a pure heart. That one must be very 
sensible of God's preserving care and fully realize the 
meaning of the Lord's prayer, "Lead us not into temptation, 
but deliver us from evil, or the Evil One." That 
those who are actively engaged in the Lord's harvest work 
need great encouragement and strengthening of their 
hands in God. When thinking on these things I determined 
that I would no longer refrain from writing you, 
for fear that my long silence might cause you anxiety of 
mind, rather than peace of mind, as I intended. And now, 
dear brother, I desire to express to you my great appreciation 
of all the helps and blessings which the Lord has 
sent us through your hands. Every Tower would seem 
to be more blessed than another. That article in last 
Tower, "Finally, be all of one mind," showing forth the 
proper use of combativeness on one's self was simply grand. 
I thanked and praised God after reading it. Pray for us 
that we may receive "mercy of the Lord," and be led 
in such a way as that we will be to God's glory in being 
made useful in His great cause, and dwell in His house 
forever. May the Lord preserve you from all evil and 
keep you as the apple of His eye and that you may be 
more than Conqueror for His own name's sake. 

With our united Christian love to yourself, your 
household, and all your fellow helpers in the great harvest 



field, I am your brother in hope, 

C. H. HOUSTON, Scotland. 



Dear Brother Russell:— 

In a recent Tower you say, "Thenceforth it is the 
business of the 'new creature' in Christ to use up in the 
divine service, as wisely, economically, and yet rapidly as 
possible, all the earthly things" etc. This puzzled me on 
the first and second readings, for I thought, Why, our 
Lord ate and slept, and rested sometimes, and so does 
Brother Russell. I could use up the 'old creature' much 
more rapidly than I am doing, but I surely ought not to do 
anything suicidal. A third reading brought it straight for 
me,— such haste would not be for the best interests of the 
Lord's work,— even my little portion. It would not be 
sacrificing "wisely, economically." Then the text came to 
mind, "The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord." 
I must go neither too slow nor must I outrun my Guide. 
Not being yet made ready, the Lord hath in mind even for 
me, certain experiences and provings necessary for development 
in Christ-likeness, and I want them every one. 
Also, my blind aunt greatly needs me as yet, and I ought 
not to hasten too fast but keep my nerves and temper in 
condition to serve her acceptably. So I pray the Lord, 
"Order my steps in Thy Word!" And I believe He will. 
ALICE L. DARLINGTON. 
Pennsylvania. 

page 399 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

Although I have been interested in the Harvest Truth 
for nearly two years, I have never expressed my gratitude 
to you, the channel through whom this great blessing 
has reached me. 

I was first attracted to this message by my sister, Mrs. 
Lee,— whom we believe now to be with our Lord; and 
since her death, I too, have given up all I have or hope 
for, respecting earthly things for joint-heirship in God's 
kingdom. 

I do thank you for the helpful words and sound doctrines 
found in the columns of your journal. My prayer 
is for you to obtain grace, wisdom and strength to feed 
us unto the end of the church's journey through the wilderness 
of sin. 

I have much faith in the prayer of a righteous man, 
therefore ask you to remember me at the throne of grace, 
that our Father may guide my every step and help me to 
be faithful unto death. 

Enclosed please find my "Good Hopes" offering for 
this month. With Christian love, I remain, 
Gratefully yours, 
K. M. DAY,-California. 



R2928 : page 399 

Dear Brother Russell:— 

I want to write and tell you how I am rejoicing in the 
truth to-day: the blessed truth as it is in Jesus. Words 
cannot tell of the peace that fills my heart, since I have 
come to understand the full meaning of the glad tidings, 
of which the angels sang at our Lord's first advent. 

At twenty-one years of age, I was converted, and joined 
the M.E. Church; but I was always so troubled about 
the eternal torment of those who did not seek and serve 
the Lord, many of whom I knew to be really better in life 
than the majority of church members. For years I struggled 
to believe it just and right, against my own heart's 
protest, because orthodoxy said so, and finally I had to 
put it out of my mind, or lose my faith in the love and 
mercy of God. About three years ago, I went to visit 
friends in the country, and while there a booklet entitled 
"The Old Theology" was given me, which set me to thinking 
and proving its truth by God's Word. 

The light began to dawn on my heart and soon the 
tract, "What the Scriptures say about Hell," was given 
me by dear Brother L., together with "Tabernacle Shadows 
of Better Sacrifices," and Watch Towers from time 
to time. I saw more and more of the wonderful love and 
mercy of God in the gift of Jesus, a Savior to bless not 
only the few, but all, all. And in answer to my constant 
prayer that I might understand the real truth, the light 
has filled my soul; and, praise the Lord, the truth makes 
me free indeed! 

I had been a teacher in Sunday-school for years, but 
soon I was made to understand forcibly that no such doctrine 
could be tolerated there. They urged me to remain 
and believe as I wished, but keep it to myself; but I 
could not teach a class, what I knew was false doctrine, 
so sent in my resignation. Then came the most bitter 
denunciations from the pulpit of such (as the pastor called 
it) damnable heresy. I withdrew from the membership of 
the church, and since that time I have had an unutterable 
peace. How glad I am to be free from the cruel bondage 
of creeds, and forms, which now are meaningless to me. 

I have been a reader of the Watch Tower for the 
last year, through the kindness of a dear brother who 
subscribed for me. It has been such a help and comfort 
to me and after I read it I have sent it by mail, and have 
given it personally to those whom I felt would be helped 
into the light by it. I have also been giving out the 
tracts and booklets from the Bible House, as I want to 
scatter the seed which has cleared away the false ideals 
of "Sectarianism" from my own heart. 

And now may God's blessing rest more and more upon 
you, as His instrument, to send this blessed truth to longing 
hearts. 

Thankfully yours, 



M. A. SMITH,-New York. 



