Do You “Want to” Help Others?
1 Jesus truly cared about people. When a leper entreated him for help, Jesus stretched out his hand, touched the man, and said: “I want to. Be made clean.” (Mark 1:40-42) In what ways can we imitate Jesus’ attitude toward helping others?
2 Interested People: Each member of the congregation plays a part in helping interested ones to become worshipers of Jehovah. When new ones come to meetings, greet them and get acquainted. Look for ways to encourage them. Commend them for the comments they make. Express appreciation for their efforts to apply Bible principles in their lives. Help them to see the prospects they have for making true friends within the congregation.
3 Fellow Believers: “Those related to us in the faith” especially deserve our help in a variety of ways. (Gal. 6:10) Many contend with health problems. By making an encouraging visit, you can provide vital association and perhaps also assist in practical ways. Some may be facing other difficulties in their lives. Show your concern by taking the time to listen to them and build them up. (1 Thess. 5:14) The elders too need our cooperation as they carry out their responsibilities. (Heb. 13:17) By displaying a willing and helpful spirit, we can “become a strengthening aid” to our fellow believers.​—Col. 4:11.
4 Family Members: We should also strive to imitate Jesus’ concern for people within our own family circle. Deep concern moves parents to ‘go on bringing up their children in the discipline and mental-regulating of Jehovah.’ (Eph. 6:4) Children can do their part by promptly getting ready when it is time for family study, congregation meetings, or field service. Grown children can reflect Jesus’ compassion by tenderly helping their parents cope with the difficulties brought on by advancing age. In these and other ways, all of us can “practice godly devotion in [our] own household.”​—1 Tim. 5:4.
5 As we imitate Jesus in helping others, we may be able to alleviate problems and to draw our family and the congregation closer together. Most important of all, we bring honor to Jehovah, “the Father of tender mercies.”​—2 Cor. 1:3.

