Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting June 10
Song 58
15 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage everyone to view the video Our Whole Association of Brothers in preparation for the discussion at the Service Meeting the week of June 24. Using the suggestions on page 4, demonstrate separately how to present the June 15 Watchtower and the June 22 Awake! In each demonstration, show a different way to handle the conversation stopper “I’m not interested in religion.”​—See Reasoning book, pages 16-17.
10 min: Question Box. Read entire article and cited scriptures. Then make additional comments, enlarging on other points in the Question Box in the March 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry.
20 min: “Sowing Bountifully Brings Rich Blessings.”a Include comments based on the December 1, 1992, Watchtower, pages 15-16, paragraphs 14-17.
Song 220 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 17
Song 136
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Be Content With What You Have.”b Emphasize the Scriptural basis for the counsel, reading and discussing as many of the cited texts as time allows.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting June 24
Song 52
 8 min: Local announcements. A married couple working together in service demonstrate how to use the suggestions on page 4 to offer the July 1 and July 8 magazines. The wife features The Watchtower, and the husband features the Awake!
12 min: Relate or reenact experiences from local publishers (1) witnessing to various ethnic groups or people speaking other languages or (2) witnessing in settings other than house-to-house and street work. In preparation for next week’s Service Meeting, encourage everyone to find a presentation to use with one of the brochures that will be offered in July and August.​—See the box “Other Publications,” in the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert.
25 min: “Why We Love Our Whole Association of Brothers.” Get right into an audience discussion of the Whole Association video, using the questions that are provided.
Song 95 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 1
Song 83
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in their field service reports for June. Ask publishers to tell which brochure they plan to offer during July and what presentation they will use.
15 min: You Can Be God’s Friend! Talk and audience discussion. Point out features of this brochure that make it a powerful teaching aid to help children and others with limited education or reading ability to learn about Jehovah. Discuss examples of its simple and logical explanations. (See lessons 2, 8, and 12.) Show how the pictures can be used to reach a student’s heart. Suggest ways that this brochure can be used to good advantage. Parents should study it with their young children. Encourage everyone to offer it in the ministry whenever appropriate.
15 min: “Do You ‘Want to’ Help Others?”c Encourage everyone in the congregation to have a helpful spirit.
Song 156 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

