Sowing Bountifully Brings Rich Blessings
1 All of us look forward to the fulfillment of the grand promises contained in God’s Word. Even now, Jehovah makes available many blessings that add delight to our lives. The extent to which we personally benefit, however, depends in large measure on the effort we put forth. As the apostle Paul put it, “he that sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.” (2 Cor. 9:6) Consider two areas in which this principle applies.
2 Our Personal Ministry: Sharing the good news with people when it is within our power to give a witness brings many rewards. (Prov. 3:27, 28) Commendably, many are sowing bountifully by expanding their share in the ministry, including auxiliary or regular pioneering. All of us can sow bountifully by conscientiously returning to cultivate all interest that is found and by offering a Bible study whenever the opportunity presents itself. (Rom. 12:11) Exerting ourselves in these ways results in upbuilding experiences and increased joy in our ministry.
3 Supporting Kingdom Interests: Paul made his comment about ‘sowing bountifully’ in connection with material giving. (2 Cor. 9:6, 7, 11, 13) Today, there is much we can do in a physical and material way to support Kingdom interests. We can assist in the construction of Kingdom Halls and Assembly Halls. We can also make ourselves available to share in cleaning and maintaining these centers for true worship. In addition, we can contribute financially for local congregation expenses as well as for the worldwide Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. As all of us do our part, how we rejoice to see Jehovah’s abundant blessing upon this God-ordained work!​—Mal. 3:10; Luke 6:38.
4 God’s Word exhorts us “to work at good, to be rich in fine works, to be liberal, ready to share.” As we heed that admonition, we enjoy rich blessings now. At the same time, we are “safely treasuring up for [ourselves] a fine foundation for the future [and] the real life” to come.​—1 Tim. 6:18, 19.

