Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting November 11
Song 183
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Using the suggestions on page 8, have two separate demonstrations of how to present the November 15 Watchtower and the November 22 Awake! In one of the demonstrations, explain how our worldwide work is financed.​—See The Watchtower, page 2, or Awake! page 5.
15 min: Supporters of True Worship​—Then and Now. A talk based on the November 1, 2002, Watchtower, pages 26-30.
20 min: “Assist Your Congregation Book Study Overseer.”a To be handled by an elder who is a Congregation Book Study overseer. When discussing paragraph 3, include comments on the Ministry School book, page 70. Commend the congregation for specific ways in which they support the book study arrangement, and kindly draw attention to any areas in which improvement is needed.
Song 114 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 18
Song 78
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report. Outline special field service arrangements for November 28. Discuss the box “Very Good Reading!”
10 min: Question Box. Talk by a capable elder.
25 min: “Family Heads​—Maintain a Good Spiritual Routine.” After a brief introductory talk based on paragraphs 1-3, conduct an audience discussion of paragraphs 4-13. As time permits, read paragraphs 7, 8, 11, and 12. Include an interview of one or two parents. What has helped their family to have an orderly routine of spiritual activities? What effort has this involved? How have they benefited? Conclude with brief comments based on paragraph 14.
Song 31 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting November 25
Song 16
10 min: Local announcements. A married couple working together in field service demonstrate how to use the suggestions on page 8 to offer the December 1 and December 8 magazines. The husband features The Watchtower, and the wife features Awake!
15 min: “Make Known the Truth About Jesus.”b Include comments on the Ministry School book, page 278. Encourage all to bring the textbook to next week’s Service Meeting for the part “A School That Equips Us for What Matters Most.”
20 min: “Show Loving Interest in ‘Fatherless Boys.’” Open with a three-minute talk on Jehovah’s view of fatherless boys and girls, based on paragraph 1 and on Insight, Volume 1, page 816. Using questions and answers, consider the remainder of the article. Highlight practical ways others can provide assistance and encouragement. When discussing paragraphs 3-4, include brief comments on the October 8, 1995, Awake!, pages 8-9.
Song 142 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting December 2
Song 213
 8 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in their field service reports for November. Briefly review a presentation that could be used when offering the Greatest Man book.​—See the June 1998 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8.
12 min: Local needs.
25 min: “A School That Equips Us for What Matters Most.” Audience discussion to be handled by the school overseer. Build enthusiasm for the new school program, which will begin in January. Draw attention to features of the “Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 2003,” in the October 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert. Outline the requirements to join the school, as set forth in the Ministry School book, page 282, and encourage those who have not yet done so to enroll if they qualify.
Song 127 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

