The Bible’s Viewpoint
Disasters​—Punishments From God?
IN THE Philippines, a land repeatedly struck by natural disasters, many people have wondered, ‘Does God test man with such calamities?’ In 1991, after the most devastating volcanic eruption in this century, the headline of one Philippine newspaper asked: “Eruption: Punishment from God?”
Columnist Nelly Favis-​Villafuerte expressed such a view when she wrote: “To Bible-​believing Christians however​—there is just one explanation: Mt. Pinatubo’s volcanic eruption is a divine visitation to remind us once again that there is an awesome and sovereign God with overruling power in the affairs and destinies of men and nations.” In view of this assertion, we ask:
Does Almighty God Judge Communities Today?
That God has done so in the past cannot be denied. The examples recorded in the Scriptures of the Flood of Noah’s day, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and on two occasions the razing of Jerusalem, the city associated with his great name, show that Almighty God can bring deliberate judgment on those who repeatedly fail to uphold his standards.​—Genesis 7:11, 17-24; 19:24, 25; 2 Chronicles 36:17-21; Matthew 24:1, 2.
But what about today? That there would be a time of worldwide calamity was foretold by Christ Jesus in Matthew chapter 24, Mark chapter 13, and Luke chapter 21. In these chapters, he gave prophetic warning of events and conditions that would be associated with the conclusion of this system of things so that reasoning persons could realize that he was invisibly ruling from heaven. These prophecies are being fulfilled today. It should be noted, though, that with each of the above-​mentioned judgments, Jehovah God gave clear, repeated warnings before destruction came. (Amos 3:7) However, in the case of natural disasters occurring in our time, warnings usually come from secular authorities, based on scientific observations.
Furthermore, the disciple James informs us in the first chapter of his letter, Jas 1 verse 13: “With evil things God cannot be tried nor does he himself try anyone.” With the increasing worldwide population, man has come to live near many potential dangers. The demands for space to live and to grow food result in clearing of previously forested areas, at times even contributing to the intensity of some natural calamities from excessive rainfall and fast runoff.
Therefore, it would not be correct to say that natural disasters are directly sent by Almighty God as a punishment on the people living in the areas affected. In fact, it is easy to see that many innocent ones, such as young children, suffer the most in times of distress. However, even though Almighty God does not cause such calamities, we may still ask:
Are There Lessons We Can Learn?
Yes. For those living in the areas affected, there is the test of how much value they place on their material possessions as compared to life itself. People have taken unnecessary, life-​threatening risks at such times just to save a few belongings. We need to remember that Jesus stated: “Even when a person has an abundance his life does not result from the things he possesses.” (Luke 12:15) Material things can be replaced, but no human can replace his life.​—Matthew 6:19, 20, 25-34.
Natural disasters also cause individuals to reflect on how they live their lives. The apostle Paul urged Christians to be careful in the way they conduct themselves: “So look to it carefully how you walk, not as unwise but as wise, making the best you can of the crisis, because the days are wicked.” (Ephesians 5:15, 16, Byington) Each trial a person faces in his life is a reminder of how important it is to have strong faith.
A third lesson we learn from natural calamities is that we need to develop greater fellow feeling, or empathy, for others. Within the disaster zone, loving concern needs to be shown for one’s fellow sufferers rather than adopting the attitude that each one has to fend for himself. Particularly is this true of those entrusted with responsibility for caring for others. The prophet Isaiah described ones he called “princes” as being “like a hiding place from the wind and a place of concealment from the rainstorm, like streams of water in a waterless country, like the shadow of a heavy crag in an exhausted land.”​—Isaiah 32:1, 2.
In showing empathy during disasters, there are many occasions to share what one has with others, both in word and in deed. For instance, the Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption and its ensuing catastrophes gave countless opportunities to share in helping those who had to flee from the disaster. Many were without the means to have even their daily food. Thus, individuals were able to show their selflessness by giving help to others. However, many have still wondered:
Will There Be a Final Judgment of Mankind?
Yes, there will be, as is clearly shown in God’s Word. (Matthew 24:37-42; 2 Peter 3:5-7) Before that judgment comes, a worldwide warning work must be done, as Jesus further prophesied: “Also, in all the nations the good news has to be preached first.”​—Mark 13:10.
Thus, each of us needs to ask himself, ‘What will I do?’ We urge you to take the time to investigate what the Bible exhorts each of us to do in order to survive that global calamity.

