From Our Readers
Help for the Dying  Thank you for the articles on “Help for the Dying.” (October 22, 1991) My sister had a brain tumor and the doctor told us they could either prolong her life [by extraordinary medical means] or let the illness run its course. It was a difficult decision, but we finally decided on the latter option. After her death, though, I began to feel as if we had sinned. I therefore felt so relieved after reading the articles. Thank you so much for providing us with comfort and help at the right time!
A. L. M. A., Brazil
Families Draw Close  We just wanted to express our appreciation for the beautifully written series “Families​—Draw Close Before It’s Too Late.” (September 22, 1991) Having recently become parents to a wonderful baby boy, we enjoyed the personal comments on childrearing related by parents from around the world. We hope and pray that we too can bring our son up “in the discipline and mental-​regulating of Jehovah.”​—Ephesians 6:4.
R. S. and J. L. S., United States
For some time now, I have been wanting to tell you just how much I appreciate your articles. But after having read the issue on strengthening family ties, I just had to write to thank you. I gave birth a few months ago, and my husband and I will make every effort to apply these suggestions.
S. D., Italy
Reading  I’m a youth and enjoy reading very much. However, I do not always understand what I read, and I tend to overlook difficult words. The article “Read to Expand Your Horizons” (July 22, 1991) helped me to improve in this regard.
A. R. B., Brazil
For years I have tried to read all issues of The Watchtower and Awake! but failed, even though I had a schedule that included reading them. Your article helped me realize that my problem was poor reading habits. I appreciate the suggestions on improving my reading.
A. K. F. M., Brazil
Hospitals  Allow me to comment on the series “Hospitals​—How Can You Cope?” (March 8, 1991) Last year I was hospitalized four times. I felt defenseless and unprotected. If I asked questions about my condition, method of treatment, and side effects of medicines, my doctors took it as a no-​confidence vote. They would even say, ‘You don’t have to be here. You can go home.’
R. A., Czechoslovakia
The concept of patients’ rights is not universally accepted, though such rights are rapidly gaining recognition. Hospital Liaison Committees sponsored by Jehovah’s Witnesses have already gained a measure of success in winning the cooperation of doctors. But where patients’ rights are not yet respected, individuals may be able to improve their situation by developing a cooperative, understanding relationship with their physician before hospitalization becomes necessary. It is always wise for a Christian to deal with medical personnel in a kind and respectful way.​—ED.
Avoiding Harassment  I appreciated the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make Him Leave Me Alone?” (May 22, 1991) Although the article was published mainly for girls, we boys can learn something from it. Recently I faced a similar problem from a girl who tempted me to risk my friendship with God! Your article came just in time and helped me deal with the situation.
E. K. O., Ghana
See our October 8, 1991, issue for specific suggestions directed to boys who are facing such situations.​—ED.

