Living Up to Our Dedication
1 Whether you were baptized recently or decades ago, you likely remember that milestone in your life. Our baptism is not the end but, rather, the beginning of a lifetime of dedicated service that can last forever. (1 John 2:17) What is involved in living up to our dedication?
2 Follow Christ’s Example: Upon being baptized, Jesus “commenced his work,” declaring “the good news of the kingdom of God.” (Luke 3:23; 4:43) Similarly, upon symbolizing our dedication to Jehovah by baptism, we became ordained ministers of the good news. While much time and effort may be required to obtain the material necessities of life, our vocation, or chief work, is the Christian ministry. (Matt. 6:33) Rather than striving to attain wealth or prestige, those dedicated to God seek to ‘glorify their ministry,’ as did the apostle Paul. (Rom. 11:13) Do you cherish your privilege of serving Jehovah and make the most of it?
3 As in the case of Jesus, we must “oppose the Devil.” (Jas. 4:7) Satan tempted Jesus following His baptism, and he similarly targets dedicated servants of Jehovah today. (Luke 4:1-13) Being surrounded by Satan’s world, we must exercise self-discipline, avoiding anything that could contaminate our mind or corrupt our heart. (Prov. 4:23; Matt. 5:29, 30) Christians are admonished that they “cannot be partaking of ‘the table of Jehovah’ and the table of demons.” (1 Cor. 10:21) This requires that we guard against unwholesome entertainment, bad associations, and dangers on the Internet. It also calls for our shunning apostate material. Being alert to these and other tactics of Satan will help us to live up to our dedication.
4 Use God’s Provisions: In order to help us live up to our dedication, Jehovah has provided assistance by means of his Word and the Christian congregation. Make Bible reading and prayer to Jehovah part of your daily routine. (Josh. 1:8; 1 Thess. 5:17) Take delight in congregation meetings. (Ps. 122:1) Associate with those who fear Jehovah and keep his orders.​—Ps. 119:63.
5 With divine support, you can live up to your dedication to Jehovah and have the joy of serving him forever.​—Ps. 22:26, 27; Phil. 4:13.

