Teach Others the Pure Language
1 Despite coming from many ‘nations, tribes, peoples and tongues,’ Jehovah’s Witnesses are a united people, a true international brotherhood. (Rev. 7:9) In today’s divided world, that is remarkable. How is it possible? Because we have been given “the change to a pure language.”​—Zeph. 3:9.
2 Marvelous Effects: What is this pure language? It is the proper understanding of the truth found in God’s Word regarding Jehovah and his purposes, particularly the truth about God’s Kingdom. As foretold by Jesus, this truth is being dispensed by means of a visible earthly channel, “the faithful and discreet slave,” with the result that people “out of all the languages of the nations” are embracing true worship.​—Matt. 24:45; Zech. 8:23.
3 As people learn the pure language, they are moved to conform their lives to Jehovah’s standards. They learn to be “fitly united in the same mind and in the same line of thought.” (1 Cor. 1:10) Divine teaching also produces in them upright conduct and wholesome, truthful speech, especially with regard to telling others the good news. (Titus 2:7, 8; Heb. 13:15) These marvelous changes honor Jehovah.
4 For example, a man who was contacted with the good news had many questions, all of which were answered from the Bible. Moved by what he heard, he began studying twice a week and attending meetings. He was surprised by the warm welcome he received at the Kingdom Hall, since many in attendance were of a different race. Within a short time, he and his wife made changes in their lives and got baptized. Since then he has helped some 40 others to serve Jehovah, including numerous family members. Despite suffering from a disability, he recently began serving as a pioneer.
5 Teaching Others: World events are causing many honest people to reexamine their thinking and their lives. Like Jesus, we should desire to help them. Effective return visits and Bible studies are a key to helping sincere ones to learn the pure language.
6 An approach that has proved to be effective with busy people is to conduct a brief Bible study right on their doorstep. (km 5/02 p. 1) Have you tried this? When you are preparing to make a return visit, select from the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert a presentation that fits the householder. Many of the presentations in this insert are designed to lead directly into a discussion of the Require brochure or the Knowledge book. Practice the presentation so that you can move smoothly from the introduction to a discussion of one of the paragraphs. Select one or two scriptures from the paragraph to read and discuss, and formulate a question with which to conclude. That will help lead into the paragraph you plan to cover on the next visit.
7 Jehovah’s people are experiencing many blessings as a result of learning the pure language. May we diligently help others to join us in ‘calling upon the name of Jehovah’ and in ‘serving him shoulder to shoulder.’​—Zeph. 3:9.

