VOL. XXVI. SEPTEMBER 1, 1905. No. 17 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 259 

A Business Man's View 259 

Peace! Peace! When There is No Peace 260 

More Darwinism for Sunday Schools 261 

Rev. R. Heber Newton's Views on Spiritism 262 

The Earth Abideth Forever 262 

Church Disestablishment in France 263 

Beyond the Shadows (Poem) 263 

Anent Archaeology and Religion 263 

"A Peculiar People" 264 

A Broken Vow— a Fulfilled Penalty 266 

Berean Bible Study for September 268 

The Life-Giving Stream 268 

Some Interesting Letters 270 

page 258 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-32 JOHNSTON ST., FITZROY, MELBOURNE. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



GENERAL CONVENTION, PORTLAND, OREGON, SEPT. 8-10 



All sessions of the Convention (except the Sunday afternoon 
public service) will be held in the "Woodman's Hall," 
corner of East Sixth Street and E. Alder Streets. Brethren 
arriving over the S.P. line on Friday morning, Sept. 8th, 
should get off the car at E. Morrison St. station and come 
direct to the hall, thus saving carfare as well as any inconvenience 
through transferring. All other brethren arriving on all 
other lines at any time should come to the Union Depot 
where arrangements will be made to meet them and direct 
them to Hall and accommodations. All cars crossing "Morrison 
Bridge" pass within one or two blocks of the Hall. To get 
to Hall from Union Depot:— Take "M" car one block south, or 
"S" car, southbound, three blocks south on Sixth St., ask for 
"Morrison Bridge" transfer when paying fare, get off at Third 
and Yamhills Sts. and take any car crossing bridge. Get off 
at Grand Ave. and look for banner showing location of Hall one 
block north and one east. 

The public service, Sunday afternoon at 3, will be held in 
the First Methodist Church, corner Third and Taylor Sts., 
easily reached from all car lines without transfer. 

Entertainment.— Good rooms can be obtained in the vicinity 
of the Convention Hall for 50c, 75c and $1.00 per night for 
each person, two, three and four in a room. Meals at nearby 
restaurants can be had for 20c and 25c. Special room rates can 
be obtained for families or unencumbered brothers or sisters 
three or four in a room. 

It is important that all brethren who anticipate attending 
the Convention should notify Wm. A. Baker at Couch St. Dock, 
Portland, Ore., at least two weeks in advance, so that accommodations 
can be secured. After writing thus for accommodations 
you may depend upon their being secured and should not attempt 
to secure rooms for yourselves. This would greatly interfere 
with arrangements we would make for you. 

Letters should state price of rooms desired, number in 
party, etc. Arrangements will also be made for brethren who 
cannot afford to pay for accommodations but who can pay their 
fare to Convention, but in such cases it is also necessary to be 
advised before date of Convention. Some of the brethren have 
already written relative to bringing tents and others as to bringing 
their own blankets, which they can do without extra cost as 
baggage. All who feel it to their advantage to do so will be 
taken care of, and where brethren cannot afford to take furnished 
rooms it is a very good plan. Compliance with the 
above will greatly facilitate work of the Entertainment Committee 
and add to the general harmony of the Convention at 
the opening session. 

Railroad Rates.— The regular excursion rate of all roads 
entering Portland, with tickets on sale at all times, is one and 
one-third fare, with a thirty-day limit. Parties of ten on one 
ticket, ten-day limit, one fare for round trip. "Coach parties" 



from any one locality are made special excursion rates, averaging 
considerably less than one fare for the round trip. It is 
suggested to friends in the northwest that they may be able to 
make joint arrangements with the local committees of the other 
two Associations (National Letter Carriers' Association and the 
"Hoo-Hoos" or Lumbermen) holding their conventions at 
Portland at this time, for "coach parties," and thus get the advantage 
of the lowest possible rate. 

R3621 : page 258 

GERMAN HYMN BOOK 



We have issued a small book of German hymns, with music, 
99 numbers, suitable for general worship, public and social 
meetings. Uniform with "Zion's Glad Songs." Price, 5 cents, 
postpaid. 



R3618 : page 259 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
A BUSINESS MAN'S VIEW 



HOW a well-informed business man views the present 

situation may be of interest as showing 

that with all the prosperity of business men 

in recent years, and all their hurry and greed for dollars, 

they do see some things which touch their own 

interests. 

The following is an extract from the address of 
Mr. D. M. Parry, before the National Manufacturers' 
Association, at its recent session in Atlanta, Georgia. 
He sees a nearer enemy than "the Yellow Peril." He 
said in part, as reported in the public press: 

"Before proceeding to a brief consideration of the labor 
question, I wish to make a few statements respecting the 
tendency towards Socialism, which, at this time, is being 
strongly manifested in many ways. The Socialist party 
last fall cast nearly a half million votes, a remarkable development 
in strength, and organized labor, composed of over 
two million employes arrayed in opposition to individualism, 
continues, according to reports of its officials, to increase its 
membership. The growth of an avowedly Socialistic party, 
with its present creed, is certainly a sinister fact to all loyal 
citizens who understand and appreciate the importance of 
individual liberty. But while the existence of these organizations 
is indicative of a serious defection from the individualistic 
principle by certain classes, yet I believe that a still 
graver portent of coming evil is to be seen in the Socialistic 



trend of the thought of the general public as reflected by the 
press, by public men, and by recent legislative enactments. 
This trend of thought is having a potent influence on the 
policies of both the leading political parties, and while the 
question of individualism and Socialism is not a political 
issue in the sense that it has caused a division of party lines, 
it is, nevertheless, a leading issue within the ranks of both 
parties. 

"While the enlargement of the scope and power of government 
by the purchase and management of certain enterprises 
has found considerable support among the people, yet I believe 
the sentiment favorable to Socialistic measures involving 
the confiscation of profits and the limitation of private 
management of capital is the more widespread and dangerous. 
Without making special reference to the aim of the avowed 
Socialists to bring about the Millennium through undisguised 
confiscation, we have organized labor and its sympathizers 
supporting the idea that organizations of men may dictate 
to a large extent the management of enterprises which they 
do not own. Besides assuming to say how much wages the 
employer shall pay and how he shall manage his capital in 
other respects, the union also presumes to deny the right of 
the individual to the full control of his own labor, determining 
for him the rate of wages for which he shall work, the 
number of hours he shall employ himself and the maximum 
amount of daily output he shall produce. As eight-hour and 
anti-injunction legislation is designed to assist the unions 
in the accomplishment of these objects these measures fall 
under the classification of Socialistic attempts by confiscation. 
Still another illustration of this kind of Socialistic 
propositions, and one which does not proceed from organized 
labor, is the pending national legislation to have the government 
fix railroad rates. 

"It was Macaulay who prophesied, in effect, that the 
masses of the American people would, in the course of several 
generations, use their right of suffrage to confiscate all wealth 
in the name of the State. This prophecy certainly places a 
low estimate on the moral perceptions of the common people 
and displays a woeful lack of faith in the ability of men in 
general to govern themselves. But while the prophecy is 
rightly to be regarded as absurd, yet there is no question that 
there are elements in our population that are attracted by 
the proposition of enriching themselves through the ballot 
box. It is said that men vote in accordance with their interests, 
and some men doubtless construe it to be for their 
interests to vote for confiscation. But I am confident that 
such men are in the small minority. I prefer to believe that 
the greater number of those who favor Socialistic measures 
do so from an honest conviction that these measures would 
be beneficial for the common weal. The tendency towards 
Socialism is certainly not to be attributed to a declining sense 
of public morality. Rather, I believe, is it to be traced to 
ignorance of the fundamental principles of true liberty and 
to demagogic leadership that for its own ends would stop 
short of nothing. Thousands of well-disposed men, who 
would not think of injuring the interests of their fellow-beings 



by their votes, have been led by these demagogues and false 
teachers into the belief that they are in some inscrutable 
manner being robbed by the rich, and they, therefore, are 
not to be morally censured for taking up with Socialistic 
propositions. 

"Since the Socialistic tendency is to be attributed to 
ignorance rather than dishonesty on the part of many voters, 
the problem of protecting individualism resolves itself down 
to a problem of educating the voting masses. Many Americans, 
in reply to Macaulay's prophecy, will declare that its 

R3618 : page 260 

fulfilment is impossible because the people of this country 

are generally speaking, far more intelligent than the people 

of other countries, and that the democracy in the establishment 

of a great common-school system has amply provided 

for its own protection. But existing facts demonstrate that 

the common-school system is not a sufficient guarantee of 

the perpetuation of liberty. Because the law-abiding elements, 

busy with their own affairs, leave politics to others, 

who perhaps are not quite so busy, the government in many 

of our communities has become a protector of vice and a 

machine for graft, as well as being a policeman. And if these 

same law-abiding elements and busy men of affairs do not 

wish to see the government also blossom out into a paternalistic 

meddler in private business the sooner they devise 

methods whereby they can wield at least a part of their proper 

share of influence in public matters the better. What 

we need is less politics in business and more business in politics. 

It is sheer folly to leave the discussion of public questions 

to the demagogue and agitator alone. 

"The most effective and permanent method of meeting 
the issue of Socialism is, I believe, that of educational propaganda. 
In order to establish such a propaganda it requires 
the organization of the substantial and law-abiding citizenship. 

R3619 : page 260 

With proper efforts and proper support, I have not 

the least doubt that the movement for the maintenance of 

individualism can be made so powerful as to be invincible. 

It is the solemn duty of true American citizens of this generation 

to do whatever lies in their power to down this specter 

of Socialism." 

PEACE! PEACE! WHEN THERE IS NO PEACE 



Notwithstanding the world's fear of war and the 
general desire to introduce the Millennial peace before 
the time and before the proper conditions have been 
established, we opine that more wars are near at hand. 
Why? Because (1) the Scriptures seem to indicate 
that the anarchy which will crush our present civilization 



will be preceded by general wars. (2) Such wars 
seem inevitable as the forerunners of anarchy, because 
so long as the nations are powerful anarchy will have 
little chance of success. (3) The Scriptures assure us 
that there will be a general call to arms about this time, 
resulting in the weakening of the nations. (4) There 
seems not enough time intervening between now and 
1915, and hence we expect present prosperity to continue 
in some measure for the next four years. (5) In 
order to have measurable financial prosperity for that 
time, war, somewhere, is almost a necessity— involving 
large expenditures of money for armies and navies, etc. 

From this view-point we are on the lookout for 
everything likely to result in war. For instance, the 
rupture between Norway and Sweden, the German and 
French dispute respecting Morocco, and now the danger 
of an uprising of India against its British rulers. Let 
us remember that we are already entering the great 
"Day of Recompenses." (Ezekiel 7:7-26.) In this connection 
note the following cablegram from India, widely 
circulated in the public press: 

Dread of another mutiny is being felt by all Europeans 
here. India is in a very serious state, and the authorities 
are making heroic endeavors to prevent the unrest and the 
mutinous spirit which, in spite of all their efforts, is spreading 
like an infection from Province to Province. 

The cause of this condition is the war between Russia 
and Japan, for the supremacy of the yellow race has come 
as a revelation to the natives. That an Asiatic race has 
defied and even conquered a European race has made them 
think. The spirit of dissatisfaction and trouble in the air 
now is far more acute than it was two years before the 
mutiny. 

What makes the situation more dangerous is the 
ability of the "Baboos" to spread their tidings of revolt 
to every end of the Indian Empire with rapidity and 
ease. The problem of how news traveled to the utmost ends 
of India in the days of the mutiny has only been partly 
solved. Since then Lord Ripon has dignified Indian native 
opinion, and the "Baboo" can make himself as easily heard 
as his master. 

THE KING IS CONCERNED 

Lord Kitchener's statement that the Indian army is 
practically worthless has been widely circulated among the 
ignorant natives. Lord Curzon's tyrannical methods have 
set every class against him personally, and the personality 
of a ruler has an effect in India which is incalculable. The 
potential possibilities of the situation have been brought 
directly to the attention of the King and it is known that he 
has had a number of consultations with prominent Anglo-Indians 
now in England on leave. 

It is a fact that in Central India hundreds of Afghans 
are loafing and skulking alone or in couples. This is considered 
to be an ominous sign, for the Afghans do not wander so 



far south with any peaceful purpose in mind. If a holy war 
were to be preached, the Mohammedans would be as much 
the object of native fury nowadays as the Christians. 

The situation has an ugly look, and there is a prayer 
on every one's lips that the cloud will not entail a storm. 

THE YELLOW PERIL 



The papers of the world, especially those of Russia 
and France, are calling attention to the peril of the 
white race at the hands of the yellow. They call attention 
to the fact that since Japan's victories the 
Chinese government has put Japanese at the head of 
its military and naval schools, dismissing the Germans 
previously employed. China has now 700,000 well-armed 
and well-drilled soldiers, and by 1920 A.D. they 
claim they could have the numbers increased to 20,000,000 
and could over-run Russia and all Europe. All the 
writers seem agreed that the combination of all Europe 
at once and fifteen years of preparation would scarcely 
suffice to prepare for such an onslaught. They claim that 
all the guns of Europe would be worn out killing these 
and leave plenty to still come on to the fray. Besides, 
the Japanese and Chinese can make as good guns and 
are doing so. It is claimed that within five years India 
and Russia may be conquered. 

It may never come to this; but the fact that military 
critics are discussing it lends force to two Scriptures: 

(1) Our Lord's words to the effect that in this 

time "men's hearts would fail them for fear, looking 
forward to the things coming on the earth." (Luke 21:26). 

(2) Our Lord's words respecting the awful 
trouble approaching, that except for the elect's sake, 
except for the Kingdom of the elect and its establishment 
of peace, "there would no flesh be saved."— 

Matt. 24:22. 

When we remember that the Yellow Peril is only 
one of the many now impending, and a minor one, no 

R3619 : page 261 

wonder we are assured that "men's hearts shall fail 

from fear" and that all the tribes of earth shall mourn. 

The anarchy and confusion resulting from clashing selfishness 

in civilized lands will be doubtless quite enough to 

make the Kingdom of Christ "the desire of all nations." 

A few short years remain wherein the reaping of 
the "wheat" is to be accomplished. Five years more 
will surely bring us to stirring times. Let us who are 
of the Day not sleep as do others; let us not like them 
dream of worldly wealth and ease and name and fame. 
Let us, as faithful soldiers of the cross, be so zealous that 
it will simply cost "hardship," so that we may be among 
those crowned lawfully. The joys of our Lord and the 



association in the Kingdom work will much more than 
compensate us for every sigh and tear and pain now 
endured. 

A WORLDLY MAN'S OUTLOOK 



The Oregonian is one of the principal journals of 
the Pacific coast, and its editor, an Evolutionist, scoffs 
at our interpretations of the Bible. Nevertheless its 
view of near-at-hand troubles is very closely in agreement 
with what we have been pointing out from the 
Bible for the last thirty years, and very much in opposition 
to the Evolution theory that men are about to 
evolute into angels, as monkeys evoluted into men. 
Here is an editorial clipping from the Oregonian: 

"We suppose our country is 'booked' for socialism. 
Greed of speculators is bringing it on. Exploitation of public 
utilities by our first families hurries it forward. Such incidents 
or operations as this one, under our own eyes, of 
capitalization of the streets of Portland for millions, in the 
interest of private individuals— the public expected to pay 
dividends on the usurpation— are making socialists by thousands, 
in every direction. 

"It is the same with all this exploitation of the modern 
time. Operators everywhere are seizing their opportunity 
to "capitalize" the wants of the public, in ways to create 
great properties and to obtain great dividends. The people 
believe that the only check to these schemes of plutocracy 
lies in a socialistic movement, under which the productive 
forces— in particular those related to municipal functions- 
may be transformed into socialized effort. 

"The Oregonian has not been willing to see this 
change. But in the contest that is coming— forced by the 
greed of capitalism and of exploitation— it finds itself compelled 
to yield to new conditions. In the contest between 
greed and privilege on the one hand, and popular rights on 
the other, it will follow the demands of the people, because 
it belongs to the people. It must stand with them, rather 
than with those who contend for the fictions of privilege and 
of vested rights." 

JUDGMENTS OF THAT DAY 



Russia's woes seem to be part of the judgment of 
the Lord upon an evil system, just such as we should 
expect at this time when the new King Immanuel is 
beginning the correction of earth's wrongs and the establishment 
of justice and judgment [rewards and 
penalties] in the earth. When the Lord's judgments 
shall be extended to include all nations and systems 
what a time of trouble there will be in the earth! But 
before that severity Churchianity must have her bitter 



portion and all the true "wheat" be garnered. 
A NUT FOR EVOLUTIONISTS 



According to the Evolutionists it is only a comparatively 
short time since men were monkeys and 
irrational. We have already pointed out that the findings 
at Nippur contradict such a thought, and that the 
"Great Pyramid" showed an exactness and skill possessed 
four thousand years ago which was lost in the interim, 
since only with something like modern machinery 
could it have been constructed. In other words, that 
the world of long ago had really, in some respects, been 
in advance of everything known in A.D. 1800. This 
would agree with the Bible's testimony that man was 
created perfect— in the image of God— and fell from it 
into degradation. Where the teachings of Christ have 
been received they have served to check the downward 
course; but the great advancement of our day is the result 
of divine overruling, preparing in every way for the 
great reign of Christ— the Millennium. 

Now in accord with all this note the following, 
remembering that Mr. F. Petrie is a man of science and 
one of the best informed in all the world respecting the 

R3620 : page 261 

Pyramid: 

A two years' study at Gheezeh has convinced Mr. Flinders 
Petrie that the Egyptian stone-workers of 4,000 years 
ago had a surprising acquaintance with what have been considered 
modern tools. Among the many tools used by the 
pyramid-builders were both solid and tubular drills and 
straight and circular saws. The drills, like those of to-day, 
were, says an exchange, set with jewels (probably corundum, 
as the diamond was very scarce), and even lathe-tools had 
such cutting edges. So remarkable was the quality of the 
tubular drills and the skill of the workmen, that the cutting 
marks in hard granite give no indication of wear of the tool, 
while a cut of a tenth of an inch was made in the hardest 
rock at each revolution, and a hole through both the hardest 
and softest material was bored perfectly smooth and uniform 
throughout. Of the material and method of making the 
tools nothing is known.— Mechanical News. 

MORE DARWINISM FOR SUNDAY SCHOOLS 



Although Sunday School literature has for some 
time been gradually undermining faith in the Bible, 
supplanting it with the suggestions of "higher critics" 
and evolution theories, it seems that the progress of unbelief 
has not been sufficiently rapid to satisfy some. 



Prof. W. S. Jackman of the Chicago University advocates 
more pronounced teaching— emphasizing Nature 
and her laws and correspondingly ignoring the true 
God. In the Educational Review he says:— 

"To thousands of people it were not more shocking 
to doubt the common axioms of morality than it is to 
question any part of the Biblical story of nature.... 
But out of patient and careful observation science has 
created a conception of the origin, the development and 
the destiny of nature, and of man's place in the great 
plan, that can not be linked with the primitive conception 
by even the maddest flight of poetic fancy.... 
The Darwinian theory, which certainly has more points 
in its favor regarding the history of life than any other, 
completely demolishes the old picture which was very 
firmly established in our minds in our early years 
through the teaching of the Sunday school.. ..It is 

R3620 : page 262 

against this flinty wall of pious belief that Nature-study 
must hurl itself and upon which it must make some 
impression if it is to gain a foothold in the Sunday 
school as a means of moral and religious training. To 
introduce Nature-study into the Sunday school, that is, 
to make it a direct factor in moral and religious training, 
means to give the child an entirely different point 
of view from that received by those of us who learned its 
lessons a quarter of a century ago." 

REV. R. HEBER NEWTON'S VIEWS ON SPIRITISM 



That Spiritism continues to make progress in deceiving 
those in high positions as well as in low, the 
following extract will show. What will the harvest of 
such teachings be? How soon will the seed ripen? A 
very few years will show terrible results. 

Discussing psychical science in an address to-night before 
the American Institute for Scientific Research in the 
home of C. Griswold Bourne, the Rev. Dr. R. Heber Newton 
made the assertion that the spirits of the dead communicate 
with the living; that telepathy is a power possessed by many 
men and women, and that clairvoyance is an established 
scientific fact. Said he in part: 

"Clairvoyance was nothing but a will o' the wisp, but it 
is now a confessed power of certain organizations. 

"For the first time in the history of man these powers 
have been scientifically investigated in our day. Already 
the result is that a considerable number of eminent men of 
science have had the courage to avow that, after allowing 
for illusion, fraud and every possible hypothesis of interpretation, 
they have been driven up to the ultimate solution of 
the problem— the belief in the actual communication of the 
spirits of those whom we call dead with the living. 



"Anyone who walks with his eyes open, ready to hear 
what men have to tell, will find stories pouring in upon him 
from men whom he cannot mistrust as liars, and whom he 
knows to be sane and sensible, which will stagger him. These 
experiences are not at all confined to the seance and the medium. 
Their most impressive forms occur in the privacy of 
the home without a professional medium present." 

RUSSIA AS SUPERSTITIOUS AS JAPAN 



Rev. Dr. Robert S. Macarthur, in an address before 
the Baptist Young People's Conference, held in New 
York, said:— 

"There is Russia— holy Russia, with its famous ikons 
and its worship of them. Everyone knows the story of the 
carload that was sent from St. Petersburg to defeat the 
Japanese. Has heathendom anything to offer worse than 
this? When I was in Russia I knew a noble lady. She went 
to one of the high priests of her faith and hired an ikon to 
cure her of a disease. She paid an enormous sum for it and 
it was drawn through the streets of St. Petersburg, clothed 
in royal robes and in the royal carriage. As it passed through 
the streets I saw men and women throw themselves down on 
the street and bury their faces in the mud until the thing 
had passed. 

"Yet Russia calls herself a Christian country and begs 
as such our sympathy." 

THE GERMAN KAISER'S AMBITION 



It is the growing impression among diplomats that 
Emperor William II. regards himself as a "man of 
destiny," another Napoleon I. He is accredited with a 
desire to form a combination of the governments of 
Europe either as United States of Europe or as a Fifth 
Universal Monarchy. His ambition is a "germ" which 
the Lord can make use of at any time to foment strife-war. 
True, he speaks for peace, but was not the Czar of 
Russia the instigator of the Hague peace conference? 
Very evidently there will be more war ere long. The 
nations apparently will be weakened preparatory to the 
great cataclysm of anarchy which we understand to be due 
to commence October, 1914. "Then they that reverenced 
the Lord spake often one to another: and the 
Lord hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance 
was written before him, for them that reverenced the 
Lord and that thought upon his name. And they shall 
be mine, saith the Lord, in that day when I make up my 
jewels; and I will spare them as a man spareth his only 
son that serveth him."— Mai. 3:16. 

THE EARTH ABIDETH FOREVER, BUT AGES AND EPOCHS 



PASS AWAY 



BY REV. JOS. A. SEISS, D.D. 

"There is a notion bred from the morbid imagination 
of the Middle Ages, which has given birth to many 
a wild, poetic dream, which has much influenced the 
translators of our English Bible [which has unduly 
tainted religious oratory, song and even sober theology], 
and which still lingers in the 'Popular Mind' [as if it 
were an article of the settled Christian creed], that the 
time is coming when everything that is, 'except spiritual 
natures' shall utterly cease to be, the earth consume 
and disappear, the whole solar and sidereal system 
collapse and the entire physical universe vanish into 
nothingness. How this can be, how it is to be harmonized 
with the promises and revealed purposes of 
God,. ..there is not the least effort to show. The 
thing is magniloquently asserted, and that is 'quite 
enough for some people's faith', though 'sense,' 'reason' 
and 'Revelation' be alike outraged. There is indeed to 
be an 'end of the world.' The Bible often refers to it. 
But men mistake when they suppose the world spoken 
of in such passages to be the earth 'as a planet' 

Four (4) different [Greek] words have our translators 
rendered 'world.' 1, Ge, which means the earth 
proper, the ground, this material orb which we inhabit; 
2, Kosmos, which means the ornamentation, beauty, the 
existing order of things, but not the substance of the 
earth as a terraqueous globe; 3, Oikouene, the habitable, 
the inhabited earth, and 4, Aion, which is used 
more than one hundred times in the New Testament, 
but always with reference to time, duration, eras, dispensations, 
—a stage or state marking any particular 
period, long or short, past, present or future,— the 
course of things in any given instance, rather than the 
earth. ..on which it is realized. It may be earth 
or heaven, time or eternity. ..it is all the same as 
to the meaning of the word 'aion' which denotes simply 
the time-measure and characteristics of that particular 
period or state to which it is applied. And this is the 
word used in all those passages which speak of 'the end 
of the world.' It is not the end of the earth, but the 
end of a particular time, age, or order of things, with 

R3620 : page 263 

the underlying thought of other orders of things and 
perpetual continuity in other ages. Aeons end, times 
change,... but there is no instance in all the Word 
of God which assigns an absolute termination to the 
existence of the earth, as one of the planets, or any 
other of the great sisterhood of material orbs... 
It will not be another earth, but the same earth under 



another condition of things. It is now laboring under 
the curse, but then the curse will have been lifted off. 
At present it is hardly habitable,— no one being able to 
live in it any longer than a few brief years; but then 
men shall dwell in it forever without knowing what 
death is. 

"It is now the home of rebellion and injustice; it 
will then be the home of righteousness. 

"It is now under the domination of Satan, it will then 
be under the 'Blessed Rule of the Prince of Peace.'" 

CHURCH DISESTABLISHMENT IN FRANCE 



In the debates in the French Chamber of Deputies 
respecting the withdrawal of the Government from the 
support of religion in the matter of paying the salaries 
of the preachers and priests and furnishing the church 
buildings, the controversy was warm on both sides. 
Deputy Briand, favoring the movement and opposing 

R3621 : page 263 

some who pleaded that all religions would suffer— Catholic, 
Protestant and Jewish— said: "If the Church cannot 
exist without the aid of the State it is because the 
Church is dead!" 

With the carrying into effect of the new arrangement 
religious matters must be managed in France as 
they are now managed in the United States. Each person 
can pay for his own religious propaganda and have 
his own kind. It will be a good move so far as true 
religion is concerned. However, clericalism will manage 
somehow to ride the people, while more or less 
blindfolding them as respects the truth of God's Word. 

UNION OF THE CHURCHES 



The success attending the efforts to unite Congregationalists, 
Cumberland Presbyterians and United 
Brethren, encourages others. Now the various Lutheran 
bodies are endeavoring to unite, and are meeting with 
good success. The Baptists, as is well known, are independents, 
each congregation being free except as the 
Ministers' Union and Missionary Society unites them. 
Baptists' Missions— South and North— were separated 
during the Civil war and are now arranging for re-union. 



BEYOND THE SHADOWS. 

Further on— beyond the shadows 



Falling darkly o'er my way, 

There is home, and rest and shelter, 

Where no storms can e'er dismay. 

Though the way be rough and narrow, 
And a cross must needs be borne, 
Further on— the night is waning 
Soon will dawn the welcome morn. 

Meekly to His will submitting, 
In His love secure and strong, 
Jesus whispers, "Bide the shadows, 
It is better further on." 

Further on— O blest assurance! 
How it thrills my raptured heart, 
Just to know that I shall see Him 
When the shadows all depart. 

Let me still be strong and patient, 
Trusting where I cannot trace, 
Further on— beyond all darkness 
Faith can see God's smiling face. 

Only waiting, ever praying, 
Let my heart be filled with song. 
Sweet the promise Jesus gives me, 
"It is better further on." 

-LIZZIE C. RAMSDELL. 



R3622 : page 263 

ANENT ARCHAEOLOGY AND RELIGION. 

DR. EDGAR, one of the leading physicians 
of Glasgow, Scotland, sends us the following 
letter:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

As many good people think that the dates which are 
accepted by archaeologists must be more reliable than 
those furnished in the Scriptures, it is important that 
we should be aware of the true value of the proofs which 
satisfy these scientific men. The following extract is to 
the point:-"DATE OF SARGON.-Sargon, King of 
Akkad, reigned about 3800 B.C. This is the first date 
in the world's history about which there is no serious 
dispute. This date is made certain by an inscription of 
Nabonidos, the last native King of Babylon, who was a 
zealous restorer of ruined temples. He tells us that he 
succeeded in reaching the foundation stone of the ancient 
temple of the Sun in Sippar, a stone which the great 
Nebuchadnezzar had sought in vain to find. Under it 
was the seal-cylinder of the founder of the temple, 



Naram-Sin, son of Sargon, which, says Nabonidos, had 
not been seen for 'thrice a thousand, twice a hundred 
years.' The date of the discovery of this corner-stone 
was about 550 B.C. We thus reach 3750 B.C. as the 
date of Naram-Sin, and by adding fifty years for the 
reign of Sargon we get 3800 B.C." (Babylonia and 
Assyria. By Ross G. Murison, M.A., B.D. One of the 
Bible Class Primers edited by Principal Salmond, D.D., 
Aberdeen). 

Surely no one but an archaeologist would accept such 
a statement as was made by this heathen king without 
demanding clear proof as to its truth! 

ANOTHER ITEM OF INTEREST, CONFIRMING STATEMENTS OF 
DAWN VI., CHAPTER X. 

In the "Zentralblatt fur Gynaekologie" of 8th 
October, 1904, there is an article on "The Intra-uterine 

R3623 : page 264 

Baptism of Human Ova and Foetuses." The author 
begins by referring to the war engaged in by Dr. Treub, 
a Dutch professor of Midwifery, against the theological 
obscurantism which would allow a mother to die when 
the induction of abortion might have the effect of saving 
her life. An article, entitled "The Right to Life of 
the Unborn Child," written by Dr. Treub, has been 
translated into English by the Rev. C. van der Donckt, of 
New York. To this translation the reverend gentleman 
adds an appendix in which he declares that in such cases 
the intra-uterine baptism of the ovum or the child is 
obligatory. He refers to a case to which a friend of his, 
an American physician, was called. The woman's life 
was saved by the removal of her three-month's child 
from the uterus. "Tormented by the family and the 
first physician, our friend, still hesitating, explains to a 
venerable Jesuit father the reasons which make him 
propose to apply to this case a new method, which permits 
the baptism of the infant. This therapeutic process, 
formerly impossible, but without danger since the discovery 
of the antiseptic treatment, has for its object to 
open quickly the orifice of the matrix by the natural 
ways and to allow the injection of an abundant stream 
of baptismal water by means of a suitable instrument: 
the remaining operations of extraction which may be 
hurtful to the life of the germ are carried out afterward. 
It is admitted, in effect, that baptism in utero by injection 
is not only allowed but obligatory when the 
physician is certain that, despite all his efforts, the child 
will die during delivery. As the reasons were considered 
valid by his counsellor, the physician was enabled 
thanks to the method employed (special metallic instruments) 
to open gently the matrix (in a minute and 
a half) sufficiently to make the baptismal injection also 
done gently; then he quickly completed the thorough 



extraction of everything contained in the uterus." 

(It may be well for me to add that the method described 
is the one always followed nowadays by medical 
men. The novelty consists not in the injection but in 
the meaning attached to it). 

We have much reason to thank the Lord that the 
Sun of Righteousness will now soon arise and dispel the 
fogs of theological obscurantism and of "science, falsely 
so called." 

Our eyes, dear Brother, are indeed blessed, for they 
see the light while the darkness is still covering the earth. 
This light is getting brighter and brighter as the perfect 
day draws near. We have much to be thankful for. 

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be ever with you 
I am, yours in the Lord, JOHN EDGAR. 



R3621 : page 264 

"A PECULIAR PEOPLE." 

"Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy 
nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the 

praises of him who hath called you out of 
darkness into his marvellous light."— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

DURING the Gospel age, which is now drawing to 

a close, the Lord has been making ready a peculiar 

people for a very peculiar and very glorious 

purpose. The purpose is nothing less than that of a 

joint-reign with Christ for a thousand years, by means of 

which, not only shall "all the families of the earth be 

blessed," but angels also shall be brought to a righteous 

judgment and reward, and all things in heaven and in 

earth will be brought into perfect harmony with and conformity 

to, the divine will, and universal peace and joy 

and praise shall abound to the glory of God. 

This peculiar people is a new and chosen generation. 
They were first chosen out from among men, "through 
sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth." (2 Thess. 2: 13.) 
Or, in other words, having believed the message 
of salvation through Christ the Redeemer, and having 
gratefully accepted the same, and being earnestly desirous 
of perfect personal conformity to the divine 
will, and having, therefore, humbly submitted themselves 
entirely to God, they were chosen of God to be his peculiar 
people. 

That which renders this people peculiar as compared 
with all other people in the world is a very radical change— 
a change of nature from the human to the spiritual. (2 Pet. 1:4.) 
This change of nature has been brought about by 
the power of the Truth, which leads those who are rightly 
exercised by it to a full consecration of heart and life to 
the will and service of God, even unto death. This change 
of nature is, however only begun in the present life, and consists 



as yet only of a change of mind and a consequent 
change of character and action in harmony with the new 
hopes, aims and aspirations generated by the "exceeding 
great and precious promises." No wonder is it that a people 
actuated by such hopes and aims should be a peculiar people 
—a people separate from the world— in the world and 
yet not of it. 

They are indeed a new "generation"— i.e.,— a new race, 
of a new and noble nature, distinct and separate from 
the human race, although as "new creatures" they 
are as yet only begotten and developing in the embryo 
state, the full development, or birth, being due at 
the resurrection. Wonderful indeed is this truth— "Ye," 
brethren, "are a chosen generation"— a new order of beings 
and chosen of God as the heirs of his special favor. 
And not only so says the Apostle, but ye are a priesthood, 
a royal priesthood— a people to be clothed with authority 
and power to stand between God and fallen humanity; 
to lift humanity up from its degradation and restore it to 
the divine likeness and favor. Ye are indeed a royal 
priesthood, whose power and glory will appear in due 
time, to the glory of God and the blessing of all the families 
of the earth. 

But further, says the Apostle, Ye are "a holy nation." 
In what sense can this people be called a nation? A nation 
is a body of people united under one government and 
having common interests and bound by mutual obligations 
and mutual consent, either expressed or implied, to 
conserve those interests. Truly such a people, such a nation, 

R3621 : page 265 

are we under Christ Jesus our King, and our interests 

are indeed one: they are the interests of the truth concerning 

the establishment of Christ's Kingdom in all the 

earth. Our national policy is aggressive, and contemplates 

the complete subjection of every other power; but 

its object, unlike that of all other ambitious powers, is not 

the glorification of selfishness, but the exaltation of meekness 

and righteousness and the establishment of universal 

peace and happiness. Every loyal citizen of this nation is 

deeply interested in its politics, and is ready to take up 

the sword for its defense at any moment. However, we 

remember that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal; 

but they are mighty, through God, to the pulling down of 

strongholds. Our sword is "the sword of the Spirit, 

which is the Word of God," and an every-day exercise 

and drill in its use makes us able soldiers. 

Let all the members of this "chosen generation," this 
"royal priesthood," this "holy nation," this "peculiar 
people," seek more and more— by vigilance, by faithfulness 
and by holiness— to separate themselves from the 
spirit of the world, to submit themselves to the transforming 
influences of the Spirit of God, and to discipline and 
drill themselves in the use of the sword of the Spirit, that 
so they may "show forth the praises of him who hath called 



them out of darkness into his marvellous light." 
"BABES IN CHRIST" 

This peculiar people the Apostle likens, in the beginning 
of their life of faith, to babes. Though they may be 
men of mature years, they are but babes beginning a new 
life. And the Apostle counsels them, as new-born babes, to 
earnestly desire and seek for the sincere milk of the Word 
of God— the simple truths, the foundation doctrines. 
These are the plain clear statements of the Scriptures— (1) 
of the original perfection and glory of humanity, created 
in the image of God— Gen. 1:27,31; (2) of the fall of 
Adam and the race represented in him in trial— Gen. 3; 
1 Cor. 15:22; (3) of the death penalty-Gen. 2:17; 3:19; 
Rom. 6:23; (4) of the redemption of Adam, and therefore 
also of the race represented in him, by the payment 
of an equivalent price— the sacrifice of "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all"— 1 Cor. 15:22; 
1 Tim. 2:6; (5) of the actual deliverance of the redeemed 
race in God's due time and order.— Acts 3:19-21. 

Those who in simple faith accept these truths and who, 
laying aside all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies and envies 

R3622 : page 265 

and all evil speaking, endeavor to live worthy of this 
salvation, esteeming it as only a reasonable service to devote 
themselves thenceforth to the service of God, are 
accepted of him as sons and heirs— as spiritual sons. And 
precious indeed are these little ones in the Lord's sight. 
It was with reference to such that the Lord said to Peter, 
"Feed my lambs"; and again that he gave warning to false 
teachers, saying, "Whoever shall ensnare one of the least 
of these who believe in me, it would be better for him 
that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he 
were sunk in the depth of the sea." (John 21:15; Matt. 18:6, 
Diaglott.) And again, under the figure of a tender 
shepherd caring for a weak and straying lamb, he shows 
his tender solicitude for these babes of the family, saying, 
"It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven that 
one of these little ones should perish."— Matt. 18:14. 
But while the babes in Christ, because of their very 
feebleness and inexperience, have much special care bestowed 
upon them, and are dearly beloved of the Lord, 
and while their meek and teachable spirit is commended 
to all (Matt. 18:4), it is not the will of God that they 
should always remain babes. The very object of his commending 
to them the milk of the Word is that they may 
grow thereby out of this infantile state up to the maturity 
of spiritual life— "that we be no more children, tossed to 
and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine." 
(Eph. 4:14.) There should come a time in the experience 
of every healthy growing child of God when he should be 
able to leave the principles of the doctrine of Christ— 
the foundation doctrines— having them firmly established 



and settled in his mind, and therefore not needing to dig 
them up and lay them over again— and go on growing in 
grace and in the knowledge of the Truth unto perfection. 
-Heb. 6:1. 

The Apostle Paul reproved some of his day because 
they did not thus grow; saying, "For when for the time 
[spent] ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one 
teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles 
of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and 
not of strong meat: for every one that useth milk [only] 
is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe." 
(Heb. 5:12,13.) We are not to live continually on the 
milk diet, "but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God." (Matt. 4:4.) Some of these words are 
the simple truths above noted— the milk; and others are 
deeper truths, the strong meat for those who, nourished by 
the pure milk, had grown and had developed considerable 
firmness and strength of Christian character. This "solid 
food," says the Apostle (Heb. 5:14), is for adults— for 
those possessing faculties habitually exercised in the discrimination 
of both good and evil. He also warned them 
of the dreadful result to them if they should fall away.— 
Heb. 6:4-6. 

If the babes in Christ are fed on adulterated milk— a 
confused mixture of truth and error concerning the above-mentioned 
foundation doctrines— the result will be that 
they will sicken and die, unless the unwholesome diet is 
speedily removed and the sincere, pure milk is sought after 
and used. As a general thing there is not sufficient care 
on the part of the babes in Christ about seeking the pure milk 
of the Word; and many of the adults are too careless about 
setting the impure milk before them. Let those who are 
truly the Lord's little ones bear in mind the Apostle's 
counsel to desire and seek after only the pure milk of the 
Word, and resolutely to discard all else. Any theological 
views which will not rest squarely upon the above-named 
foundation doctrines, so plainly enunciated in the Scriptures, 
but which attempt to pervert and to shift and to 
make them void, do not constitute the pure diet for the 
Lord's children. Let them cautiously beware of all such 
adulterations, and feed only upon the pure milk, and by 
and by upon the more solid food— that is food indeed to 
those who have their faculties exercised— and thus grow up 
to maturity, to a full development of Christian character 
and faith. 

R3622 : page 266 

The Apostle then shows (1 Pet. 2:4-8) that such consecrated 
and faithful children of God have the privilege of 
becoming members of a grand spiritual house, of which 
Christ Jesus is the head. The shape of the building to 
which reference is made is evidently that of a pyramid, 
and was probably suggested to his mind by the words of 
the Prophet Isaiah (28:16) to which he refers, saying, 
"Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner-stone, elect, precious; 



...the same is become the head of the 
corner, and a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, 
even to them which stumble at the Word, being 
disobedient, whereunto also they were appointed." 

The chief corner-stone in a pyramid is the top stone, 
which is also the model after which the whole building is 
being fashioned. The Prophet Zechariah (4:7) calls it 
the head-stone, and Isaiah (28:16) calls it a foundation-stone. 
At first thought these figures seem incongruous, 
but they are not really so when we consider that this building 
is not an earthly, but a heavenly building, having a 
heavenly foundation, and that it is held together, not by 
earthly, but by heavenly attraction. And it is in accordance 
with this thought that we are invited to come unto 
Christ, the chief corner-stone, to be built up under him 
and to be fashioned for our places as living stones in this 
building, in accordance with the lines and angles seen in 
him who is the model. 

The great work of preparing these living stones for 
their places in this building of God is still in progress, although 
it is almost completed. This is the painful part of 
the work to every one of the stones. The blows of the 
hammer and the chisel— the hard discipline of experience 
—are not desirable except for the effects— the peaceable 
fruits of righteousness. And if we would have the results 
we must patiently submit to the painful processes, and see 
to it that no cross-grained wilfulness on our part shall interfere 
with the work; for such interference would sooner 
or later be the occasion for abandoning us, and the Builder 
would substitute another stone more pliable and easily 
worked; for the time is short, and what is to be done 
must be done quickly. 

The Prophet further showed that the foundation stone 
of this great building would be a stone of stumbling and a 
rock of offense to many until the time of its exaltation. 
Those who will stumble over it, says the Apostle, are not 
those faithful and loyal to the Word of God, but those 
who stumble at the Word, being disobedient, and who will 
not accept its plain and simple teaching relative to the 
great foundation of our faith— Christ Jesus, who gave his 
life a ransom for many. (Matt. 20:28.) And this class, 
he assures us, were appointed to stumble— that it does 
not happen so, but that God designed that they should 
stumble, because they are unworthy to stand, being 
disobedient. 

God lays great stress upon loyal and loving obedience 
on the part of all his children. It was only a little matter 
of disobedience that cost Adam and his posterity so dearly, 
and that will bring similar results to all those who, 
having once escaped the condemnation of death through 
faith in Christ the Redeemer, thereafter refuse to stand 
before God in the robe of his righteousness, but prefer to 
appear in their own. All such were appointed to stumble; 
but blessed are the meek, for they shall stand. "The 
Lord knoweth them that are his." 



R3623 : page 266 

A BROKEN VOW--A FULFILLED PENALTY. 

-2 CHRONICLES 36:11-21.-SEPT. 3.- 

Golden Text:— "Be sure your sin will 
find you out."— Numbers 32:23. 

ZEDEKIAH, the last king on the throne of David, 

was exalted to his position by Nebuchadnezzar 

and reigned eleven years, until the overthrow 

of the dynasty. He was given the throne upon his taking 

a solemn oath of faithfulness as a vassal to the 

king of Babylon. The taking of that oath was the immediate 

cause of his downfall. The matter is so stated 

in Ezekiel's prophecy.— Ezek. 17:11-21. 

The folly of the king's course in this matter is but 
an illustration of the general folly of all who reject the 
Lord as their counsellor. Our lesson relates how the 
Lord through Jeremiah his prophet had warned the 
king respecting reformation and the keeping of his oath 
and the certainty that the king of Babylon would vanquish 
him. Self-willed and unbelieving and careless of 
his oath, the king, abetted by the princes and his counsellors, 
took the course which proved to be the way of 
folly and which led to the utter overthrow of the nation. 

This reminds us of our text for the year, "The 
wisdom that cometh from above is first pure, then 
peaceable, easy of entreatment, and full of mercy and 
good fruits." It was, of course, not the privilege of 
Zedekiah or others living at that time to have the guidance 
of the holy Spirit in the sense that spiritual Israel 
may enjoy it now. Nevertheless they had what to 
them was a very fair substitute, all things considered, 
namely, God's direct revelations through his prophets. 
But now as then an evil heart of unbelief is inclined to 
lean to its own understanding, its own wisdom— earthly 
wisdom, which often, as the Apostle declares, is sensual 
and devilish. This is the meaning of much of the war 
and commotion which we see about us in the world, 
especially amongst so-called "Christian nations." Nor 
should we too severely censure the world for not acting 
along the lines of faith and trust in the Lord when we 
remember that they know him not and see him not as 
do his spirit-begotten children— "Blessed are your eyes 
for they see and your ears for they hear." For those 
who do see and do hear and do know the Master's will 
to proceed along worldly lines would certainly be much 
more reprehensible than for the natural man to take 
the same course. The Lord looketh upon the heart, 
and where the privileges are small the requirements will 
be correspondingly lenient; where the privileges are 



R3623 : page 267 

great, as with us, we can only reasonably expect stricter 
requirements at the Lord's hands. 

"THE LORD WILL JUDGE HIS PEOPLE" 

In Zedekiah's case the Lord allowed the natural 
consequences of his wrong course to follow, and they 
were severe indeed. His sons were slain before his 
eyes, then he was blinded and carried to Babylon, 
where he was a prisoner until his death. We infer from 
this that he never came to a properly repentant attitude 
of heart before the Lord. On the contrary his 
father, the previous king, Jehoiachim, who was taken 
a prisoner to Babylon eleven years before, was subsequently 
released from prison and granted many favors 
at the hands of the king of Babylon. 

These high ones in nominal Israel may properly 
enough represent the more highly favored ones of the 
Lord's people in spiritual Israel, and we may draw the 
lesson that the unfaithful, like Jehoiachim, might be 
chastened and afterwards treated with leniency; but 
that those who violate the oath of their covenant, their 
vow to the Lord, breaking that vow, will suffer loss in 
every sense of the word— they shall thenceforth be 
blinded by the Adversary to the blessings they had 
once enjoyed and they will subsequently die the Second 
Death. Everywhere the Scriptures uphold the thought 
that a vow, a solemn compact with the Lord, is a most 
binding obligation. It is under such an obligation that 
all the members of the New Creation have been granted 
the first fruits of the spirit. Disloyalty or renouncement 
of this vow to us could therefore mean nothing 
short of the Second Death. 

CALAMITY AND RUIN 

The calamity and ruin which came upon Jerusalem 
and Judea, at the time described in our lesson, doubtless 
seemed to many to indicate God's lack of power, his 
lack of ability to protect the nation which he had 
specially planted. Not so. The Scriptures assure us 
that God foresaw the calamities which then came upon 
his chosen people; he foretold them through the prophet 
and he permitted them to come upon the nation. The 
lessons he had sent them in the nature of milder chastisements 
had availed little. The example he had shown 
of scattering the ten tribes on account of their idolatry 
had not properly been taken to heart by the two tribes 
with whom his favor still remained. Now he would 
scatter them all and leave the land desolate for a period 
of seventy years— a period long enough to allow nearly 
all of them to die in exile, a period in which those who 
loved idolatry might go their way, as it is written, 
"Ephraim is joined to his idols, let him alone." It was 



a period, too, in which those who still reverenced the 
Lord— as for instance Daniel, and others mentioned— 
would in a foreign land look back longingly to the land 
of promise, read more attentively than ever the records 
of the Lord's dealings with their nation, and see how 
he had predicted this very trouble which they now were 
experiencing, and lead them thereby to a better condition 
of heart and to the instruction of their children 
in the right ways of the Lord. 

As a matter of fact this was the result. At the close 
of the seventy years' desolation of the land the Lord 
raised up Cyrus, the King of Media and Persia, who, 
having conquered the Babylonians, offered liberty to all 
of the Jews who desired to return to their own land. 
That proclamation would have little influence upon the 
vast majority of the Israelites who had gone into captivity. 
Those idolatrously inclined had undoubtedly 
forgotten all about Jehovah and the covenant made 
with their fathers, and were fully amalgamated with the 
heathen by intermarriage, etc. The indifferent Israelites 
settled in the foreign land realized that it would be 
to their disadvantage in temporal matters to leave their 
Babylonian homes to go back to Palestine, there to begin 
life afresh and to battle with the inconveniences, 
the wilderness condition, of their once fertile land. 
Consequently of all the hosts of the twelve tribes that 
went down to Babylon in various captivities only about 
50,000 accepted the offer of Cyrus to return. Only a 
very few of these had ever seen Palestine; they had 
merely heard of it through their parents and the few 
aged ones of their number. These, however, had learned 
well the lesson which their fathers refused to learn. 
From the day of the return from the Babylonian captivity, 
we have not a record of further idolatry in Jerusalem 
and Judea. 

DESOLATED SEVENTY YEARS 

The last verse of our lesson tells us how the land 
lay desolate three score and ten years to fulfil her 
Sabbaths, as the Lord had foretold by the mouth of 

R3624 : page 267 

his prophet Jeremiah. Here we see clearly marked the 
time when the seventy years began, that it was at the 
time of the carrying away of Zedekiah and not at the 
time of his father's captivity, eleven years previously. 
We see distinctly that it was not seventy years' captivity 
but seventy years' desolation of the land, and 
apparently the land was not desolate during the eleven 
years of the reign of Zedekiah. This is an important 
point in history, and one which has misled many in 
their chronological reckonings. It is an important point 
in the reckoning of the Jubilees, but for a fuller statement 
of this matter we refer the reader to MILLENNIAL 



DAWN, Volume II., Chapter VI. 

The Lord had appointed a jubilee arrangement by 
which every seventh year would be a Sabbath year of 
rest to the soil, and every fiftieth year a Jubilee of restitution 
for all the people, to all the inhabitants throughout 
Israel. It would appear that this divine arrangement 
fell into neglect or was only partially observed for 
a time. Doubtless the princes and nobles and wealthy 
thought they saw an error in the divine program and 
that they could improve upon God's arrangement. At 
all events there is no record of the keeping of the Jubilees, 
and the Lord here declares that they were neglected— 
either they were not kept at all or they were observed 
in so perfunctory a manner as to constitute neglect from 
the divine standpoint. Nevertheless we have no record 

R3624 : page 268 

of the Lord having chided the people on this score. A 
lesson for us would be that every feature of the divine 
law is of importance, that every regulation should be 
observed, that there is a blessing in the arrangement 
whether it so appears to human judgment or not, and 
that the Lord will require an account from us eventually 
respecting our knowledge and obedience. 

Turning to Leviticus 26:33-35, we find that the 
Lord through Moses had foretold this very failure to 
observe the year Sabbaths and Jubilees, and that it was 
on this account that the whole nation was cast out of 
the land of promise so that it received in the seventy 
years of its desolation the full number of Jubilee years 
—"For as long as it lay desolate it kept Sabbath to 
fulfil three score and ten years." 

This thought, that each of those years that the 
land was desolated represented a Jubilee year which had 
not been properly observed by Israel, furnishes one of 
the keys by which we may estimate the whole number 
of Jubilees from the entrance of the children of Israel 
into the land of Palestine down to the grand consummation 
when the Kingdom of Messiah will be established 
and the actual Jubilee, the antitypical Jubilee, 
will begin. These calculations carried out show that 
we are already living in the great antitypical Jubilee, 
which will last for a thousand years. As the priests 
were to blow the silver trumpets in the beginning of the 
typical Jubilee year announcing its beginning, so now 
all who are of the Royal Priesthood are commissioned 
by the Lord to blow upon the silver trumpets of truth, 
and to make known to all who have a hearing ear in 
spiritual Israel our present times and seasons, and that 
the great Jubilee, the times of restitution of all things, 
has begun. This implies, as we have already shown, 
that the great King is now taking unto himself his 
great power, and that his reign over the nations will 
soon begin, precipitating the time of trouble such as was 
not since there was a nation, the result of which will be 



the overthrow of all human institutions and the opening 
of the way to the establishment of the Kingdom for 
which we pray, "Thy Kingdom come," under whose 
ministrations all the families of the earth will be blessed, 
and every evil institution and thing suppressed, and 
every good and true matter brought forward to the 
light, established. 

Thank God for the great blessing and privilege of 
living in our day under these favorable conditions. Let 
us be faithful to our vow and for the present be submissive 
to the powers that be, waiting for the Lord in his 
own time and way to establish his Kingdom and to 
fulfil all the gracious promises of his Word. Let us 
who realize that we are now in the antitypical 
Jubilee be faithful to the blowing on the trumpets. 

"Blow ye the trumpet, blow 
The gladly solemn sound; 

Let all the nations know, 
To earth's remotest bound, 

The year of jubilee is come, 

Returning ransomed sinners home." 



R3624 : page 268 

BEREAN BIBLE STUDY FOR SEPTEMBER. 

--SEE PREFACE OF WATCH TOWER BIBLES 
AND WATCH TOWER, MARCH 1, 1905.- 

BROTHERLY KINDNESS (BROTHERLY LOVE) 

11. How should brotherly love exercise itself in seeking 
opportunities for service? Z. '98-228 (2nd col. 

par. 1,2); 229, (1st col. par. 1,2). 

12. How should brotherly-love manifest itself "in honor 
preferring one another"? Rom. 12:10; Z. '97-264 

(2nd col. par. 4); Z/05-139 (1st col. par. 1). 

13. How should we "consider one another to provoke 
unto love and to good works"? Heb. 10:24; F.308, 
par. 1,2; Z/05-106 (2nd col. par. 1). 

14. How will brotherly love exercise itself in "laying 
down our lives for the brethren"? 1 Jno. 3:16; 
Z/98-228 (1st col. par. 3); Z.'01-4 (1st col. par. 3); 
Z/01-150 (1st col. par. 1); F.468, par. 1, and 469. 

15. How should we manifest brotherly -kindness toward 
the weaker brethren? 1 Thess. 5:14; Z/98-183 

(2nd col. par. 1); F.236, par. 1; F.304 to 306. 

16. How will brotherly love sympathize with the more 
demonstrative brethren? F.134, par. 2. 

17. How should brotherly -kindness deal with the self-seeking? 
F.296, 297. 

18. How will brotherly -kindness deal with brethren who 
lack self-control? F.148 (par. 2) to 150 (par. 1). 

19. How should brotherly-kindness seek to avoid "busy-bodying"? 



1 Tim. 5:13; 1 Pet. 4:15; F.583 to 
586. 

20. How should brotherly-love control the tongue? F.291, 
par. 2;F.292,par. l;Z.'98-85 (1st col. par. 2,3); 
Z/98-86 (1st col. par. 2,3); F.586 to 588; F.406 
(par. 1). 



R3624 : page 268 

THE LIFE-GIVING STREAM. 

-EZEKIEL47:1-12.-SEPT. 10.- 

Golden Text:— "Whosoever will let him take 
of the water of life freely."— Rev. 22:17. 

EZEKIEL'S prophecy is full of symbolism, and 
has appropriately been termed the apocalypse 
of the Old Testament. It was written in 
Babylonia in the Chaldaic language. 

Ezekiel was one of the captives of Judah taken to 
Babylonia by King Nebuchadnezzar on the occasion of 
his first invasion, when he placed Zedekiah on the 
throne, eleven years before his later invasion, when 
the city was destroyed. The captives taken at that 
time included many of the chief men of the Jewish 
nation, princes and nobles, the brightest and the best. 
His object in taking these seems to have been to 

R3624 : page 269 

strengthen his own empire, for the captives were not 
treated as slaves, but were granted great liberty, some 
of them, as in the case of Daniel, rising to positions 
of very high honor in the kingdom. Ezekiel had great 
liberty, and his prophesying was done for the Jews of 
the Babylonian captivity— exiles. The Lord's testimony 
through this prophet was undoubtedly intended 
to cheer and comfort those of his people who were 
Israelites indeed, and to fan the spark of faith which 
still remained in their hearts— to lead them, as in the 
case of Daniel, to hope for the return of God's favor 
and the end of their captivity with the end of the appointed 
seventy years' desolation of the land. 

The matter of our lesson as heard by the Jews in 
exile undoubtedly was pictured as referring to earthly 
Jerusalem, and the blessings as appertaining to the 
Jews as a nation. The restoration of Jerusalem and 
the Temple are clearly and explicitly foretold, and no 
doubt the hearts of the captives leaped with joy as 
they thought of the future blessings, and no doubt 
also, their faith and hope were encouraged. But so 
surely as Ezekiel's prophecy was the Word of the Lord, 
so surely the prophecy did not relate to blessings to 



be conferred upon that people at the time of their restoration 

from the land of Babylon, for the predictions 

of Ezekiel's prophecy were never fulfilled. Just so 

surely they belong to the future. Spiritual Israelites 

may realize that the prophecy not only related to 

natural Israel but also to spiritual Israel, not only to 

a deliverance from literal Babylon but also a deliverance 

from mystic Babylon, "Babylon the great, the 

mother of harlots," whose power is soon to be completely 

overthrown as precedent to a full deliverance 

of all who are Israelites indeed and the establishment 

of the Kingdom.— Rev. 18. 

THE RIVER OF LIFE 

Our lesson deals particularly with one of Ezekiel's 
visions, which predicted the springing into existence of 
a wonderful river whose waters would bring to the 

R3625 : page 269 

land of Palestine and to the Dead Sea verdure and 

life instead of drouth, desolation and death. The ordinary 

interpretation of this lesson is that the Gospel 

is represented in this river, which now for a considerable 

time has been flowing onward and bringing life. 

We cannot accept this interpretation, for several reasons: 

First, the description is in such close agreement 

with the Millennial age blessings of Revelation 21 and 

22 as to leave no doubt that the same thing is referred 

to. In Revelation we see that the Church is the Bride, 

and the Church glorified is symbolized by the heavenly 

Jerusalem and the river of the water of life, whose 

leaves are for the healing of the nations and whose 

fruit is for their sustenance and whose water is the 

water of life, living water. There can be no doubt 

that the two rivers are identical. And since the Church 

is not yet complete, and has therefore not yet been 

glorified, the river of life has not yet proceeded from 

the glorified Church, and hence the whole matter must 

be future. 

The same thought is in this lesson as Ezekiel gives 
it. He first sees the Temple and then beholds the 
glory of the Lord entering the Temple through the eastern 
gate, and that gate closed after the Lord. This 
represents the closing of the door at the end of this 
age, as our Lord portrayed it in the parable of the ten 
virgins. The door will be shut, the glory of the Lord 
will have entered into the Temple. It is subsequent 
to this shutting of the door that the prophet is shown 
the issuing of the water from under the threshold. 
The lesson, therefore, is clear and explicit to the effect 
that not until the glory of the Lord shall have entered 
his Temple, not until the Church shall be glorified, not 
until that door shall be forever shut, will the water of 
life issue forth. 



The stream is shown as rapidly increasing. Issuing 
as a rivulet it speedily becomes ankle deep, a little 
further along waist deep and a little further beyond a 
man's depth to ford. Thus is indicated the rapid increase 
of the blessings of the Lord as soon as his time 
shall have come; but, as we have heretofore pointed 
out, there is no such river of life now, our Master himself 
being authority for this in his statement respecting 
his disciples, saying, "The water I shall give him shall 
be in him a well of water springing up to everlasting 
life." Ours is not an invitation to drink of a river of 
life, but an invitation to have a wellspring of water of 
life started in our hearts by the impartation of the 
holy Spirit. As already pointed out it will be after the 
river of the water of life flows from the glorified Church 
that the Spirit and the Bride will say to the world of 
mankind, Come. Then whosoever will may come, 
whereas now no man can come "except the Father 
which sent me draw him." 

A REFRESHING PICTURE 

Thus seen, God has rich blessings in store for mankind 
in general in the day when his Kingdom shall be 
established amongst men, in Immanuel's day. The restitution 
of that time is pictured in the leaves of the 
trees; the abundance of instruction and nourishment, 
mental, moral and physical, is represented in the fruit 
of the trees. More than this, wherever the water of 
this river went life resulted, until finally it emptied 
itself into the Dead Sea with the effect that the waters 
of the latter were healed. Fishes thrive well in sea 
water, but the water of the Dead Sea is about five times 
as strongly pregnated with salts, and as a consequence 
fish taken from the Mediterranean and put into the 
Dead Sea die in a few minutes— hence its name, Dead 
Sea. 

It would not at all surprise us if, in the beginning 
of the Millennial age, not only the nation of Israel would 
receive the blessing of the Lord lost at the beginning 
of this Gospel age and become his representative people 
in the world— the Church having been taken from the 
world, glorified spirit beings— but neither would it surprise 
us if, in the Lord's providence, some miracle were 
wrought by which the Dead Sea would become connected 
with the Mediterranean, possibly refreshed also 

R3625 : page 270 

by some such river as is here described by Ezekiel, a 
picture of the symbolical river of life flowing from the 
New Jerusalem. But however interested we might be 
in the thought of such a literal fulfilment of this prophecy, 
our interest is still greater in the fulfilment of it 
as a symbol in accord with the river of Revelation. 
From this symbolical standpoint the Dead Sea represents 



the dead world, and the coming of life-giving 
waters would represent the resurrection power of the 
Lord and the Church exercised amongst men during the 
Millennial age. As the Apostle expresses it, it would 
mean, for the Gentiles, life from the dead. 

But while it is refreshing and exhilarating to look 
down into the future and think of the blessings to come, 
it is important that we draw practical lessons and apply 
them to ourselves, and see to it that we do all in our 
power now to make our calling and our election sure, 
that we may be of that New Jerusalem class, the Bride 
glorified, from whom the river of the water of life will 
issue. There is no doubt that it will all be accomplished, 
because the Word of the Lord has spoken it. The whole 
question for us is whether we or others will be the Lord's 
ministers, servants, honored agents in causing the blessing 
of the Lord to fill the whole earth. The more we 
love the glorious prospects set before us in the Word, 
the more we will strive for present participation in the 
sufferings of Christ, in laying down our lives for the 
brethren, and for future participation in the glories of 
Christ in the blessing of all the families of the 
earth. 



R3625 : page 270 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS. 

MR. C. T. RUSSELL, 
BROTHER BELOVED:- 

I have just read in your booklet, "Protestants Awake," 
these burning words: "Some even admit that their personal 
views differ from those they preach, and are endeavoring 
to have their conferences and synods allow them to 
preach what they conceive to be truth and desist from what 
they believe to be error; dishonorable, ignoble, hypocritical 
and slavish though such a course is," etc. This is not all 
true in my case, but sufficiently so to cause the words dishonorable, 
ignoble, hypocritical and slavish, to strike me 
with tremendous force, and in deep agony of spirit, born of 
condemnation, I cry unto God, What shall I do? I most 
certainly believe your interpretation of the blessed Word. 
My soul longs for freedom; I am helpless— chained by environment. 
Tell me what to do? I doubt not there are hundreds 
in my condition. They saw the truth too late. What 
they possessed of this world's goods has been willingly sacrificed 
to an all-absorbing, but false purpose. Their means is 
gone; their physical force is spent; their years are well nigh 
numbered. "Their righteous souls are vexed from day to 
day in seeing and hearing." Conscious helplessness augments 
their bitter agony. They are handicapped by dependent 
families. To withdraw from their denominations means 
to cut off their bread. Your system offers no support to the 
helpless. Their minds are constantly harrowed by the light 



of the new revelation. Their spirits chafe and fret like the 
caged eagle yearning for the liberty he sees but cannot enjoy. 
There seems to be no open door of opportunity, and 
again I ask, in God's name, What shall we preachers do? I 
would be willing to sink out of sight from the world. 

If I could dispense with all responsibility toward my 
family, I would gladly submit to any sort of humiliation, 
criticism or persecution, and would feel that the liberty for 
which my heart and mind so yearns would be cheap at any 
cost to myself, but alas, alas! Brother, pray that a door 
may be opened unto me— that deliverance may come, in 
God's own way. 

Yours in bonds and fellowship, 



REPLY 

MY DEAR BROTHER IN CHRIST:- 

Your pathetic letter of the 18th is at hand. You have 
my sympathy, indeed, dear brother. I rejoice that you have 
a conscience and a heart to which the truth does appeal. Be 
of good courage! Our heavenly Father lives; our Redeemer 
lives; his power is as great as it ever was. All of his Daniels 
are safe from the lions. All of his Elijahs shall be fed. All 
of the widows shall be supplied with meal. The condition 
is faith, trust, obedience. 

But the Lord's favor cannot be expected unless the 
step of obedience has been taken. Then man's extremity 
will constitute the terms on which the Father will be pleased 
to cause all things to work together for his good. The command 
is, "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers 
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." 
Those who discern the real Babylon condition, those who 
discern the errors of "Christendom," are more responsible 
than the others in Babylon who discern not; and if they will 
not come out of her, if they will not stand up for the truth 
and the Lord, they are demonstrating that they are not 
worthy to be his disciples in the special sense in which that 
word is properly to be used during this Gospel age. It is not 
for us to say that those who do not come out will lose all, 
but we have the assurance that they will lose the Kingdom 
position, the great prize of our high calling of God in Christ 
Jesus; and their position would be, through greater tribulations, 
in the "great company" of Revelation 7, "before 
the throne," instead of in it; with "palm branches," instead 

R3626 : page 270 

of "crowns;" "servants," instead of "the Bride." 

Dear brother, if you have my sympathy, much more 
you may be sure you have the Lord's sympathy, and as soon 
as you shall have learned the lesson and taken the proper 
steps he will manifest his love and care and blessing toward 
you. Exercise the faith; overcome the spirit of fear and 
bondage, and thus be in heart an overcomer. The Lord will 
do the rest. It may not be in your way, nor in my way, but 



in the Lord's way he will supply all your need. 

The question before your mind should not be, Shall I 
come out of Babylon? but that being settled affirmatively, 
the question should be, How would the Lord have me come 
out of Babylon? I offer you a few suggestions along this line, 
which I trust may be helpful. 

I advise firmness and courage, blended with moderation 
and love. The truth of itself is sufficiently strong, without 
our adding to it any of our weight in the way of invective or 
sarcasm. "Preach the Word," says the Apostle; "Speak 
the truth in love." Begin at once to preach on the good 
tidings of great joy which shall be unto all people, showing to 
all people of the Lord, and all others who will hear, something 
of the lengths and the breadths, the heights and the depths, 
of the love of God which passes all understanding. After a 
few discourses of this kind have filled their hearts with a 
high estimate of the divine character, preach a discourse on 
the meaning of the word "hell" as found in the Old Testament; 
another discourse on the meaning of "hell" as 
found in the New Testament. Nothing in these sermons can 
conflict with any reasonable or proper denominational 
limitations. Get your sermons out of the usual rut, and 
more into Bible studies, doing the talking yourself, of 

R3626 : page 271 

course, but appealing to your congregation, not so much 
through oratory, as through reason and references to the 
Scriptures. Thus gradually, from Scripture to Scripture, 
you may draw the attention of your own hearers, and 
those in your vicinity, to what the Scriptures do say, and 
they doubtless reverence God's Word. If later a conflict 
with the creed shall be thrust upon you, you can appeal 
to the congregation as to whether they desire to be bound 
by a creed of men, or whether their consecration to the Lord 
was to be faithful to him, in harmony with his Word. Stand 
up courageously, dear brother, and if this shall mean (what 
it doubtless will in the end) the rejection of your message 
and of you, God will bless those Scriptures to your comfort, 
and the enlightenment, perhaps, of others in that vicinity. 

As you say, the Lord in his providence is not arranging for 
a paid ministry, after the ordinary fashion, but in the present 
movement toward the methods of the early Church paid 
ministry is abandoned, and the original methods of laboring 
with hands and preaching the truth, as strength and opportunity 
will afford, is coming into vogue amongst those who 
are hearing the Shepherd's voice. 

When faithfulness to the truth shall have led you outside 
of all sectarian lines (as it is sure to do, for, as the Apostle 
declared, "the time is coming when they will not endure 
sound doctrine"), we would be pleased to have you serve 
the Society as a colporteur, and will be glad to do what we 
can to co-operate in the use of your talents in some such 
manner, in the service of the truth, carrying the message to 
those who have not as yet heard it. 

Meantime, remember, dear brother, that you have our 



love, and sympathy, and prayers, and that we shall be always 
glad to hear from you. 
As ever, 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL 



PASTOR C. T. RUSSELL, 
DEAR SIR:- 

I wish to thank you for the tracts and the paper. I will 
send the money as soon as I get it in the fall. I did not 
know I would enjoy it so much, but it is the only pleasure I 
have, as there are no Dawnists here and no one is in sympathy 
with my belief. I sent for the tracts to distribute 
among friends, intending then to canvass for MILLENNIAL 
DAWN. I am sure I could do the work well, but my parents 
will not allow me for fear the churches would turn against 
us. They think because I am not eighteen that I do not 
realize what is right. When I left our Church they thought 
I was crazy, but I know it was God who sent me the DAWN 
books. It is very hard to be able to reap in the harvest and 
yet be held back by authority. 

But I realize in all things that my life is in God's hands 
and I am content to go through the fire since He leads me. 

I wish I could tell you how I appreciate the blessed 
knowledge of MILLENNIAL DAWN! You will some day know 
how we all feel about it. Oh, how I rejoice in my loneliness 
to know there are hundreds of "like precious faith" around 
me though I do not know them, and I hope they remember 
in their assemblies the isolated ones. 

I would be glad if you would write me some words of 
comfort and remember me in your prayers, for sometimes I 
do feel so lonely; and God bless you. 
Yours in consecration, 
111. 

REPLY 

MY DEAR YOUNG SISTER IN CHRIST:- 

I am glad to hear from you, and to know of the depth 
of your consecration to the Lord, and of your appreciation 
of his glorious plan. I rejoice that you will now have the 
regular visits of the WATCH TOWER, which will compensate 
to some extent your lack of personal fellowship with others 
of like precious faith. It is apparently the Lord's arrangement, 
by which many of his people are enabled to follow the 
advice of the Apostle, in Heb. 10:25, "Forsake not the assembling 
of yourselves together." Our hearts meet together 
in the study of the Word, in connection with the WATCH 
TOWER helps for Bible study, as well as meeting at the 
throne of grace. Through this means the Lord seems to be 
blessing, refreshing, strengthening and instructing and preparing 
for the Kingdom, some of his dear "Jewels." 

You are quite right in respect to your duty: so long as 
you are under age you have no discretion in the matter of 



obedience to your parents, except in the case of any demand 
in violation of your conscience, and this is not your present 
situation. 

Be assured, dear sister, that faithfulness to the Lord 
under the trials and difficulties, as they are permitted to 
come to you, will, in his providence, work out blessing. He 
is able to keep us; he is able to open and close the doors of 
opportunity. Let us trust him fully. Ultimately we will see 
more and more of the lengths and breadths and heights and 
depths of the wisdom and riches of his grace. May the Lord's 
blessing continue with you. 

Your brother and servant in the Lord, 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings to you in the Lord. 

I wish I were able to tell you of the intense joy and 
blessing I received from the Dayton Convention. It was a 
day long to be remembered, and may our blessed Lord and 
Chief Reaper give the increase to that seed sowing, as the 
Dayton friends and yourself so zealously have done the 
planting and watering. It brings to my imagination some of 
the scenes that must have taken place when our dear Savior 
spake as never man spake to the crowds that pressed him. 
Glorious ministry! to be co-laborers together with Him! 

In your comments in a TOWER of recent date on John 12:24, 
you said that our Lord's going down into death 
brought forth much fruit— the first fruits— the Church, the 
144,000. Thinking on this it occurred to me, Will not the 
Church as so many grains of wheat (by virtue of our Heavenly 
Father's blessed arrangement in Christ) going down into 
death, bring forth the same amount of fruit in proportion? 
Reasoning thus, I found that if one brought forth 144,000, 
that number would bring forth 144,000 times 144,000, or 
20,736,000,000. Ah! I thought, here is where Brother Russell 
must get his twenty thousand millions to which he refers so 
often in his sermons as representing earth's dead, and specially 
mentioned in the Tract, "Millennial Hopes Examined." 
Now, dear Brother, is this a mere coincidence or did you use 
this method in addition to the one mentioned in the Tract? 

The light of His parousia is growing brighter and 
brighter as the Truth shines from the blessed Word; how 
much (and yet how little) I appreciate the various lightning 
flashes that come from the TOWER, (the "sign" of the Son of 
Man in heaven); how they clear up and purify the murky 
atmosphere that has surrounded the Word these many centuries, 
and wonderful miracle as it were, like of old, the 
thunder came in the harvest. So here in this "harvest" the 
thunders have uttered their voices with no uncertain sound, 
and verily to-day are shaking the very foundations of Ecclesiasticism, 
and by the time the last one speaks so that all 
hear, only those things will remain that cannot be shaken, 
God's blessed, glorious Truth. To Him be glory and honor and 
praise through Christ Jesus throughout all ages. Amen. 



Your Brother in the one Hope, 
C.B. S.,Ohio. 

IN REPLY:- 

I am glad to have your suggestion respecting the proportions 
of the fruit of our Lord's death as represented in 
the Church of the First-born (144,000) and the afterfruit of 
these, 20,736,000,000. I had not noted this correspondency, 
and hence it had nothing whatever to do with my calculations 
of the world's dead. 

Yours in our Lord, C. T. RUSSELL. 



page 273 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 