R978 : page 1 

VOL. IX. PITTSBURGH, PA., OCTOBER, 1887. NO. 2. 



R977 : page 1 

THE MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

These were mentioned in last TOWER 
for the first time, and we already have 
more orders than will be supplied by the 
first lot of fifteen thousand. Those who have 
ordered, among whom are several brethren 
in business who can use quantities, 
express themselves as highly pleased with 
the plan. It is both a cheap and an unobtrusive 
way, of preaching the good tidings 
of great joy to many. 

The appearance of these envelopes has 
been generally approved as neat, and we 
expect you will all want them. It is 
written of this time: "His lightnings enlightened 
the earth;" and these as one of 
the agencies of the truth, the light, have 
their mission to perform. How like the 
lightning they will be, as borne on "Fast 
Mail" trains they rush hither and thither 
over the entire civilized world, unobtrusively 
putting before the eyes of intelligent 
business people and friends and their families, 
pointed Scripture texts which set 
forth our hopes; calling their attention 
also to the DAWN. Those who might refuse 
to hear you, or whom you could not 
approach in conversation or in any other 
manner on these themes, will be led by 
their curiosity to listen to your representative 
—to hear this preacher's message. 

We repeat the price, postage prepaid 
by us: One hundred 35 cts., three hundred 
$1.00, one thousand $3.00. Those 
who order two thousand for $6.00 (or more 
at same rate) can have their business card 
printed on the corner without extra charge. 
Order only in quantities here specified, 
(Do not therefore order 50 cts. worth, 
nor 150, nor 200, nor 500,) as we get 
them put up in packages thus and cannot 
spare the time to prepare special quantities. 
For this reason also we charge one cent 
each for quantities less than one hundred. 

Address as above. 
-TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 



R979 : page 1 

THE FIFTIETH THOUSAND. 

Still they go, you will be glad to learn. 
MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. I. is now in its 
fiftieth thousand. Forty thousand have 
already gone out, and ten thousand more 
are now being printed and bound. 

This was our first proposition— the hope 
first expressed— that before 1888 fifty 
thousand copies of DAWN would be in the 
hands of the people. Three months yet 
remain of this year and we want to suggest 
what is possible through still further 
faithfulness of the harvesters. It is possible 
to have twenty-five or fifty thousand 
more out by Jan'y 1st. 1888. How?— 
By the Colporteurs who are selling DAWN 
continuing their present averages, or increasing 
them as the cool weather will permit; 
by more of the brethren and sisters 
entering this branch of the "harvest" 
work; and by all others of the readers of 
the TOWER doing what they CAN. 

What can the others do? They can 
each sell from four to twenty copies, or 
can use that number for loaning, though 
to sell is better, because people are almost 
sure to use what they pay even a small 
price for. So then, God knows and we 
know the possibilities; and as the New 
Years' TOWER comes to you, all will see 
how faithful the servants have been as a 
whole. Some we are sure can do no more 
than they are now doing, though some 
others we fear are "slothful servants." But 
the "View" in the September TOWER has 
seemed to awaken and quicken many previously 
asleep, or overcharged with the affairs 
of this world, for which we thank God. 



R978 : page 1 

A CHINAMAN'S VIEW OF CHRISTIANITY. 

The following extracts from a paper in 
the North American Review by Wong 
Chin Foo, a Chinaman, and evidently a 
graduate of one of our New England colleges, 
gives his reasons for preferring the 
religion of his fathers to Christianity. 



True Christianity and its teachings he of 
course does not comprehend and against 
it his pointed sarcasm has no power; but 
against much, very much, nay, against the 
generality of what is called Christian it 
strikes a sharp blow which should have 
some good effect in stimulating thought 
on the part of many who feel that their 
religion only must be an unreasonable 
matter. And yet we know that this educated 
heathen man voices the sentiment of 
thousands of sensible thinkers, who, merely 
because they have less moral courage 
than he, do not express themselves. How 
much need there is, then, to "Lift up a 
standard for the people"— the truth— and 
how energetic all should be who have been 
entrusted with the honor of being standard 
bearers in this time "when the enemy 
shall come in like a flood." 

Wong Chin Foo says:— 

The main element of all religion is the 
moral code controlling and regulating the 
relations and acts of individuals toward 
"God, neighbor, and self;" and this intelligent 
"heathenism" was taught thousands 
of years before Christianity existed 
or Jewry borrowed it. Heathenism has 
not lost or lessened it since. Born and 
raised a heathen, I learned and practised 
its moral and religious code; and acting 
thereupon I was useful to myself and many 
others. My conscience was clear, and my 
hopes as to future life were undimmed by 
distracting doubt. But, when about seventeen, 
I was transferred to the midst of 
your showy Christian civilization, and at 
this impressible period of life Christianity 
presented itself to me at first under its 
most alluring aspects; kind Christian 
friends became particularly solicitous for 
my material and religious welfare, and I 
was only too willing to know the truth. 
But before qualifying for this high mission, 
the Christian doctrine I would teach 
had to be learned, and here on the threshold 
I was bewildered by the multiplicity 
of Christian sects, each one claiming a 
monopoly of the only and narrow road 
to heaven. 

I looked into Presbyterianism only to 
retreat shudderingly from a belief in a 
merciless God who had long foreordained 
most of the helpless human race to an 



eternal hell. To preach such a doctrine 
to intelligent heathen would only raise in 
their minds doubts of my sanity, if they 
did not believe I was lying. Then I dipped 
into Baptist doctrines, but found so 
many sects therein of different "shells," 
warring over the merits of cold-water initiation 
and the method and time of using 
it, that I became disgusted with such trivialities; 
and the question of close communion 
or not, only impressed me that 
some were very stingy and exclusive with 
their bit of bread and wine, and others a 
little less so. Methodism struck me as a 
thunder-and-lightning religion— all profession 
and noise. You struck it, or it struck 
you, like a spasm,— and so you "experienced" 
religion. The Congregationalists 
deterred me with their starchiness and 
self-conscious true-goodness, and their desire 
only for high-toned affiliates. Unitarianism 
seemed all doubt, doubting even 
itself. A number of other Protestant sects 
based on some novelty or eccentricity- 
like Quakerism— I found not worth a serious 
study by the non-Christian. But on 
one point this mass of Protestant dissension 
cordially agreed, and that was in a 
united hatred of Catholicism, the older 
form of Christianity. And Catholicism 
returned with interest this animosity. It 
haughtily declared itself the only true 
Church, outside of which there was no 
salvation— for Protestants especially; that 
its chief prelate was the personal representative 
of God on earth; and that he was 
infallible. Here was religious unity, power, 
and authority with a vengeance. But, in 
chorus, my solicitous Protestant friends 
beseeched me not to touch Catholicism, 
declaring it was worse than heathenism— 
in which I agreed; but the same line of 
argument also convinced me that Protestantism 
stood in the same category. In 
fact, the more I studied Christianity in 
its various phases, and listened to the animadversions 
of one sect upon another, 
the more it all seemed to me "sounding 
brass and tinkling cymbals." 

[The following portion shows the great 
evil of calling things what they are not 
—of calling civilized nations Christian 
nations and calling the worldly, unbelievers 
and the unconsecrated Christians, because 
they outwardly respect religion and draw 



nigh to God with their lips while their 
hearts are far from him.] 

"Call us heathen, if you will, the Chinese 
are still superior in social administration 
and social order. Among 400,000,000 
of Chinese there are fewer murders and 
robberies in a year than there are in New 
York state. True, China supports a luxurious 
monarch whose every whim must 
be gratified; yet, withal, its people are 
the most lightly taxed in the world, having 
nothing to pay but from tilled soil, 
rice and salt; and yet she has not a single 
dollar of national debt.... 

Christians are continually fussing about 
religion; they build great churches and 
make long prayers, and yet there is more 
wickedness in the neighborhood of a 
single church district of one thousand 
people in New York than among one million 
heathen, churchless and unsermonized. 
Christian talk is long and loud 
about how to be good and to act charitably. 
It is all charity, and no fraternity 
—"there, dog, take your crust and be 
thankful ! " And is it, therefore, any 
wonder there is more heart-breaking and 
suicides in the single state of New York 
in a year than in all China? 

The difference between the heathen and 
the Christian is that the heathen does 
good for the sake of doing good. With 
the Christian, what little good he does he 
does it for immediate honor and for future 
reward; he lends to the Lord and wants 
compound interest. In fact, the Christian 
is the worthy heir of his religious ancestors. 
The heathen does much and says 
little about it; the Christian does little 
good, but when he does he wants it in the 
papers and on his tombstone. Love men 
for the good they do you is a practical 
Christian idea, not for the good you 
should do them as a matter of human 
duty. So Christians love the heathen; 
yes, the heathen's possessions; and in 
proportion to these the Christian's love 
grows in intensity. When the English 
wanted the Chinamen's gold and trade, 
they said they wanted "to open China for 
their missionaries." And opium was the 
chief, in fact only, missionary they looked 
after, when they forced the ports open. 
And this infamous Christian introduction 
among Chinamen has done more injury, 



social and moral, in China, than all the 
humanitarian agencies of Christianity 
could remedy in 200 years. And on you, 
Christians, and on your greed of gold, we 
lay the burden of the crime resulting; of 
tens of millions of honest, useful men and 
women sent thereby to premature death 
after a short, miserable life, besides the 
physical and moral prostration it entails 
even where it does not prematurely kill! 
And this great national curse was thrust 
on us at the point of Christian bayonets. 
And you wonder why we are heathen? 
The only positive point Christians have 
impressed on heathenism is that they 
would sacrifice religion, honor, principle, 
as they do life, for— gold. And they 
sanctimoniously tell the poor heathen: 
'You must save your soul by believing 
as we do!'... 

We heathen are a God-fearing race. 
Aye, we believe the whole universe-creation 
—whatever exists and has existed— is 
of God and in God, that, figuratively, the 
thunder is His voice and the lightning 
His mighty hands; that everything we do 
and contemplate doing is seen and known 
by him; that he has created this and other 

R978 : page 2 

worlds to effectuate beneficent, not merciless 

designs, and that all that He has 

done is for the steady, progressive benefit 

of the creatures whom He endowed with 

life and sensibility, and to whom as a consequence 

He owes and gives paternal care, 

and will give paternal compensation and 

justice; yet His voice will threaten and 

His mighty hand chastise those who deliberately 

disobey His sacred laws and 

their duty to their fellow-men. 

'Do unto others as you wish they would 
do unto you,' or 'Love your neighbor as 
yourself,' is the great divine law which 
Christians and heathen alike hold, but 
which the Christians ignore. This is 
what keeps me the heathen I am! And I 
earnestly invite the Christians of America 
to Confucius. 



What can the nominal Christian Church 
answer to this charge and arraignment of 
heathenism? Nothing; they themselves 



have counted in under the name Christian, 

millions of the unregenerate, wholly 

opposed to the true principles of the doctrine 

taught by the Founder of Christianity 

and his apostles. They have with 

pride acknowledged all the civilized nations 

of earth as Christian nations, even 

going so far as to speak of them as Christendom 

(Christ's Kingdom); and hence 

to be consistent they must bear the Chinaman's 

reproach as against Christianity, 

for the nefarious acts of these kingdoms 

which the Scriptures declare to be beastly 

and subject to the machinations of the 

devil, the prince of the power of the air 

who now worketh in the children of disobedience, 

but is to be dethroned, bound, 

and finally destroyed by the true kingdom 

R979 : page 2 

of Christ, when he shall take his great 
power and reign. 

How pointed, too, are the thrusts of 
this heathen man: He agrees with Paul 
who says— While one saith I am of Paul, 
I of Apollos, I of Peter, etc., are ye not 
carnal? So the Chinaman wants to know 
whether the various sectarian claims— I 
am of Wesley, I of Luther, I of the Pope, 
I of Calvin, Knox, etc., etc., does not 
imply gross carnality among Christians 
to-day. 

And how well merited are this heathen's 
strictures upon what has come to be the 
fundamental doctrine of "Christendom?" 
—that all but a small handful of humanity 
are on their way through a world of 
sorrow, pain, disappointment and tears, to 
a place of untold and everlasting agony, 
prepared for them by a God of love, 
whose unerring wisdom saw this to be their 
fate and portion before they were born. 

Oh! what blasphemy upon the wisdom, 
love, justice and power of our Creator. 
What a terrible misrepresentation of his 
gracious plans. It is creditable indeed 
to the fairness and justice of the heathen 
world, that they spurn such— bad tidings 
of great misery, to all people. It is a 
shame, a disgrace to the intelligence of 
the civilized world to-day, that such an 
unreasonable, cruel misrepresentation of 
God and his plan finds credence among 
them, and has their millions for its support 
and spread. Even if the real plan 



of God were not seen by them, the civilized 
mind like that of its heathen brother, 
should be able to recognize such a hideous 
distortion, and should regard the teachers 
of such things, as would the heathen— 
"as insane, if not liars." 

But the fact is that the majority of the 
intelligent people of "Christendom" do 
not believe in this doctrine, that God's 
chief work is to create men by the billion 
for eternal torment. The trouble is that 
they are not honest, not righteous, 
not upright. They are willing to sail under 
false colors, from selfish motives. 
They are lovers of self more than lovers 
of God, and hence are willing to join in 
this blasphemy of his character and plan. 
They, like Baalam, love the reward of 
unrighteousness, and hence practise deceit 
to get that reward. Verily, they 
have their reward! 

Oh! for more noble men and women 
whom Satan cannot rule by either fear or 
favor. Honesty is a pre-requisite to 
growth in grace and knowledge; for 
"Light [truth] is sown for the RIGHTEOUS 
and gladness [such as comes from confidence, 
inspired by the true plan of God] 
for the UPRIGHT in heart." Since the 
truth is only for the upright, the honest, 
is it any wonder that so many morally 
dishonest people of intelligence fail to 
find the truth? How can they believe 
who seek honor one from another and 
seek not (exclusively) that honor which 
cometh from God only? 



page 2 

EXTRACTS FROM INTERESTING LETTERS. 

Akron, September 25th, 1887. 
DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am thankful 
for many things! I am grateful for the 
September TOWER! I am so glad for 
Brother Hickey's excellent (anniversary) 
letter, so comforting to you and all the 
dear saints. I like the Sabbath article 
and yet believe that because it robs religionists 
of the Sabbath they love so much 
and regard so little, that it tends greatly 
to make your prediction of hindrance to 
our free teaching of truth, brought out in 
the View— a fact. 



I was at Kent part of Friday and Saturday 
delivering DAWNS previously sold. 
A large proportion of them are in good 
hands. Although the necessity and glory 
of the work I do in selling DAWN is a 
compensation, yet I can scarcely tell you 
how much your letters are to me. You 
mention that some of mine are timely, 
and my words and deeds helpful to encourage 
some, especially you and Sister 
Russell, and that knowledge is a great joy 
and encouragement to me. How often 
Brother Tackabury must, now that he is 
himself helpless, look back joyfully upon 
the record of his faithfulness. 

A little coterie of Henry George's adherents 
are warm friends of DAWN and 
June TOWER View; they sold many books 
for me. The headquarters is in a store 
owned by a McGlynn Catholic. 

I suppose TOWER readers who consider 
DAWN selling to be preaching the Word, 
if they hear that for the last two weeks I 
fell below 200 names per week, will be 
surprised. The chief reason is that the 
main industry here has been suspended 
for several months; and it is natural that 
when house after house pleaded poverty, 
the colporteur should make his talks 
longer, even to debating the matter of 
the book sale with the people. I am more 
than ever convinced of the folly of this 
course. Our strength should be taxed 
less and not more at each house when 
sales are slow. And the able colporteur 
who is always sure to make his canvass interesting 
is the party who must guard 
most against delay from this cause. We 
should be sure not to stay so long that our 
greeting at parting will be less cordial 
than when we introduced ourselves. 

But to-day in another section I made 
my old record of 50 names, so that a few 
days in this neighborhood will be apt to 
raise me to 500 names for 2-1/2 weeks work. 
I made no long talks to-day, having learned 
by my late experience that lesson, I 
was forward to teach to others, and had 
not learned thoroughly myself, viz., Do 
not preach, nor debate, nor indulge in 
long talks of any kind while selling DAWN 
—be brief and to the point. 

In close affection, and fellowship, joined 
by Mrs. A. Yours in Christ, 

J. B. ADAMSON. 



Sept. 20th, 1887. 

BROTHER RUSSELL:-Mr. Tackabury 
has regained strength to quite an extent, 
being able to walk about the house and 
sit up most of the day. His lungs show 
great power of resistance to the advance 
of the disease, much to the surprise of all, 
but he is scarcely more than a skeleton. 
He wishes me to remember him to you 
and Sister Russell with much love. 

We feasted on the contents of the last 
TOWER. Mr. T. said he thought it one 
of the best he had ever read. We find 
many things in the Bible that we would 
like to hear you talk about. Almost every 
reading reveals something new, something 
that throws light on the grand plan which 
God has designed for a lost world's recovery. 
How it all increases our love 
and gratitude to our heavenly Father! 

Write us whenever you can spare time 
from your numerous duties. Your sister 
in Christ, MRS. S. T. TACKABURY. 

Clear Water, Neb. 

MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, MY DEAR SISTER: 
—I received a number of April TOWERS 
and have a good many loaned out. I do 
hope and pray the Lord will hear and answer 
my prayer, that the eyes of their understanding 
may be opened that they may 
behold God's wondrous plan of Salvation. 
I received a very interesting letter last 
week from a lady whom I have never seen 
and know only through the glad tidings 
preached in MILLENNIAL DAWN. I think 
it will interest you and Brother Russell, 
so I enclose it. May the Lord continue 
to bless you and make you a blessing to 
others still more, is my daily prayer. 

With love and respect to Brother Russell 
and yourself, I remain your humble 
Sister in Christ, J. A. M . 

[We publish the letter referred to, that it 
may encourage all to further efforts.— ED.] 

Willow Valley, Neb. 
DEAR MRS. M.:-You will doubtless 
be surprised at receiving a letter from a 
stranger, but I want to let you know that 
you have been instrumental in bringing 
to me such joy, peace, and rest, as I had 
not thought it possible to possess in this 
life. Our mutual friend, Mrs. L., gave 
me MILLENNIAL DAWN and several copies 



of ZION'S WATCH TOWER to read. As 

soon as I had looked them over, I saw 

that I had received them in answer to my 

prayer for a better understanding of God's 

Word, if so be I should use that knowledge 

aright. That book proved to be the 

key for which I had long been searching. 

And Oh! the rich treasures of God's 

boundless love and mercy to this sin-stricken 

world, it opened up to my view. 

No wonder, Paul could say, I am not 

ashamed of the gospel of Christ. I shall 

esteem it a blessed privilege to preach this 

gospel to every one with whom I come in 

contact. I have already been able to interest 

several, though I have only had it 

a few days myself. In looking over the 

letters of the "Little Flock" to Brother 

Russell, I noticed that there seemed to be 

a great scarcity of "this world's goods" 

among them, and I thought, what a poor 

little flock it is, to be sure,— and it made 

me feel rather sad for a moment, thinking 

of the multitudes of truth-hungry ones needing 

food. Then I remembered the multitude 

of hungry ones that were following Jesus. 

How he satisfied their hunger with the 

seven loaves and a few small fishes, which 

he blessed and brake and gave to his disciples 

to be distributed among them. And 

I knew that that was intended for a lesson 

for us now. We are to give him what 

loaves and fishes we possess, and it shall 

be sufficient to feed the hungry multitude 

who are now following him; and not only 

that, but we will have more for ourselves 

than we had in the beginning; for 

"they took up of the fragments seven baskets 

full." Then let us go forward in the 

full assurance of faith, knowing in whom 

we have put our trust. All the honor and 

riches of this world seem now as "filthy 

rags" compared to that which I see by 

faith "beyond the vail." Now I know 

what it means to "be dead to this world." 

May the Father give me strength to never 

"look back," for I know full well that 

the flesh is weak. I am a farmer's wife, 

and do my own work, so of course my 

time is pretty well occupied with the necessary 

duties of this life. But this I 

know, If we make the best use we can of 

the opportunities given us, it is all God 

requires of us. If our heart is really in 

any work, we can and will find many opportunities 

for engaging in it; for instance, 



while my hands are busy with 
household work, my mind is devising 
ways and means for spreading the truth, 
or studying the meaning of some text of 
Scripture, for it nearly all has a new 
meaning to me, since I have the key. 
I hope the knowledge that you have 
been the means of helping me to see the 
truth, will encourage you to persevere. 
I shall be pleased to hear from you if convenient. 
Sincerely yours, O. E. S . 



R979 : page 2 

A CHINA MISSIONARY WRITES. 

Chefoo, China. 

MY DEAR MRS. RUSSELL:-Many thanks 
for your kind letter, and for the copies of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN and the WATCH TOWERS. 
It is such a comfort to know that 
Jesus calls us his "friends" and is making 
known to us "all things that he heard 
from his Father." (John 15:15.) In 
the far away days of my youth, and the 
not so far away days of my orthodoxy I, 
thought I knew it all, but now I see how 
blindly I read my Bible. And how I thank 
God for having compassion on me, and 
touching my eyes, and giving me sight. 
May I follow Him as did those of old 
whose eyes were opened. 

I am giving away and lending my 
copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN and my 
papers, and any time you can send me 
extra copies of the WATCH TOWER I can 
use them to advantage. I expect to see 
a good many missionaries from other parts 
of the country during the summer, as this 
is a health resort, and I shall scatter my 
TOWERS, and lend MILLENNIAL DAWNS. 
The last bound copy I gave away before 
taking the wrapper off. 

Wishing you abundant success in your 
efforts to spread "the everlasting gospel," 
the "good tidings which shall be to all 
the people." I remain Yours in Christ, 
C. B. D . 

page 2 

Lebanon, O. 
MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have 
probed the mystery of selling MILL. DAWN 



and find that I can sell it with some success. 
Day before yesterday I went to a 
village of several hundred inhabitants, 
and in about three hours worked about 
one third of the place and took twenty 
orders. Tomorrow I am going back to 
finish. I am not certain but that I may 
put the greater portion of my time, the 
next year, to this work, if my affairs will 
permit. If I could turn my whole attention 
to it, I believe I could sell six or 
seven thousand in the next twelve months. 
However I am pleased to do what I can, 
be it much or little, feeling that every 
book I sell is a footprint in the sands of 
time to guide some discouraged, disheartened 
fellow-mortal to the fount of truth 
at no far distant day. I wish I could 
flood the world with it. I am surprised 
at myself in this work; it seems that I am 
particularly adapted to it. 

A week from next Sunday I go to Miamisburg 
or near it to preach. Bro. Van 
Hook filled my pulpit last Sunday morning. 
Yours in faith and service, J. P. M. 

In a later letter the same Brother says:— 

This Sabbath afternoon finds me at leisure 
to write you a few lines. I am quietly 
leaving my hold go on secular business 
and as quietly laying it on the Lord's 
business, and within the next six months 
I expect to be able to turn my attention 
largely to canvassing. The harvest is a 
big one, and the laborers are few. I think 
the Lord will have us go on until every 
country, where the Bible is read, will be 
canvassed for MILL. DAWN. I have only 
canvassed our little town, and have taken 
40 orders. I am confident I can make a 
living for my family at it, and therefore I 
shall drift into it as fast as circumstances 
permit. Of course the world thinks me 
foolish, but that is just what I think of the 
world; so no difference as to that, I am free. 

I do not talk much in canvassing, only 
explain how much the Chart of the Ages 
facilitates Bible reading; speak of the book 
in a general way, showing its qualities of 
workmanship, leading them to expect it 
to be a tolerable high priced book, and 
then tell them the price of it a quarter; 
some have actually taken a long breath 
on hearing the price, and have me repeat 
it, for fear they misunderstood me. 



It sells; it is bound to; but Oh! what 
a commotion it will create! how it will 
dig into their former belief! What a 
struggle! and how many of them will wish 
they had never seen it; and yet how they 
will return to it again and again, until, at 
last, the conflict over, how they will rejoice 
in their freedom ! Lord haste the 
day when all shall know. J. P. M 



YOUNG'S CONCORDANCE now $3.50 to 
our subscribers. See notice on eighth page. 



SUPPLEMENTS this month, order freely. 



R979 : page 3 
MY SHEPHERD. 

"He leadeth me!" 
And so I need not seek my own wild way 

Across the desert wide; 
He knoweth where the soft, green pastures lie, 

Where the still waters glide, 
And how to reach the coolness of their rest, 

Beneath the calm hillside. 

"He leadeth me!" 
And though it be by rugged, weary ways, 

Where thorns spring sharp and sore, 
No pathway can seem strange or desolate 

When Jesus "goes before." 
His gentle shepherding my solace is 

And gladness yet in store. 

"He leadeth me!" 
I shall not take one needless step through all, 

In wind, or heat, or cold; 
And all day long he sees the peaceful end, 

Through trials manifold. 
Up the far hillside, like some sweet surprise, 

Waiteth the quiet fold. 

—Selected. 



R980 : page 3 

THE SPIRIT OF ANTICHRIST. 



While the world and its spirit are quite 
contrary to Christ and the Spirit of Christ, 
and might therefore without impropriety 
be termed anti-Christ (against Christ), 
yet this term as used in Scripture is never 
applied to the world, but always to professed 
Christians who have turned aside 
from the truth, and who, by becoming 
advocates of error, are in Christ's name 
opposing him, his followers, and his 
doctrines. 

We are well aware that many regard it 
in a contrary light,— considering the term 
antichrist as belonging to worldly opponents 
of all who profess Christ in any 
manner— infidels, heathens, Mohammedans, 
etc. That this view is incorrect we 
can prove readily by citing here every 
text in the Bible containing the word 
antichrist, and pointing to some statement 
in the context which unmistakably 
fixes it upon some professing to be Christ's 
followers. This is an important point, as 
it overthrows completely a wide-spread 
belief, and opens our eyes to look for 
antichrist in a quarter in which many 
may not have thought to look hitherto. 
In fact, the prefix anti, signifies more 
than against, it contains the double thought 
of instead and against. 

The word antichrist occurs five times, 
1 Jno. 2:18,22; 4:3; 2 Jno. 7. The 
class meant is easily discerned from the 
general tenor of John's epistles and from 
the following pointed statements: "They 
went out from us, but they were not of 
us." They are [really] of the world 
[though professing otherwise], therefore 
speak they of [or according to the spirit 
of] the world, and the world heareth 
them." (1 Jno. 2:19; 4:5.) Other 
scriptures mention and describe the same 
class, but by different names. Paul in 2 Thes. 2:3, 
following the same vein of 
thought as in Rom. 6:6, personifies the system 
of error which he saw would arise, and 
speaks of it as the "Body of Sin," counterfeiting 
and opposing the "Body of Christ," 
naming it here as an organized body, "The 
man of Sin." He makes no reference to 
a sinful individual; for there are and have 
been in the past, and were in and before 
Paul's day, horribly depraved creatures 
of the human race, than whom worse 
could scarcely be conceived of; and the 
Apostle was not passing all these by to 



speak of some individual pre-eminently 
vile and vicious. No, he sees and tells 
us of a system of evil and error, the 
embodiment of evil, the opponent and 
counterfeit of the Body of Christ,— the 
antichrist Body. But only those who 
have learned that the true church is the 
"Body of Christ" can appreciate how the 
counterfeit nominal system, the "Man of 
Sin," is the antichrist. But we refer to 
this merely to note the fact that the 
Apostle Paul mentions that this "Man of 
Sin" system arises in the church, and 
professes to be in and of the true temple 
—the Church of the living God (Compare 
2 Thes. 2:4 with 1 Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:21.) 
and not of the world. He declares 
this to be an apostasy, a falling 
away from the truth. 

But it is not our purpose here to discuss 
antichrist: this we have done heretofore and 
may again, but now we simply call attention 
to one point of antichrist's erroneous 
teaching which is very injurious 
as a source of many other errors. This 
point of error is particularly pointed out 
to us by John, the Apostle who specially 
represented us who are alive and remain 
unto the parousia (presence) of our Lord 
(John 21:22.); and he tells us that it is 
common to every theory and class claiming 
to be Christ's followers and soldiers of 
the cross, who are really opponents to 
and counterfeits of the true body of Christ. 
Remember that the individuals in these 
great counterfeit systems, and bound by 
their errors, are not all of them, and do 
not all properly belong to them, and hence 
it is, that by the truths now being uncovered 
and presented to such, as "meat 
in due season," God is calling his people 
out of those systems to which they do 
not really belong, saying "Babylon is 
fallen! Come out of her, my people." 

But what, you inquire, is this one notable 
point of error upon which all antichrist 
systems agree, and which blinds 
many to other truths, and opens the way 
to errors? Surely, we answer, it is a point 
long and deeply covered under hoary 
traditions which are esteemed venerable 
and sacred. The adversary buried this 
first and deepest, realizing the necessity 
for keeping the truth out of sight and of 
arousing prejudice against it. This being 
the case, prepare yourselves to find it a 



test which you would never have thought 
of had the Apostle not pointed it out, 
but which, once clearly seen, proves to-day, 
to be an oracle in the light of which 
every system of doctrine may be quickly 
tried, whether it be of the spirit of truth 
or of the spirit of error, the spirit of 
antichrist. 

The passage to which we refer is found 
in 1 John 4:3, which in the oldest and 
the most correct, the Sinaitic MS. reads 
thus: 

"Every spirit [theory, doctrine] that 
confesseth not that Jesus the Lord is come 
in flesh, is not of God: and this is the 
spirit [theory] of antichrist, whereof 
you have heard that it cometh; and even 
now already is it in the world." 

Ah! you say, that is not a test, for all 
Christians and all theories, even the 
worldly, confess that. Not so, we answer; 
you do not get the depth of the Apostle's 
statement; your view of his words would 
make them and him foolish indeed. The 
world does not confess Jesus to be 
"Lord;" so that shuts the world out; and 
as we examine closely we will find few 
of the professed Christian systems ready 
to confess that Jesus, our Lord, came in 
flesh. To do so, would contradict their 
creeds old and new. it is the general 
view, that the real man is not flesh, but a 
spirit being which lives for a while in a 
body or house of flesh; hence by such the 
flesh is no more recognized as the person, 
than the garments put on and off. Moreover 
it is claimed by many, that in our 
Lord Jesus' case, he was really and truly 
the Father, Jehovah, who thus for a time 
appeared in flesh, but that he himself was 
not flesh; that he appeared to be tried 
and tempted in all points, but was not 
really tried at all; that he appeared to suffer 
and die, but did not actually suffer, nor 
did he really die for our sins, but merely 
dropped the flesh as a garment remaining 
really alive as before, for, they say, God is 
immortal and cannot die, and their claim 
is that in leaving the glory which he had 
with the Father before the world was, he 
did not become flesh or "come in flesh," but 
still remained a spirit being and came into a 
flesh body and only appeared like men, like 
the seed of Abraham, though all the while 
really was the almighty immortal Jehovah. 
They say that it was the God Christ Jesus 



who appeared to or pretended to die for our 
sins, and contradict the Apostle's statement 
that it was "the man Christ Jesus" 
who gave himself a ransom, a corresponding 
price [Greek, antilutron] for all. (1 Tim. 2:6.) 
Yet we see some go to a 
further extreme and hear them sing— 
"Well might the sun in darkness hide 

And shut his glories in, 
When God the mighty Maker died 
For man the creature's sin." 

But in this poetic slip only a few can 
recognize the inconsistency. Some even 
going so far as to deny God's immortality, 
claim that it required the death of a God 
to atone for the sin of man, not seeing 
that this is contrary to scripture which 
demands not a God's life for the life of a 
man, but a perfect man's life, as a ransom 
or substitute for the forfeited life of the 
first perfect man— a corresponding price. 

Still others, anxious apparently to get 
away from the straightforward, simple 
doctrine of ransom, figure the dying out of 
their way by saying that the real, spiritual 
Christ died to sin, and let his flesh 
body die as an example of how we should 
do the same. They do not stop to account 
for the uselessness of such an example, 
to those who cannot avoid dying. 

But all these, with their various shades 
of difference, stand firmly, shoulder to 
shoulder, on the one point mentioned by 
the Apostle— they deny that Jesus the 
Lord "came in flesh" or "was made 
flesh," as the same writer elsewhere states 
it. (John 1:14.) That his body was 
flesh and bones cannot be denied directly, 
hence their claim that the spirit being 
came into the flesh, but was always 
separate and distinct, and not flesh. But 
this does not fit: the Apostle does not say 
into [Greek eis] flesh, but "in [Greek en] 
flesh" and "was made flesh" [Greek sarx 
egeneto— literally, "became flesh."] (Jno. 1:14). 
So we see that the test of believing 
that Jesus the Lord came in flesh, i.e. 
became flesh, would draw the line outside 
of so called "Orthodox" doctrines. The 
theory of Universalists and Unitarians, as 
generally held, is likewise opposed to 
Jesus being "made flesh," for they generally 
claim that our Lord had no existence 
before, and that he was born after the 
ordinary manner of men: these, then, 
make no confession which would imply a 



pre-existence of our Lord in order to be 

made flesh or to come in flesh. Swedenborgians, 

Spiritists, etc., etc., all come 

in on the same side of the question— all 

deny that the Lord Jesus was "made 

flesh," "came in flesh"— became flesh. 

Next notice that all these are not only 
without Scriptural sanction for their 
theories, but are positively and directly 
contradicted by the Apostles. We need 
not again quote the many passages in 
which our Lord and the Apostles declare 
that the Father and the Son are not the 
same person, etc., but notice the fact 
that the death, even the death of the 
cross, was the death of the real person, 
and not a pretended death of a body, 
while the real person or being slipped out 
alive and watched the proceedings. Every 
text touching on the subject, in both the 

R981 : page 3 

Old and the New Testaments, treats it in 
the most positive manner, declaring that 
our Lord made his soul (his being, himself,) 
an offering for sin (Isa. 53:10), 
that he poured out his soul (being, existence) 
unto death. (Isa. 53:12.) They 
declare that his soul was in hades (the 
state or condition of death) three days 
and not left there longer; that he died, 
that he was dead, and that on the third 
day he was raised to life by the Father's 
power. Our Lord himself said that he 
came into the world to give his psukee 
(being, existence,) a ransom, a price, for 
all [for the psukee, the being, or existence, 
of all men]. Speaking of what he 
gave for the life of the world, he represents 
himself in a parable as giving all that he 
had to purchase the field (the world) with 
its treasure— all those whom he will bring 
back into harmony with God, chief and 
a first fruit, forever pre-eminent, being 
his Bride. 

The Apostle Peter declares that he was 
our price, that he redeemed us, purchased 
us back out of death. Paul assures us 
not only that we were "bought with a 
price," (1 Cor. 6:20,) but in 1 Tim. 2:6, 
he tells us all about the purchase, 
saying "There is one God [not three] 
and one mediator between God and men, 
the man Christ Jesus." It was something 
that this man did that mediated between the 



race of sinners and God, something that no 

one of them could do for another because 

all were sinners, and as such, each one 

himself condemned to death. As a spirit 

being, as our Lord was before being 

"made flesh," he could not have mediated 

between God and men, because under 

God's arrangement a ransom, a CORRESPONDING 

price for the first sinner who 

precipitated the trouble, was the only way 

out of the difficulty. Neither an angel 

nor an arch-angel could give what he 

did not possess. They could not give a 

human nature in exchange for that which 

Adam had forfeited, for they had not 

human, but angelic, spiritual nature. So 

then, our Lord also a spirit being, with 

the Father in glory and honor before 

coming into the world, could not give 

the price of our redemption. In order 

to be able to give the price he must become 

flesh, must be a man: not imperfect 

and sinful as the fallen race has become, 

but perfect and sinless as the original of 

our race was before he sinned. Hence he 

"came in flesh"— "was made flesh"— "became 

flesh," in order, as the Apostle 

expresses it (1 Cor. 15:21), that "as by 

man came death, by man also should 

come the resurrection of the dead." He 

became flesh (holy, undefiled) in order to 

pay the price or penalty against us, 

—death. The Apostle urges (Phil. 2:7,8) 

that though the obedience implied in 

becoming a man, in being made flesh, 

was great, yet the trial was severer still 

when our Lord found himself man and 

learned that the divine plan by which he 

was to prove his entire submission to the 

Father's will would lead him to death as 

and for the sinner— even the ignominious 

death of the cross. But he was obedient 

even to the full, and died for us as our 

ransom: Wherefore God hath highly 

exalted him, giving him station, dignity 

and authority far above angels, and far 

above the glory and honor which he had 

with the Father before the world was 

created. 

What our Lord gave is clearly stated by 
Paul; for continuing the above quoted 
testimony, that "There is one God and 
one Mediator, the man Christ Jesus," he 
tells us how he mediated, what he gave 
for us. He says— "Who gave himself a 



R981 : page 4 

ransom for all." This settles the matter 
that our Lord was flesh, a human being, 
and a perfect one at that, for as usual 
with Paul he expresses himself in unequivocal 
terms. He uses the Greek word 
antilutron which signifies a corresponding 
price, where in English we have the word 
ransom. 

Now consider well the import of this, 
and you will see that it contradicts every 
antichrist system; for Paul shows that 
before sin entered the world there was no 
death, (Rom. 5:12) hence the one 
(Adam) who first sinned was a perfect human 
being, and if our Lord gave a corresponding 
price, he must have been a perfect 
human being when he gave himself 
for Adam and all who shared in Adam's 
sin and penalty. 

John recognized the tendency or spirit 
of antichrist in his day. Though the 
system had not organized, some were already 
going out from them because not 
of them, denying Jesus "in flesh," claiming, 
with the heathen, an impersonation, 
that the real one was inside the seen one, 
and preparing themselves by this error to 
deny their Lord, their Master, the man 
Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom 
for all. To-day, after centuries of triumph 
over the words of our Lord and of the 
Apostles, and over reason and common 
sense, this doctrine or spirit of antichrist 
known as that of the Trinity, is so firmly 
intrenched in the hearts of many, that 
they prefer to deny the Master's words 
—"The Father is greater than I," and 
the Bible teaching that Christ came in 
flesh and gave himself a ransom— prefer 
to deny anything rather than this theory 
of antichrist, which twists and disjoints 
every truth of Scripture, so long as it is 
held. 

Note then the test of every spirit or 
doctrine, the test which will prove whether 
or not any faith is well founded, surely 
founded on the ROCK, the true and only 
basis of faith, of which the Apostle declares 
"Other foundation can no man lay than 
that which is laid, Jesus Christ." This 
test is given in few words, as we have seen, 
and can be easily and quickly applied to 
every doctrine or spirit with which you 
may come in contact. If it will not 



stand this God-given test you may be 
sure it is error and at once set it aside. 
If it agrees with this test you have proved 
it to be on the right foundation, and you 
may go on proving all its details. This 
test, 1 Jno. 4:3, in the oldest and most 
exact Greek MS., the Sinaitic reads:— 

"Every spirit [theory, doctrine,] that 
confesseth not that Jesus the Lord is come 
in flesh [become flesh] is not of God: 
and this is the spirit [theory,] of antichrist, 
whereof you have heard that it cometh; 
and even now already is it in the world." 

Remember that many good people, 
many of God's children, have been blinded 
by the errors and sophistries of Satan, 
and while not anti or opposed to Christ 
at heart, have been beguiled by the great 
deceiver's falsities, promulgated even in the 
Apostle's days and fully headed up and 
brought to a climax in Papacy and only 
partially gotten rid of by the Reformation. 
Now, in the "harvest" of this age, God 
causes the light to shine more clearly, for 
the reason that he is making the truth his 
"sickle" by which he will separate wheat 
from tares completely and finally. Therefore, 
put on the whole armor of God, 
that you may be able to stand— that you 
be not among the thousands to fall in 
this time of trial. -Psa. 91:7,11,12. 



R954 : page 4 

"BE CONSTANT in what is good, but beware 
of being obstinate in anything evil; 
constancy is a virtue, but obstinacy is a sin." 



R981 : page 4 

REASONS FOR EXPECTING TOLERATION 

IN THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH. 

A Brother, the Editor of a contemporary 
Journal, publishes his reasons for 
expecting toleration in the Presbyterian 
Church as follows:— 

1 . It resides in the very idea of the 
church that there must be growth in divine 
knowledge until her ultimate unity 
and perfection are attained. To this end 



there must be room for the free operation 
of the Spirit of God in unfolding the 
truth. This requires opportunity for 
reverent investigation and discussion. 
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is 
liberty. 

2. Because of confessed obscurity in 

the whole of the church's teaching concerning 
the last things. Our wisest teachers 
admit that the Reformed Theology 
left many of these problems unsolved, 
and that a fuller investigation of them is 
a duty put upon the church in these last 
days by the Spirit and Providence of God. 

3. Because a new era of investigation 
at points even more essential than this is 
coming upon the Presbyterian Church, 
which it is both unwise and impossible to 
resist. Whatever evils may result from 
this spirit of free inquiry, the evils of its 
suppression would be far greater. 

4. Because a wide diversity already 

exists between the views of future punishment 

current among us, and as presented 

from our pulpits, and the statements of 

our Standards that both before and after 

the resurrection, "the wicked are to be 

punished with most grievous and unspeakable 

torments, without intermission, with 

the devil and his angels in hell-fire forever." 

If fidelity to these statements is 

to be the test by which our right to remain 

in the church is to be determined, then 

we ask our brethren to honestly ask before 

God whether they are so free from sin in 

this respect as to have the right to cast a 

first stone at us. 

5. Because we honestly believe that we 
have taken up this line of testimony in 
obedience to the Spirit of God, and from 
motives of sincere love for the whole 
church, which needs this larger, better 
view of God's great plan of grace before 
it can be unified; and specially in the 
interest of the Presbyterian Church to 
whose welfare we have devoted a life-long 
ministry, and which greatly needs relief 
from the incubus of monstrous views of 
God's sovereign justice which obscure her 
own constant testimony to His fatherhood 
and grace. 



R982 : page 4 



Full of love for blinded brethren, this 
brother earnestly desires to carry the entire 
Presbyterian Church into the light, and 
so desires of it toleration, that is, permission 
to stay in its company and to 
anoint all their eyes as his own have been 
anointed— with the truth. What this 
brother desires to do for those with whom 
he spent so long a bondage, we desire to 
do for all the sects into which the great 
adversary has seduced God's children. 

But we see what he evidently has not 
yet seen, viz: That the light which ultimately 
shall be to every creature, can as 
yet reach and be appreciated only by a 
"little flock," the true church, which is 
the body of Christ. 

If the Presbyterian Church were the 
real, true Church whose names are all 
written in heaven, this brother's expectations 
of opening their eyes would be 
justifiable. But he should be able to see 
that this is not the case; none of the sectarian 
systems, great or small, are the 
Church which is Christ's body; though 
members of his "body," members of the 
heaven-recorded Church are probably still 
in bondage in every sect. 

It is because these sect-systems are not 
the true Church, and because we have 
reached the "harvest" time of separation, 
that the Lord gives present light, and 
meat in due season, and calls on all of his 
people to "come out" into the light, the 
truth, the liberty proper for children of God. 

God not only saw our day and knew 
how it would be, but he had it written in 
his Word for our learning; and it is not 
written that the tares growing with the 
wheat may be changed into wheat, but 
that the two classes may be separated. 

Our Brother evidently is in heart free 
already from the shackles of the Presbyterian 
Creed; but he should be entirely 
free. Why help to uphold in any degree 
slavery to a creed and get others under it 
who have not the moral strength to free 
themselves even in heart? Why stay in 
a human organization of any sort, where 
our company is not desired, except at the 
cost of stifling our convictions of right 
and truth? Why not, on the contrary, obey 
actually as well as mentally the Lord's command 
to separate, to "Come out" of all 
the Babylon bondage and confusion, and 
thus not only make straight paths for our 



own feet, but thus make foot-prints which 
may encourage and guide some weaker 
brother or sister out of the bondage of 
sects, into the liberty wherewith Christ 
hath made us free to follow unhindered 
and untrammeled his word and example? 

The brother is asking liberties and 
privileges granted only in the true Church 
where the spirit of the Lord is, and where 
the liberty of his Word is granted. Hence, 
one of two things is sure to happen— the 
brother will either abate his energy on 
the side of truth and liberty, (which we 
hope he will never do, but rather increase 
it,) or else he will get out of the sect and 
into closer fellowship with the true Head 
of the Church and with the "true Church 
which is his body." Like others, the 
Presbyterian sect never agreed to grant 
toleration, and never has shown any. 

When a man joins that Church, it is 
on the same principle that people join 
other human organizations, partnerships, 
societies, etc., viz.: They agree to submit 
to the rules and by-laws as they are. 
And when this brother took upon him his 
Ordination Vows as a minister of the 
Presbyterian Church, though he was already 
a minister (servant) in the true 
Church and anointed, as all the members 
of that body are, with the Holy Spirit of 
the truth, he BOUND himself in the presence 
of witnesses that so long as he was 
a member and minister of Presbyterianism 
he would "not teach or inculcate anything 
opposed to the doctrines" of that organization; 
to which doctrines he there subscribed 
as representing his faith. 

We are well aware that many, after 
changing their faith, still continue to hold 
membership and office in these organizations; 
and some, in violation of their vows, 
do teach and inculcate doctrines opposed 
to the doctrines of the sects to which 
they are pledged. But is this right? 
They generally excuse themselves by the 
claim that the denomination claims to 
uphold and believe the truths taught in 
the Bible, while they are sure they now 
have more truth and Bible support than 
the sect. But is this a sufficient ground 
of excuse for such a course? Is it doing 
by them as we would have them do by us 
if our places were changed? We think not. 

The very spirit and intent of the ordination 
vow was to bind, to compel a 



man by his solemn pledge, not to use his 
office or influence inside the organization, 
against it as it stands— to compel any who 
might come to differ on any point, to first 
get out of the ministry of their sect, cease 
from professing the faith he no longer 
holds, before he could attack it. 

To us it seems that a contract is not less 
binding on a saint, than on a worldling; 
and such a contract as Presbyterians, Methodists, 
Lutherans, Roman Catholics and 
others impose upon their ministers, should 
certainly be considered as binding as a 
note, or a bond, in the business world; 
and business honor would insist on a full 
compliance with both the letter and spirit 
of the contract— that when the faith 
changes, the minister or member should 
step down and out, before uttering a word 
of contrary teaching. 

In the case of Baptists, Disciples, and 
a few other denominations, the case differs 
a little, since some of these claim to have 
no creed or standard but the Bible. In 
such a case a minister or member is at 
liberty to teach all he finds in the Bible, and 
if interfered with, may, if he choose, insist 
on a trial of his case by the Bible. But 
with these, other means than a trial are 
generally resorted to, such as social ostracism, 
money pressure, etc., until a saint 
is glad to escape from so many "tares" 
to get a better chance for worship and 
study, "one [saint] with another," or 
where this is impossible, in private Scripture 
study alone. 

But in the case of Presbyterians, Methodists, 
etc., they guard themselves, and 
do not even claim to accept the Bible as 
the only rule of faith and practice. They 
candidly and openly state, in so many 
words, just what they want all members 
and ministers to subscribe to as their faith; 
and when any are tried for heresy by these, 
the Bible is not brought forward at all, 
but (properly according to their organization 
or contract) "the standards" of their 
organization. The Bible is the standard, 
not in name merely, but indeed, to the 
true Church; but with the sects, each has 
its own "Standards," "Creed," dogmas, 
etc., to which, on joining, members subscribe; 
and surely their trial should be according 
to their contract, which they 
agreed to be bound by, and to which 
they are therefore responsible. 



Any contract made with fellow-men is 
binding; and to violate it, even in the 
interest of truth, would be wrong. We 
must not do evil that good may result, 
but do right, and leave all results to God, 
who promises in due time to cause the 
righteousness of his saints to shine forth 
as the noon-day. If, therefore, a Christian 
finds himself bound to a creed and 
sect, he should at once look up the Faith 
he professed in joining them— the faith 
he agreed neither to add to, nor to diminish, 
so long as he remained one of them; 
he should see whether it fully and clearly 
expresses his present faith. If it does 
not, he should at once withdraw; for by 
any other course he violates his contract 
with his fellow-men. To refrain from 
teaching the truth fully and clearly, after 
God has brought us to a knowledge of it, 
would prove us unworthy of a place in 
the "body of Christ," would prove that 
we are not overcomers, and not worthy of 
a place among the Royal Priesthood, the 
true sanctuary, the Ambassadors for God 
before the world. 

We would like to impress upon every 
reader that to teach or to believe anything 
different from a Confession of Faith to 
which by membership you profess to hold, 
is a wrong to God, to the sect whose 
name is borne, to yourself, and to the true 
members of the body of Christ. Whatever 
the difference between your faith and 
the Creed of the sect to which you are 
attached, to that extent exactly your 
course is wrong, dishonest, unsaintly, 
and hence ungodly; because, to that extent 
you are misrepresenting God's Word 
and plan, and hence displeasing him; to 
that extent you are misrepresenting the 
sect, and hence offending and wronging 
them, even if they would tolerate you; to 
that extent you are dishonoring yourself 
as a child of God, one of the children of 

R982 : page 5 

the light— the truth,— not only by the 
shackles of your denominational slavery, 
which are galling to all whom the Son 
makes free indeed, but by reason also of 
the deception and misrepresentation 
practiced daily, in outwardly, to saints 
and sinners, professing by the Creed you 
uphold, doctrines which you detest and 



which sometimes and under some circumstances 
you would deny as unscriptural 
and as misrepresentations of God's character 
and plans, and also misrepresentations 
of your honest belief. To the same 
extent also you injure the true body of 
Christ, especially the "babes in Christ," 
for you not only do not give the moral 
weight of your presence, and influence, 
and talent, and means, to further the cause 
of true liberty among the saints, and true 
union on true principles, but you give 
to the opposition the weight of your 
influence, means, talents and presence, 
and constitute one of the numbers whose 
support and names are bids to the world 
for its respect and alliance. Not only do 
you serve Babylon's purpose as a decoy 
for others, but possibly the weight of your 
influence keeps many of the "babes" and 
weaker brethren in bondage, not only 
hindering their development, but keeping 
their influence, and talents, and means away 
from the free fellow-members in the same 

R983 : page 5 

true body and adding these advantages to 
the false systems, the nominal church, to 
help perpetuate and draw others into the 
errors and bondage which galls you, and 
which misrepresents you even more than 
you misrepresent it. 

Thus you become a false beacon-light 
to the poor world seeking the peace and 
joy of Christ, luring them into doctrines 
which, if honestly accepted and firmly 
held by them, will blind them and ensnare 
them, and prevent the peace, and 
light, and joy, and love of the real gospel. 
It was looking thus at the influence of 
sects in the time of the first advent, that 
our Lord said to the zealous Pharisees, 
"Ye compass sea and land to make one 
proselyte, and when he is made, he is two-fold 
more the child of hell [destruction] 
than he was before." So now, it is far 
better to let the world alone, than to get 
them into sects which will only blind them 
to the truth and misrepresent to them 
God's character and plan. Far better; 
because when the light of the now dawning 
Sun of Righteousness reaches them, 
it will have far more influence upon them 
where they are, in and of the world, than 
if converted by the spirit of error into 



tares, in imitation of real wheat. 

But when you come to examine the 
Creed to which you subscribed, Pastors 
generally say, "Oh, never mind! It 
matters little anyhow." And if you insist 
on seeing and pondering its professions, 
promises, and covenants, they will often 
unblushingly assure you that neither they, 
the pastors, nor a majority of the membership, 
believe all to which you and they 
subscribed; and that they never did believe 
or teach such and such portions. And 
they will try in every way to hold you in 
their sects (especially if you have money or 
influence— which few of the little flock 
have,— Jas. 2:5,) because naturally a 
professed field of wheat would not like to 
lose all its wheat and have only tares left. 

Such Pastors may even resort to the 
specious misleading argument that you 
joined merely the local company of which 
he is the pastor; and claim that his faith 
is the measure by which the members of 
this local organization are to be judged, 
and not the written confession of faith, and 
the written Covenant to which you assented 
and subscribed. But both of these 
arguments are wrong; all local organizations 
(except such as have what is known 
as Congregational government) are parts 
of systems, so that in joining the Episcopal 
Methodists, for instance, your covenant is 
not merely with the local organization, 
but with the M.E. Church as a system; 
and the Pastor's faith, or his violation of 
his covenant with the organization, is no 
more an excuse for you, than the fact 
that other men violate business covenants 
would be an excuse for your doing so. 
Custom and numbers can never make 
wrong right. The fact is, a large majority 
of the membership of all denominations 
are really covenant breakers, whether they 
have given the matter sufficient thought 
to realize it or not. They either do not 
know or do not care what is the Creed to 
which they have subscribed, or else, knowing 
it, they believe it only in part, if at 
all; and yet by subscribing to it all, they 
act out an untruth before the world, 
before one another and before their families. 
The demoralizing influence of this 
double dealing is unmistakable in toughening 
and searing the conscience, tending to 
make such both unworthy of the truth 
and unable to readily accept it, as they 



get into the habit of thinking of others as 
being as insincere as themselves in their 
teachings and professions. 

Duty seems plain from this standpoint: 
However others may violate covenants, 
and misrepresent themselves, the truth and 
the systems to which they are joined, the 
consecrated have no choice, as to their 
course of action. Not any of their influence, 
time, or money, must go to sustain 
error. All of it must be enlisted on the 
side of the truth, which is ever opposing 
error, even as light opposes darkness. 
As children of the light, we can have no 
fellowship with any of the unfruitful works 
of darkness, but must rather reprove them. 

Should all do so, should all honestly 
withdraw from sects and creeds which do 
not truly and fully represent their faith, 
the result would be the immediate disruption 
of all these great sectarian systems, 
which now ensnare the consciences of 
many of God's children, and dress up and 
fondle "the children of this world" in 
imitation of the children of God. Many 
of the "tares" would come out honestly 
and say that they believe little or nothing, 
and would get back to their place in the 
world from which they were never really 
converted by the truth. 

The saints would be entirely free and 
unhindered to grow up to the fullest 
measure of grace, knowledge and love. 
Others in various stages of childhood, and 
even the "babes in Christ," would be 
blessed too. At first they would make 
hundreds of new combinations of thought, 
only to be broken continually as they would 
grow up into Christ in all things, until 
finally they would reach the position of 
the early Church, and stand where we 
now do, recognizing no bondage, attempting 
to bind none, and refusing to be bound 
by any other than that faith which no 
man can ignore and yet be in Christ at 
all, viz., that the Bible is God's revelation 
of his plan, and the only guide for faith, 
and that as a race we were sinners, but 
were redeemed by the precious blood of 
Christ. Planted on this foundation, all 
God's children may grow from babes which 
feed at first only on the "milk" up to 
strong men who feed upon the "meat in 
due season" from the same storehouse. 

This union of heart and mind upon the 
rock, without other limitations, gives room 



for the exercise of every grace and gift of the 
spirit in the Church, each member of which 
is a minister, in proportion to his ability 
to minister to the needs of "the body." 
And it leaves room, too, for the Head to 
exalt or debase, to honor or to chasten, 
according to faithfulness, each member in 
"the body"— each minister, or servant. 

But all will not thus act out conscientiously; 
all cannot do so; all have not the 
strength: and so long as they are fed on 
the present diet of worldliness, pride, 
sectarian rivalry, deceit (as in professing 
doctrines not believed), etc., with a very 
little skimmed "milk of the Word," they 
cannot get the strength to come out boldly 
and oppose the majority, the strong, 
proud children of this world, who grow 
strong on the diet refused by the "meek." 

Hence our Lord pictures over and over 
again, especially in the Revelation, the 
complete fall of these systems in order to 
the liberating of the "great company" of 
the true wheat class. But we who see, 
and who have strength, and who by 
valiant energy for the truth could help 
others, shall we for fear, or any other 
motive, draw back and lend our influence 
in any degree to these systems, which in 
the name of God and of truth, are misrepresenting 
God and truth, and blinding 
and enslaving God's children? Can we 
expect our Master's approval and the 
overcomer's crown, unless we do overcome? 
I tell you, nay. And unless such 
come out of Babylon, they will be reckoned 
as partakers of her sins, and receive 
of her plagues, shortly to be poured 
out. As our Lord expressed it (Matt. 24:51.) 
they will have "their portion with the 
hypocrites" in the time of perplexity, disintegration, 
and confusion just at hand, 
though they are not hypocrites, but disobedient 
servants. 



R983 : page 5 

MY PEOPLE-OUT OF BABYLON. 

A LETTER TO THE EDITOR. 

DEAR SIR:-Apology for what follows 
is needless; this would not be written had 
the writer doubts of your sincerity and 



desire to live up to the full light. 

The June number of Z.W.T., under 
head of "Come out of Her!" contains in 
the "Reply" an error, in my opinion, of 
great harm. 

(1.) Briefly— God, at the beginning of 
the present age, and while selecting his 
"little flock," made use of apparent human 
means— an association of believers, 
who at Antioch were first called Christians. 
These associations, called Churches, were 
specially blessed, and several have special 
mention. 

(2.) These associations have been the 
means used by God to bring down the 
Truth to this day. This you will admit. 

(3.) I believe that the church rightly 
perpetuated itself— under Divine guidance 
—by regular means, and that the pedigree 
of the "Clergy" of the Church is as well 
authenticated to-day, as was that of the 
Levitical in its day: that this is not accident, 
but the result of the Divine interposition, 
and therefore is to some good end. 

(4.) Further, that the Churches each 
had its own territory in which it was the 
supreme or only visible means of identification 
of the membership or legitimacy 
of the little flock. Concurrent jurisdiction 
would not be an exception so 
long as they agreed. The original Churches 
mentioned in the New Testament have 
here in the United States of America, 
certain legitimate descendants, that can 
be readily identified-THE PROTESTANT 
EPISCOPAL CHURCH. I came out of that 
district of Babylon known as Congregational. 

R984 : page 5 

(5.) Granted that at this day many of 
the membership of The Church [Protestant 
Episcopal] are proud of their age; 
that they look with reverence at its honors 
and worldly trappings; and that the "little 
flock" may not get its rightful food, and 
may even be ministered to by "wolves" 
—this does not alter the fact of the Divine 
appointment of the institution. 

(6.) Wesley tried to keep his hot-headed 
followers in The Church and reform IT. 
And this is our right and privilege. But 
this has never been done— and this is the 
starting point. 

(7.) Simple ordering out, does not 
improve the matter. The little flock 



must be organized— and until you, MR. 
RUSSELL, have something better to offer 
them, modesty should indicate a different 
course. Very Truly Yours. 

WM. M. WRIGHT. 



The above, from a Brother in Christ 
who has not long been a reader of the 
TOWER, but who has been greatly blessed by 
the reading of MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I. 
as previous letters show, is well stated; 
and as its answer may be of interest to 
many of our readers, we give it space. 
We have numbered the paragraphs so as 
to simplify our answer, the numbers of 
which correspond or relate to the above. 

(1.) Our brother has well chosen his 
terms, calling the early churches "associations," 
rather than "organizations;" for 
they were merely associations, not bound 
and fettered by creeds and traditions, as 
the organizations or systems of to-day are. 
These associations bound themselves only 
with love and truth, and were just such as 
we have to-day, and generally small, their 
usual meeting places being private dwellings 
or rented upper rooms. (Philemon 2; 
Acts 20:8; 28:30,31; 1:13; Mark 14:15.) 
In no respect did those early associations 
or gatherings resemble those of 
Babylon, "mother" or daughters, to-day. 
Neither in size, in worldly place and 
honors, in forms and ceremonies, in display 
of dress, in choirs, nor in a titled and 
salaried "Clergy," was there any resemblance 
whatever. The "first love" and 
"first works" are gone long since, except 
among the few outside of Babylon. 
Yes, the early "associations" were blessed 
of God; and all of like spirit, even though 
only twos or threes, who have since associated 
in the name of the real Head 
and Master, and under ruling of His 
Word alone, have also been blessed. 

(2.) We cannot admit that those early 
associations, good as they were, have 
been the means of bringing down the 
truth to this day. On the contrary, they 
had nothing to do with it: they gradually 
lost their first love and first works, and 
their liberties, and became subject to ambitious 
leaders and teachers, finally drifting 
into that great system of error so 
conspicuous in Revelation, called "Babylon," 



"The Mother of harlots." "The 
Mystery of Iniquity." On the contrary, 
the Lord himself, through his Word 
written by his inspired Apostles and 
Prophets, has been the means of handing 
down the truth. What came from Babylon's 
streams has been foul with errors 
and traditions of men,— the more direct 
the more foul— and the only draughts of 
pure water have been given to the church 
by messengers whom God has from time 
to time raised up, who dipped directly 
from the fountain— the Word of God. 
These have in nearly every instance been 
raised up outside of organized Babylon 
among the associating believers; or if 
inside and faithful, God drove them out. 
Such were Huss, Wyckliffe, Zwingli, 
Melancthon, Luther and others. 

(3.) We are well aware that about the 
third century, the "Mystery of Iniquity" 
whose spirit was already working in Paul's 
day, began to rise in influence and power, 
and triumphed over the more slowly developing 
"Mystery of God" (the little 
flock). We know that this great, grand, 
powerful, organized, false church persecuted 
the dissenters, who protested against 
her errors, until she was intoxicated with 
her success, (Rev. 17:6.) and deceived 
all nations, and gained their support. 
This continued until her worldliness and 
devilishness became apparent to all except 
the blind, and forced the less corrupt of 

R984 : page 6 

nations and individuals to leave her 
bosom, protesting against her open errors 
and crimes. Such a seceding and protesting 
branch, split off and took root in 
England and still flourishes, with fewer 
of the vices, but many of the errors of 
organization and tradition inherited and 
still injuriously retained— The Protestant 
Episcopal Church of England. 

We are aware, too, that the "Mystery of 
Iniquity" has a "clergy" upon which she 
confers certain powers and honors; but 
we do not know of any such class with 
such powers in the early associations. 
The only ones recognized as having special 
authority were the Apostles, whose teaching 
the true church has always had, and 
consequently never needed popes claiming 
to be "Successor of St. Peter" in 



authority. The Apostle Peter needed no 
successors, and in his epistles opposes 
these would-be successors and their errors. 

This self-authorized and self-organized 
clergy, called by each other, and ordained 
by each other, do slightly resemble the 
Levitical priesthood; but our Lord was 
not of that priesthood, nor was he called 
nor ordained like unto either these or 
those. [See "The Melchisedec Priesthood" 
in June TOWER.] Instead, therefore, 
of considering this system of Clergy 
a divine arrangement, we consider it the 
reverse, a delusion and snare of the devil, 
by which the simplicity which is of Christ 
has been destroyed, and the development 
of the saints in that great system has been 
greatly hindered. Our Lord recognized 
no separate "clergy" class, but said, "All 
ye are brethren;" (Matt. 23:8) and all 
the brethren were to exhort one another 
and stir up each other's pure minds in 
remembrance; all the brethren were to 
seek ability to prophesy (teach publicly), 
and all were surely to be living epistles of 
God ready at all times to give a reason 
to every inquirer, of the hope that was in 
them. (1 Thes. 4:1; 1 Cor. 14:1,31,39; 
2 Cor. 3:2; 1 Pet. 3:15.) And 
these instructions the early Christians 
followed, and all preached.— Acts 8:4; 
11:19. 

The "clergy" of the nominal church 
was not organized as a priesthood, or system 
resembling the Levitical priesthood, 
by the apostles, nor until the fifth century, 
as saith the historian:— 

"With the fifth century the church 
strove more and more to perfect her outward 
temporal form as Roman Catholic, 
a theocratic institution. The conception 
of the church as a community of the saints 
is now lost. The priestly order are the 
rulers, the laity are the ruled— the clergy, 
as ecclesia representativa hold unconditional 
preferment, and form a hierarchy. 
The prominent peculiarity of the mediaeval 
church is its purely clerical character. 
The rigid distinction between the secular 
order and the spiritual, is marked by the 
external appearance. Clerical dignity and 
power are signified by a peculiar costume 
which varies with the rank of the office."* 

The same historian says again:— 

"This much is certain, that in the time 
of the Apostles, about the middle and 



even towards the close of the first century, 

there was no external union of all the 

churches, no ecclesiastical establishment, 

no visible headship with an ecclesiastical 

centre. Of 'the Church' in the later 

sense of the word, there was yet no conception. 

There was one holy mystical 

body of Christ— one great Church organism, 

hidden however from the world, 

having Christ for its soul, and by His 

Word and Spirit assured of future perfection 

and glory. And still, there were 

many local communions, made up of those 

who were believers, having a nucleus of 

true disciples [saints] but exposed to 

worldly influences, and soon embracing a 

mixture of genuine believers with nominal 

members and backsliders. These separate 

churches [congregations] were not connected 

by any external bond, but only by 

the instinct of brotherly love, and the 

tendency to mutual fellowship." 

Under the head of Episcopacy, McClintock 
and Strong's Cyclopaedia very 
moderately says:— 

"This change in the mode of administering 
the government of the Church, 
resulting from peculiar circumstances, may 
have been introduced as a salutary expedient, 
without implying any departure 
from the purity of the Christian spirit. 
When, however, the doctrine is (as it 
gradually gained currency in the third 
century) that the bishops are by divine 
right the head of the Church and invested 
with the government of the same; that 
they are the successors of the Apostles and 
by this succession inherit Apostolical authority; 
that they are to be the medium, 
through which, in consequence of that 
ordination which they have received 
merely in an outward manner, the Holy 
Ghost in all time to come must be transmitted 
to the Church— when this becomes 
the doctrine of the Church, we certainly 
must perceive in these assumptions a great 
corruption of the Christian system. It is 
a carnal perversion of the true idea of the 
Christian Church." 

Notwithstanding the errors of many 
well-meaning men in forging, out of their 
ideas of faith and forms, chains and fetters, 
which have greatly hindered many of their 
no less honest and able successors in the 
Christian pathway, it is still a fact that 
the church ("whose names are written in 



heaven," "the sanctified in Christ Jesus") 
has been perpetuated by God, begotten of 
him by the spirit of truth, through the 
word of truth (James 1:18), and neither 
created nor perpetuated by the hands of 
bishops. 



*Herzog, Vol. I., page 678. 
R985 : page 6 

(4.) Whenever and wherever Christians 
are, as fast as they become known to each 
other they will be drawn together by love 
and common interest in their one mission, 
unless, as to-day, kept separate from 
one another by doctrinal errors and party 
spirit— contrary to the spirit of Christ. 
And each such association or gathering, 
assembled in the name, not of popes, 
bishops, apostles, synods, or presbyteries, 
but in the name of their only head, Christ 
Jesus, is a Church, whatever its size, in 
the original use of the Greek word ecclesia. 
But such a Church of believers is not the 
true Church, and may contain few or none 
of the final members of the true glorious 
body of Christ. The true Church is not 
yet fully organized, and will not be until 
this age ends. During this age we are 
all probationers, who for the time are 
reckoned members of the true Church 
pending our present trial and testing, 
which must prove whether as "overcomers" 
we shall be worthy of membership in that 
glorious Church which is to be fully organized 
and fitted for the great work of 
the Millennial age. 

Failing to see that the great work of 
the Church for the world is future, the 
Church in the fifth century, seeking to 
accomplish that work of the next age in 
the present age, saw that organization was 
essential to that work, and organized 
under antichrist a system or "clergy" 
which is neither more nor less than a 
counterfeit of the true Church of overcomers, 
the glorious Royal Priesthood, 
the Kingdom of God under the whole 
heaven, which Christ is to organize shortly 
and place in control. From this serious error, 
the Reformation movement of the sixteenth 
century only partially freed a few. 
Seeing the statements of Scripture, that the 



Church was to rale and judge the world, 

and losing sight of the "ages to come," all 

predictions were crowded into the present 

age, and the Scriptures were wrested so 

as to make the prophecies of Christ's 

Millennial reign applicable to their popes 

who represented him as his vice-gerents. 

And the promises made to the overcoming 

saints, they applied to the "clergy" who 

thus constituted a hierarchy claiming to 

be Christ's spiritual kingdom, the Royal 

Priesthood. Carrying out further their self-deception, 

they thereafter recognized only 

this hierarchy or clergy as THE CHURCH, 

and the common believers, who in the 

Apostles' days constituted the church, were 

styled the laity, or children of the church. 

It should be remembered, too, that about 
the same time, the church, having mistaken 
its proper present mission, viz.: the 
selecting of the church, the body of Christ, 
to be in due time joint-heirs with him, 
and having gotten the idea that they were 
now, in this age, enjoying the reign, 
strove to do the new, kingdom work, viz.: 
to convert the world and rule it. They 
therefore baptized the heathen professors 
of Christianity, who really knew nothing 
of Christ, and endeavored to teach them 
morality, which they made impressive 
upon them by forms, ceremonies and 
rituals. And to keep all power in their 
own hands, as well as because these savages 
were unprepared to do so, the right or 
authority to teach was claimed as the 
exclusive prerogative of the church. And 
so say we, that the church and its members 
alone may teach; only we object to their 
definition of true church— "the clergy" 
—and claim the Apostolic definition— all 
consecrated believers in and followers of 
Christ. All such are brethren; all such 
are God's ambassadors; all such are ministers 
(servants) of Christ, head and body, 
each according to his talents. As yet 
there are no "children of the church," 
and there will be none until the church is 
exalted and glorified. The Church complete 
—head and body— is to be the 
"Everlasting Father," or life-giver, and 
all the restored millions will be the 
"children of the resurrection." 

From these erroneous ideas regarding 
the church, Protestants escaped in part 
only. They still organize, and still recognize 
the terms "clergy" and "laity," 



and vest the power and privileges of 
ministry chiefly in the former; and many 
of them still hold the Episcopal or hierarchal 
form of church rulers hip; and 
though under this the "clergy" rules as a 
superior and independent order, yet generally 
the "laity" is recognized as being 
part of the church, and not merely "children 
of the church." They have reformed 
this much at least over the great apostasy, 
of which the Church of Rome is the only 
full representative to-day. 

The mistake started with the supposition 
that when the church obtained influence 
with the Roman Empire, it was being 
"set up" in power by God, to rule the 
world. It was really set up by Satan, as 
clearly shown in the book of Revelations, 
to deceive the nations, and if possible the 
very elect. How well his plan succeeded, 
let all judge. 

The Reformers partially discovered this 
error among the many others they had 
received for hundreds of years, through 
the teaching of those they had, as taught, 
long revered as specially authorized exponents 
of the truth and successors of the Apostles, 
divinely inspired by the laying on of 
the holy (?) hands of the claimed Apostolic 
succession, communicating the holy spirit. 
Luther distinctly pointed out that all consecrated 
children of God are prospectively 
members of the "Royal Priesthood," of 
which Christ Jesus alone is the head or 
High Priest, and consequently that all have 
the same authority now to offer up their 
lives and talents in the service of God, 
of his truth and his children— every man 
according to his several ability or talents, 
carrying out the example and teachings of 
the Lord and the Apostles, who in no 
age have had successors. They remain 
with us ever, represented by their words 
and examples. 

So then we can say truly that legitimate 
children of God, begotten not of pride 
and formalism, nor in any sense of the 
will of the flesh, but begotten of God by 
His Word of truth, are to be found to-day 
and can be readily identified, not 
by titles or gowns, but as the early church 
of priests was identified— by their love 
for the truth (John 13:35.) and by their 
sacrificing for it and for all those who love 
and serve the truth. (Gal. 6:17; 1 Cor. 9:12; 
Col. 1:24.) 



(5.) If we grant this claim of our correspondent, 
it destroys his entire argument; 
for, to say that God established the 
"clergy" and, by the laying on of hands 
of the Apostolic succession, specially 
commissioned them, and them only, to 
feed the flock, and then to admit that some 
of these specially consecrated ones are 
"wolves," is to charge God either with 
giving them a bad spirit, or else with 
selecting and placing over the true flock 
false and improper teachers. We prefer 
to explain the prominence of these 
"wolves" in control of sheep, in the light 
of the inspired explanation of the Apostle 
Paul, who said: "For I know this, 
that after my departing shall grievous 
wolves enter in among you, not sparing 
the flock. Also of your own selves shall 
men arise, [to influence and authority as 
teachers,] speaking perverse things, to 
draw away disciples after them [and their 
systems]. Therefore watch" [beware of 
these]. 

Then the Apostle tells what God's 
means of keeping them would be if they 
were faithful— not a sacred order of 
"clergy" puffed up with pride and adorned 
with worldly titles, not wolves in 
sheep's clothing, but he explains: "Now 
brethren, I commend you to God, and to 
the Word of his grace, WHICH IS ABLE to 
build you up, and to give you an inheritance 
[not present, but future] among all 
them which are sanctified" [the true 
Church, the true Priesthood]. -Acts 20:29-32. 

Furthermore, if our brother admits 
under this head (5.) that "many" of the 
membership of the Episcopal Church are 
proud and worldly, does this not prove 
that they are not members of the true 
Church, who are the "blessed, the meek?" 
And since such are members of the Protestant 
Episcopal Church (and others of 
the sort are in all sects), does it not prove 
that none of these professed churches are 
the true Church, but only human organizations 
fashioned somewhat to correspond 
to the true Church of the future? 

And if the "little flock" are those in 
Babylon without the holy hands, and the 
"wolves" are those who have the holy (?) 
Apostolic (?) blessing, and if the true sheep 
get some food, notwithstanding the efforts 
of the "wolves" to withhold it, and if they 
live somewhat consecrated lives even in spite 



of the unfavorable surroundings of "pride 
and worldly trappings"— would they not 
be much better off, and much better able 
to perform their sacrifices to God as Priests 
under Christ our High Priest, by getting 
free and separate from all those hindrances? 

R985 : page 7 

Common sense says, that the true 

would make much more rapid progress if 

rid of those hindrances, and merely associating 

in spiritual things with the truly 

consecrated. 

(6.) One weakness of that great and 
good man, John Wesley, of which all his 
followers (who know of it) are ashamed, 
and because of which Episcopalians in his 
day despised him, was his course in staying 
himself in the Protestant Episcopal 
Church to the day of his death, while 
founding another Church which the Protestant 
Episcopal Church condemns as a 
sect, and would not recognize in her pulpits. 
Thus from your stand-point John 
Wesley stands condemned by his conduct: 
either for not leaving the Episcopal Church 
if it was wrong, or for organizing another 
if it was the true. 

Mr. Wesley, though free from many of 
the errors of the Apostacy, which for 
centuries had blinded and deluded the 
church as well as the world, still clung to 
the error that the "clergy" is a sacred 
class, specially authorized and appointed 
of God to baptize and to administer the 
bread and wine of the Lord's Supper, 
though no such limitation can be found 
in the teachings of Jesus and the Apostles. 
It is only for the "Royal Priesthood," 
and they are as capable of dispensing it 

R986 : page 7 

to each other as of partaking of it. Wesley's 
followers for years were sent for 
baptism and the Supper to Episcopalian 
ministers. As they became numerous in 
America, and especially after the Revolutionary 
War, when many of the Episcopalian 
ministers as British sympathizers 
fled the country, it was found that something 
must be done, or Methodism would come 
to naught. Wesley appealed for years to 
the Bishops of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church to lay holy (?) apostolic (?) hands 



on some of his followers if not on himself, 

to make a bishop for the new associations, 

which up to that time much resembled 

the early church, not even taking a sectarian 

name though called Methodists in 

derision by their opposers, the Episcopalians 

and Presbyterians. Mr. Wesley well 

knew that according to the laws of Episcopacy 

he could not ordain a minister 

—that only a bishop had that authority, 

and he saw that if he could only get one 

bishop ordained in harmony with him and 

his new Church, all would then be smooth, 

and as many ministers could be authorized 

as might be needed; but his appeal was 

in vain. 

Finally as a last resort, Mr. Wesley with 
two others— T. Creighton and R. Whatcoat 
—ministers (not bishops) of the Church 
of England, determined to do the best 
they could to hold to the form of Episcopacy, 
and attach it to the new Church, so 
they met and ordained Thomas Coke a bishop. 
They well knew that they were violating 
the rules and principles of Episcopacy and 
that under those rules ten thousand of the 
"inferior clergy," or ordinary ministers 
could not make a bishop, but they did 
the best they could and made the best 
imitation bishop they knew how, and this 
started the great Methodist Episcopal 
Church of the United States of America. 
On Mr. Coke's arrival a general conference 
was held at Baltimore, and sixty 
ministers who had long been preaching 
Christ were authorized to baptize and to 
officiate at the Lord's supper. These 
were ministers not in the sense of titled 
and honored "clergymen," but in the 
true and early sense of the word ministers, 
namely servants— servants of God and 
his people. 

Let us not be misunderstood; we mean 
no disrespect to Methodists in showing 
that Methodism has only the form of 
Apostolic succession and ordination; on 
the contrary it is our claim that they 
needed not even the form. Each of those 
sixty ministers (servants) of God had 
just as much authority before Mr. Coke 
authorized them, as afterward. They 
needed no such human authority, but 
had it direct from the Head of the Church 
in the Bible, and were only hindered 
from seeing it by the long standing customs 
and superstitions coming down from 



Rome. Every child of God is authorized 

to preach, everywhere, Jesus and the resurrection, 

and to immerse any believer; 

and every believer is invited to partake 

of the emblems of his Lord's body and 

blood in remembrance of him, without 

asking liberty or requiring the assistance 

of any other member of the body. 

We have referred to this in answer to 
proposition six (6.) above, to show that 
the feature of Mr. Wesley's course commended 
by our brother, was the worst 
failure Wesley made. Notice for instance, 
When he believed that divine authority 
lodged in the Episcopal Bishops as the 
representatives of the Apostles, was he not 
wrong in organizing a church contrary to 
their will, and in opposition to their 
authority?— if they had any authority, 
which we deny. 

Our brother is right in saying (6.) that 
the reform of the Episcopal Church has 
"never been done." It itself was a reform 
on a previous system, and hence its 
title Protestant. It protested and rebelled 
against the Church of Rome. It did not 
and could not reform the Church of Rome, 
for the same reason that it cannot be reformed 
from within, viz.: because all 
these systems are so carefully and thoroughly 
organized that a sufficient number of 
those who have the holy spirit of Reform 
could never get into the places of power 
and control. 

Besides, from another standpoint our 
brother's argument is unsound. If we 
concede that our Lord and the Apostles 
authorized and organized the Protestant 
Episcopal Church (which we do not), 
still it would not follow that it must 
triumph, and must be reformed, and that 
from within. The Jewish Church surely 
was organized and authorized by God, 
yet it was not reformed but cast off, and 
only the Israelites indeed gathered out 
into the Gospel favor. Our Lord declared 
the reason that he did not attempt to 
reform Judaism, and why that was not his 
"starting point;" and his wisdom is shown 
by the failure of modern reformers to reform 
present institutions from within. He 
says:— Men do not put a patch of new 
cloth on an old worn out garment, neither 
do men put new wine into old wine-skins, 
for they are not strong enough to hold it 
and the result would be a waste of the wine. 



Our Lord thus illustrates his reason for 
not trying more to put the Gospel into 
the Jewish institutions. New vessels and 
agencies were preferred by the Lord when 
opening up the Gospel age. 

Even so now, he again chooses new vessels 
for the opening work of the Millennial 
age, and for the same reason. He 
even shows us clearly that the closing of 
the Gospel age was foreshadowed by the 
closing of the Jewish age. Now as then 
great nominal Israel is to stumble in her 
blindness and be cast off from all special 
favor; and only the remnant, the faithful 
few, the Israelites indeed, in whom is no 
guile, are to be accepted into the higher 
favor of Millennial glory with Christ. 

(7.) The brother errs here; it is not 
we, but Christ, who calls his people out 
of Babylon. We merely call their attention 
to his words and show that they are 
reasonable. It was the Lord himself who 
said— Let wheat and tares grow together 
until the HARVEST, and who now in the 
harvest himself thrusts in the sickle of 
truth to separate these as he did in the 
"harvest" of the Jewish age. (Matt. 13:30.) 
His work then, as now, was a separating 
work, a gathering of the Israelites 
indeed into harmony with himself, and 
the separation from them of the great mass 
whom he never recognized as his kingdom 
or joint-heirs. Mark that Babylon had 
long been in existence as an abomination, 
and had even become a mother of other 
harlots and abominable systems (all of 
which bear her name— Babylon) and had 
been drunken with the blood of the saints 
and martyrs of Jesus (Rev. 18.), and yet 
it is not until the time of her complete 
overthrow that the message is sent by the 
Lord who is about to destroy her utterly 
(not reform her), saying, "Come out of 
her, my people, that ye be not partakers of 
her sins and that ye receive not of her 
plagues." (Rev. 18:4.) We are not ashamed 
to be the Lord's mouthpieces in this 
timely but unpopular message: and what 
timely truth has not been unpopular? 

But some may object that the Lord and 
the Apostles did not call believers out of 
the Jewish synagogues, but "went into the 
synagogues" and taught the people there. 
(Luke 4:15,44; Matt. 4:23; Acts 9:20; 
13:5.) Ah yes! The Lord and the 
Apostles could go into the synagogues, 



and could teach the people there, for a 
time, but as they shunned not to declare 
the whole counsel of God, they soon 
found little and finally no opportunity to 
teach the people in the synagogues. 
(Matt. 10:17; Mark 13:9; John 16:2; 
Luke 4:28-29; John 9:34.) But could the 
Lord or the Apostles get into the pulpits 
of any of the various divisions of Babylon 
and teach the people? We all know that 
they could not. In the Protestant Episcopal 
Church for them to preach from the 
pulpit and altar would be considered defiling, 
and they would need to be cleansed 
and possibly re-consecrated. To get into 
such office and privilege of teaching the 
people, they would require the holy Apostolic 
blessing from three bishops, or at least 
from one. And none could be found who 
would dare install either the lowly, untitled 
Nazarene, or the tent-maker of Tarsus, 
or any who humbly follow in their 
footprints. 

The system of Babylon is much more 
thorough than that of the Scribes and 
Pharisees. Law and custom has so hedged 
the sheep about, that only the regular 
shepherds have access to them to feed 
them. And the "Clergy" has so exalted 
its office and power, that it can and does 
keep out all whom God could or does use 
in feeding to the sheep "meat in due 
season." Hence the Master, the great 
Shepherd who bought the sheep, needs 
now to call his sheep "out," because they 
cannot be rightly fed while in these man-made 
systems, as our Brother admits in 
proposition (5) five. 

But this Brother and many others err 
in supposing that we or the Lord are calling 
the "little flock" into confusion and 
beyond the bounds of all authority. Not 
so; while the nominal human institutions 
have continually had trouble about their 
organizations, and have been continually 
trying to get rightly organized, as the 
names "Protestant," "Reformed," "United," 
etc., etc., indicate, the true Church 
has had no such trouble, but has had a 
temporary organization all the time. God 
has this organization under his charge. 
"The Lord knoweth them that are his," 
and their "names are written in heaven," 
and such only who prove unfaithful are 
ever blotted out. No "wolves" are of 
that organization and its teachers are the 



Lord and the Apostles only. They teach 
by the Word, using the various members 
of the "body of Christ" in building up 
and strengthening one another through 
that Word. All are led of the spirit, and all 
are priests ministering and sacrificing daily. 

Oh no! We want none to come out of 
this organization, this true tabernacle, in 
every lively stone of which, God through 
his spirit operates. Thus seen, we have 
something much better than the Babylon 
confusion with its attempted, but only 

R987 : page 7 

slightly successful reforms, to offer to the 
saints, the "little flock"; but we have 
nothing whatever to offer to the proud, 
worldly-minded masses of Babylon now. 
Their imitation churches will all fall, being 
"cages" of unclean birds. (Compare 
Rev. 18:2 and Matt. 13:4,19.) We 
can only promise them something much 
better than their present systems and 
Kingdoms,— after the "little flock," the 
true Gospel Church, is glorified. Then 
they will be taught better than the "many 
wolves," and the machinations of the 
devil blinding them, will now permit. 
They will come to a knowledge of the 
Lord and can then worship him in spirit 
and in truth, and not as now, draw nigh 
with their lips, while their hearts are far 
from him. 

"Love not the world, neither the things 
of the world" [the World's churches, etc.] 
says the Master, and so we urge. As saints, 
seek not the favor of men, but of God 
only, and learn of him. Hear his voice 
and come out of Babylon into the sunlight 
of truth, into the green pastures where 
the good Shepherd leads. He declares, 
"My sheep hear my voice and they 
follow [obey] me!" 



R987 : page 7 

WHAT THE CZAR WANTS. 

A French traveler in the East has discovered, 
according to The Wiener Tagblatt, 
the ultimate aim of the Czar's 
policy. He would be glad enough to 
obtain Constantinople, but the real object 



of his ambition is to become "the Pope 

of Jerusalem." The war of 1054, the 

French observer remarks, had its germ in 

the quarrels over the Holy Places in 

Palestine, and was a continuation of the 

conflict between East and West which the 

crusades left still unsettled. "Every step 

of the Russians towards Constantinople," 

says he, "is a step toward Jerusalem. It 

is of great significance that the Emperor 

Alexander III. confides much more upon 

the power of religious enthusiasm than 

either of his predecessors did." He 

wishes to procure a more officious and 

ostentatious consecration of his religious 

authority, and to have his position emphasized 

as the supreme Protector of the 

Eastern Churches and the Orthodox Faith, 

and so rally all the Greek-Oriental 

Churches and peoples around the person 

and office of the Czar as the Constantine 

and Justinian of the modern world. This 

bold project has been long in preparation, 

is never lost sight of in any diplomatic 

movement, and no sacrifice of money is 

thought too great to secure this end. 

"Numbers of settlements of Eastern 

monks, of apparently harmless and unpretending 

character, have been and are 

being founded, and Russia finds the money 

for the purchase of the land. Aid and 

counsel are always to be had from the 

Russian authorities. The European 

powers restrict their attention too one-sidedly 

to the movements on the Bosphorus, 

and ignore the extraordinary but 

quiet movements in the Holy Land." 

Two of the Vienna papers— The Politische 

Correspondenz and The Wiener Tageblatt 

R987 : page 8 

—appear to put some faith in the 

Frenchman's observations and predictions. 

The latter has no doubt that the 

Czar would hold a coronation on the site 

of the Holy Sepulchre of the world's Redeemer, 

to be the highest possible consecration 

of his authority. "Many imagine 

that Alexander III. reckons much upon 

being crowned Emperor of Asia in Samarkand; 

but to have the crown of Asia 

set upon his head in the mother city of 

Christendom corresponds much more to 

his character and to the thoughts which 

he cherishes in the stillness of Gatschina." 



-Pall Mall Gazette. 



R987 : page 8 

SUGGESTIVE. 

A Presbyterian minister writes:— 
"In all defences I have seen, of the old 
dogma of eternal, endless torment, I 
think there is not one, even of those that 
claim to prove the doctrine from the 
Scriptures, in which there is not at least 
ten times as much of argument to show 
that the inspired Word must be so understood, 
as there is of solid quotation from 
the Word itself. Where so much pounding 
with the hammer of human reason is 
required to shape God's Word into conformity 
to a traditional or preconceived 
theory, or to weld something upon that 
Word to supply a supposed deficiency, are 
we not justified in challenging the right of 
such a doctrine to demand our acceptance? 

Let the explicit declaration of the 
Westminster Confession and Catechism 
be written on one side; on the other side 
place all the Scripture references or proof 
texts, with any other passages, that bear 
on this subject. Now is there any one 
in his right mind who will look carefully 
at the language on both sides, and then 
affirm that these form an equation? or 
that they can be made equal without adding, 
subtracting or transposing? And 
dare any Christian claim authority thus 
to tamper with God's Word?" 



Another says:— "Until the Church realizes 
that there is something worse even 
than being 'agitated;' until it is forced 
into a position where crying 'peace, 
peace,' when there is no peace, will be 
impossible, the real questions at issue will 
be held in the background, and as at 
Andover, the decision will be not upon 
the merits of the truth at stake, but upon 
the conformity of one's teaching to the 
artificial standards, conventionally 
interpreted. " 



R987 : page 8 

PROFESSOR BRIGGS' VIEWS 

ON CHURCH UNION. 

"Another great barrier to the reunion 
of Christendom is subscription to elaborate 
creeds. This is the great sin of the Lutheran 
and Reformed churches. Every 
one of these churches has separated subscribers 
from non-subscribers and occasioned 
the organization of dissenting 
churches. Lutherans, Calvinists and Arminians, 
and sections of the same, have 
been separated into different ecclesiastical 
organizations. These doctrinal divisions 
have done more than anything else to 
weaken Protestantism and stay its progress 
in Europe. ...These differences 
cannot be solved by conquest, but only 
by some higher knowledge and better adjustment 
of the problems involved through 
an advance in theological conception and 
definition. The question now forces itself 
upon earnest men whether these differences 
justify ecclesiastical separation, 
and whether they may not be left to battle 
their own way to success or defeat 
without the help of ecclesiastical fences 
and traditional prejudices.... 

Progress is possible only by research, 
discussion, conflict. The more conflict 
the better. Battle for the truth is infinitely 
better than stagnation in error. Every 
error should be slain as soon as possible. 
If it be our error we should be 
most anxious to get rid of it. Error is 
our greatest foe. Truth is the most precious 
possession. There can be no unity 
save in the truth, and no perfect unity 
save in the whole truth and nothing but 
the truth. Let us unite in the truth already 
gained, and agree to contend in 
Christian love and chivalry for the truth 
that has not yet been sufficiently determined, 
having faith that in due time the 
Divine Spirit will make all things 
clear to us." 



R979 : page 8 

PROGRESS IN KNOWLEDGE. 



This is the law of the church's progress 
and growth. When a Christian, or a 
church, becomes convinced that it has 
nothing more to learn, there follows stagnation 
and decay. And yet what else 
than this is the prevalent assumption that 
all Bible truth is locked up in our Confession 
of Faith, and that it is a heresy 
and crime to think beyond it? No greater 
mistake was ever made by Reformed 
churches than this quenching of the 
Spirit in the body of Christ, by the denial 
to its members of the liberty of progressing 
beyond the limits of their creeds. 
Confessions are good for purposes of 
instruction, but not to bind the conscience. 
Enforced creeds should content 
themselves with stating only the great 
facts and primary beliefs of Christianity, 
as they are given in the language of 
Scripture, such as "I believe that Jesus 
Christ is the Son of God." "I believe 
that He died for our sins, according to 
the Scriptures, and rose again the third 
day, according to the Scriptures." Human 
formulas, founded upon these facts, 
and explanatory of them, should always 
be held open to amendment, as God may 
bestow increasing light until we all come 
to the unity of the faith and of the perfect 
knowledge of the Son of God.— Words 
of Reconciliation. 



R987 : page 8 

SCOTLAND'S THREE "PROTESTANT" 
EPISCOPAL CHURCHES. 

The "Evangelical Advocate" of Edinburgh 
states that there are now three 
separate Protestant Episcopal church bodies 
in Scotland. 

The Scotch Episcopal Church, or as it 
is called The Episcopal Church in Scotland, 
is the Sacerdotal and Ritualistic 
portion of the Episcopal Churches in 
Scotland. Within its communion the most 
rampant Ritualism is in full practice, and 
it varies little from the practices and doctrines 
of the Church of Rome. It stands 
wholly on its own account, without any 
connection or affiliation with the other 
churches. 

Another portion of Episcopal Churches 



which may be called the Church of England 
in Scotland, maintaining purity of Evangelical 
doctrine and church administration, 
are in connection with the Church of 
England, under Bishop E. H. Beckles D.D. 
(the late Bishop of Sierra Leone), put 
into that position to keep the protestants 
from leaving the church's communion. 

And another portion is known as the 
Reformed Episcopal Protestant Church of 
England in Scotland. 

In the year 1873, ten thousand English 
Protestant churchmen, with Bishop Gregg 

R988 : page 8 

broke off from the church (not however 

in the way of schism) and formed a Reformed 

Church of England, and in 

January of 1880 the St. John's Episcopal 

Church, Dundee, Scotland, decided by 

the unanimous wish of the incumbent 

church-wardens, trustees, vestry, and congregation 

to place the church under the 

jurisdiction of the bishops of the Reformed 

Church of England, and this has had 

its effects upon other similarly circumstanced 

churches objecting to Sacerdotalism 

and Ritualism, thus forming the third 

Protestant Episcopal Scotch Church. 

—The Christian Family Annual. 



R988 : page 8 

MANIFESTO OF REFORMED CHURCH 
OF ENGLAND. 

EXTRACTS. 

We are Old-Fashioned, Evangelical and 
Protestant church people. We love the 
"old paths." We are not schismatics; 
but as the Church of England once rejected 
Romish error and separated therefrom, 
so now we reject those same errors which 
are destroying the spiritual fabric of the 
Church of England. 

Even at the risk of the charge of not 
"sticking to the ship," we prefer to adhere 
to our principles— rather than be carried 
to Rome by a church which is rapidly 
losing her Protestant character. 

We bear a relation to the Church of 
England similar to that which the Church 



of England bears to the Church of Rome. 
The reasons which the Church of England 
had for her separation from Rome three 
centuries ago, are our reasons for our separation 
from the Church of England to-day. 

Our mission is to complete the work 
of the Reformation which was then so nobly 
begun.— Ref. Church of Eng. Record. 



R988 : page 8 

HOW TO PREACH TO JEWS. 

The biographer of Mr. Leigh Richmond 
one day submitted to him the following 
question: "What is the Scriptural and 
right way to preach to the Jews?" "I 
know of no scriptural way," he replied, 
"of preaching to men, otherwise than as 
sinners; and why the Jews, whose sins 
are of so aggravated a nature, should be 
dealt with in a different way, I do not see. 
I would address the Jew as I would address 
any other man, that is, as a sinner; and 
till he is convinced of his sin, he will 
never believe in a Saviour. 'Christ Crucified' 
is declared to be, 'To the Greeks 
foolishness, and to the Jews a stumbling 
block; but to them that believe, the power 
of God and the wisdom of God.' No 
man will ever feel the power of God, 
whether he be Jew or Gentile, till he 
learn it at the foot of the cross." 



page 8 

MORE GOOD NEWS. 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 
GENTLEMEN: -The MILLENNIAL DAWN 
was handed me, by Captain A. C. Bowman, 
with a request for me to read it. 
The grip of tradition was upon me, and I 
had settled down to the current idea that 

"There is no death! what seems so is transition; 

This life of mortal breath 
Is but a suburb of the life Elysian, 
Whose portal we call death." 
I therefore commenced reading the 
volume, with a certain amount of prejudice; 
but ere I had finished the first chapter 
I perceived the pure, straightforward 



character of the writer and determined to 
give him that attention, his manifest honesty 
warranted. I resolved to note my 
objections as they occurred, and watch if 
his theory met and disposed of them, ere 
conclusions were formed. As I advanced 
the mist of tradition vanished, and the 
sunlight of God's purposes began to shine 
through the rifts of the dark, melancholy 
clouds with which tradition has obscured 
our understanding of the Bible. By the 
time my first reading was finished, I had 
become so interested, that I commenced 
a second reading, with my Bible at my 
side; so that every citation, and its connections, 
was examined and referenced. 
As I advanced my objections grew beautifully 
less, then smaller still. I was perfectly 
astonished, as I traced the Millennial 
promise from its first faint glimmer 
into the glorious sunlight of God's immaculate 
word. 

Since I have read the first volume, I 
have felt more at ease and more hopeful 
than I ever did before. A new light falls 
upon the Bible that dispels the darkness 
of mystery. I can now think of God as the 
center of love. I now feel that I can (as far 
an humble mortal is capable) comprehend 
Him. I no longer regard the Bible as 
dry and irksome, but can feel its wondrous 
utility. I never felt this or knew 
it before— it is a new light, a Helping 
Hand for which I feel a thankfulness. 

I want to have all the facts of the first 
volume fully established in my mind, and 
for that purpose, I propose to give it a 
diligent third reading. I want to get at 
the very corner stone of its ideas. I want 
removed from my shoulders entirely the 
traditional weights that I feel have hanged 
about me for years. 

I have talked much about the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN with persons of intelligence, 
since I began its reading. Some priest-ridden 
persons reject it, but I find its 
ideas a joy to many. I traveled for fifteen 
miles across my county, a few days since, 
with a gentleman, and shortly after joining 
him I remarked, I have been lately 
reading the MILLENNIAL DAWN, the most 
wonderful book of our day. I gave him 
its outline and he eagerly continued the 
conversation through our three hours ride. 
The next day I luckily had another friend 
to make a part of the return ride with. 



I mentioned the book as before, and the 
gentleman soon became interested, and 
we discussed it up to our parting. He 
then invited me to go to his community 
and lecture upon the subject, which I 
promised to do, when I thoroughly investigated 
the whole subject. I thank you a 
thousand times for having placed this 
book in my hands and will be glad to have 
the second volume on any terms. 
Respectfully yours, J. R. PHILLIPS. 


