Announcements
WISE SAYINGS FOR OUR DAY A GUIDE TO ACTION
These are perplexing times, times of crisis. It calls for knowledge, understanding and wisdom to meet the situation effectively. Wisdom of the highest kind is available, having been provided by the great Creator in advance. and contained in his Word, the Bible. Failure to avail oneself of the opportunity to gain wisdom would mark one as willfully unwise. Jehovah’s witnesses, appreciating the privilege of passing valuable information on to others, will present throughout April the Watchtower magazine, accepting subscriptions at $1 for the year. Three free Bible-study aids in booklet form will be given to new subscribers.
OBSERVE THE LORD’S EVENING MEAL
All persons of good will are invited to be present when Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world assemble on Thursday evening, April 3, after 6 p.m., Standard Time, to observe the Memorial. The meeting will be opened with song and prayer. A discourse will follow, setting forth the significance of the occasion. At the appropriate time the emblems, unleavened bread and red wine, will be served after Jehovah’s blessing has been asked separately in connection with each. Service announcements for the weekend will be made. Song and prayer will conclude the meeting.
GOD’S PURPOSE WAITS FOR NO ONE
Time and tide wait for no man. Yet some of us fail to appreciate that the Creator of time and tide has a mighty purpose toward this earth that also waits for no man. What is it? The Watchtower magazine has said: “He purposes to clean out all rebellion and iniquity, destroy those who now wreck and ruin the earth and establish a new world wherein will dwell righteousness.” Like time and tide, that marvelous purpose of the Creator moves irresistibly ahead, waiting for no man. Do you want to enjoy life in God’s new world? Then you must obtain and act on accurate knowledge of God. That means you must study the Bible. The Watchtower can help you. Send $1 for a year’s subscription and receive three free booklets.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
April 27: Shepherd of Israel, and Shepherding the Flock of God, ¶1-7. Page 176.
May 4: Shepherding the Flock of God, ¶8-30. Page 183.

