Shepherding the Flock of God
 1. What instruction does the apostle Peter give to overseers in the congregation?
THE apostle Peter instructed: “Therefore, to the older men among you I give this exhortation, . . . Shepherd the flock of God in your care, not under compulsion, but willingly, neither for love of dishonest gain, but eagerly, neither as lording it over those who are God’s inheritance, but becoming examples to the flock. And when the chief shepherd has been made manifest, you will receive the unfadable crown of glory.” (1 Pet. 5:1-4) Let these words sink deep into your minds; go over them time and again until you have made them yours, because this exhortation by the apostle must be obeyed by every shepherd in God’s organization. Otherwise he will be disqualified and disapproved.
 2. To whom do the sheep belong? Explain.
2 The dedicated brothers are God’s flock. They are his inheritance. A great trust is confided in shepherds who are given the care of God’s flock. These sheep have been redeemed by the precious blood of God’s Lamb, his only-begotten Son; so they are a purchased possession, a treasure owned by Jehovah. The sheep are not the property of the undershepherd, but are placed in his custody by the Chief Shepherd. Therefore they must be cared for as something done to Jehovah himself. All who hold appointment as shepherds (or overseers) over any part of the flock must realize the tremendous responsibility to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. Remember how Jehovah himself handled his own sheep, feeding, leading, protecting, patiently bearing with them at all times. Also, keep ever before you how our Lord Jesus cared for his Father’s sheep, losing none of them and serving continually in the fear of God, though serving in love and for love.
 3. How must God’s sheep be handled by the shepherds?
3 The sheep must be handled by the undershepherds in the same way as the Chief Shepherd handled them. This must be by leading the sheep to pastures where they will be fed spiritually and so grow strong and in time be able to help the weaker ones. They must be encouraged to attend the weekly congregational meetings, as well as the assemblies, and be helped to preach the truth with effective door-to-door and back-call sermons. They must be kept inside the theocratic arrangements of the New World society. Handle them gently with love and great consideration, for sheep quickly scare and run; and with tenderness, for they bruise by harsh or rough treatment. They have no means of defense, as do other animals, when they are attacked. They just run out of the way, and sometimes run into greater dangers.
 4. How are the shepherds appointed, and why must they live in the fear of Jehovah?
4 Shepherds are a gift to the congregation of God. They are God’s gift. The apostle Paul wrote: “He gave some as apostles, . . . some as shepherds.” (Eph. 4:11) To such shepherds he said: “Pay attention to yourselves and to all the flock, among which the holy spirit has appointed you overseers, to shepherd the congregation of God, which he purchased with the blood of his own [Son].” (Acts 20:28) If, now, you are a shepherd among the sheep, ask yourself the question, Am I paying attention to the flock over whom I am responsible? You were appointed as a shepherd by holy spirit; therefore you must not neglect such an appointment. You must not sin against the spirit. Jesus said: “Blasphemy against the spirit will not be forgiven. . . . whoever speaks against the holy spirit, it will not be forgiven him.” (Matt. 12:31, 32) You dare not go contrary to the holy spirit, dare you? For you will be held responsible. Therefore you have cause for fear if you are not attending to your duties in a proper manner. Question yourself to see if you are living in fear of Jehovah God, or has it not forced itself on your mind that he holds you responsible for the shepherd’s work? Do you truly fear God?
 5. Does shepherding mean hard work? What do we learn from Jacob’s experience?
5 The work of a shepherd was very arduous. It was not for weaklings. Attached to it were such hardships as attacks from lions, bears, wolves, robbers who would sometimes murder rather than risk being identified, exposure to all kinds of weather, keeping the sheep in the fold and hunting the ones who became lost—always being on the watch for danger. Jacob’s experience of long ago is illuminating, for it truly gives some glimpse into a shepherd’s work. He said to his father-in-law Laban: “Your female sheep and your she-goats did not suffer abortions, and the rams of your flock I never ate. Any animal torn I did not bring to you. I myself would stand the loss of it. Whether one was stolen by day or was stolen by night, you would put in a claim for it from my hand. It has been my experience that by day the heat consumed me and the cold by night, and my sleep would flee from my eyes.” (Gen. 31:38-40) Likewise today the care of the sheep is no light task.
 6, 7. When a shepherd loves his sheep, what does he do? And how is the care of them shown by Psalm 23?
6 The sheep do not know how many hours have to be devoted to the shepherding work. They do not know of the constant care, the vigilance of the faithful overseer who watches over them as parents watch over their little children. A loving parent does not continually impress upon a child how hard he has to work to provide a home, food and clothes, does he? He wants his children to be carefree and happy, yet realizing some measure of responsibility. Out of love the parent serves long hours for the family and never looks for reward. So also it is with a faithful shepherd and his sheep. Serve because you love.
7 You do not want to lose any of the sheep in your care, do you? Their safety lies in keeping in the fold and depending on the true and right shepherd watching over them. Psalm 23 assures us: “Jehovah is my Shepherd. I shall lack nothing. . . . Even though I walk in the valley of deep shadow, I fear nothing bad, for you are with me.” Therefore you must watch that the sheep do not stray from the fold. Your work is to keep out marauders. Look after the sheep. Be careful of wolves in sheep’s clothing. Today multitudes are flocking into the New World society and all kinds of men are coming. We want to help all kinds of men to clean up and dedicate their lives to Jehovah God. Those who do not, and are determined not to do so, you are to keep your eye on, for the protection of the sheep. Shepherds, watch the flock of God among you.
 8. Show how a shepherd should refrain from burdening the sheep.
8 You must lead them out to pasture, or else they will weaken and die. Show the sheep where they can browse upon the Word of Jehovah. Teach them how to study. Break up the food for them while they are young. Go into necessary explanations so they will understand. They will chew it later for themselves. Show them the precious truths of God’s Word. Open out to them the purposes of Jehovah. As they eat they will want to move about in the pasture. Show them how they can help yet ‘other sheep’ to eat good food and grow strong. Train them to preach constantly. Lead them in the way they should go. Do not burden them with your problems. Rather, discuss yours with other shepherds, and if they cannot help you, take your problems to the Good Shepherd and to the Chief Shepherd, Jehovah God. “Cast all your anxiety upon him, because he cares for you. Keep your senses, be watchful.” (1 Pet. 5:7, 8) He will take your burden and answer your prayers, but certainly carry your own load and do not unload them on the sheep. You bear the load and keep them happy and in good spiritual health.
 9. Relate how Peter was saved by his Shepherd’s care and prayer.
9 Remember the experience of the apostle Peter, when Jesus said to him: “Simon, Simon, look! Satan has demanded to have you men to sift you as wheat. But I have made supplication for you that your faith may not give out; and you, when once you have returned, give support to your brothers.” (Luke 22:31, 32) Peter was saved from Satan’s power through his Shepherd’s supplication for him. Jesus could not help him because of his own near trial and death; so he prayed to the Chief Shepherd, Jehovah. Jehovah heard and answered the prayer by bringing Peter to his senses, and Peter became a tower of strength to his brothers. This consideration shown by the Lord Jesus for Peter should make you very happy, for “Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today, and forever.” (Heb. 13:8) He is our Intercessor. When you see danger coming, pray to Jehovah for his sheep, so they will not get lost. If one of his sheep is enduring great trial, do not aggravate the situation, but try to ease it with cheerfulness, with reminders of God’s good Word of promise. Pray for your brothers that Satan will not sift them as wheat. True, we must mind our own business, but we must help spiritually. That is your business; if not, why are you a shepherd?
10. How must a shepherd be found ‘spending and being spent’?
10 Our service as shepherds should be unstinting. The apostle Paul, a faithful shepherd, did not think of his personal comforts. Read of his experiences at 2 Corinthians 11:21-33. He was beaten with rods, was stoned, was in danger from his own race, from the nations, was in dangers at sea, in the cities, spent sleepless nights—and why? So he might give a good account to Jehovah God, who, through Christ, had charged him: “I am sending you, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light and from the authority of Satan to God.” (Acts 26:17, 18) He said: “For my part, I will most gladly spend and be completely spent for your souls.” (2 Cor. 12:15) Do you shrink from giving your strength, your time, or from suffering, or giving up your own comforts for the sheep? Are you ‘spending and being spent’ for the flock of God? All the apostles spent and were spent.
11, 12. How is it possible to lose sheep? And how can the shepherd prevent this?
11 The Lord Jesus Christ set the example for all, and his record is perfect. As a faithful shepherd he did not lose one sheep. Examine your record. Have you been guilty of losing any of the sheep of God? It is known that some leave because their hearts are not set on Jehovah, and some may go away speaking evil. But how about all the others? Have you lost any because of your neglect or carelessness, or by offending them, or by not leading them into the ways and ministry of Jehovah and Christ? Has there been failure to feed them, not following up on the back-calls, not conducting Bible studies with them, not helping them at the meetings? When they have been weak, have you quickly gone to their aid, or just shown indifference? If they have been sick spiritually, have you cared for them? Let each examine himself and consider this shepherding work more thoroughly and carefully for himself, and not for another.
12 Sometimes the deplorable condition of sheep calls for urgent help. Prove yourself to be a true and faithful shepherd to the flock. Have you tried to understand their problem, to consider their real difficulty, their upbringing, domestic circumstances, or opposition in the home? Are they in the cold? If you can, help them personally or through someone else. If you cannot reach them, always keep in mind that you can pray. Our Lord Jesus prayed for Peter when he could not help Peter personally. Do not think lightly of the power of prayer. The Scriptures state: “And the prayer of faith will make the indisposed one well, and Jehovah will raise him up. Also if he has committed sins, it will be forgiven him. Therefore openly confess your sins to one another and pray for one another, that you may get healed. A righteous man’s supplication when it is at work has much force.” (Jas. 5:15, 16) Always keep in mind how considerate and tender Jehovah, the Great Shepherd, and Jesus, the Right Shepherd, have been toward you.
GATHERING DURING THE “TIME OF THE END”
13. How will the Great Shepherd gather all his sheep?
13 The Great Shepherd promised that at the “time of the end” he would gather together all his sheep. From all parts of the world they would be gathered. (Ezek. 34:11-16, AS) These lost sheep have to be found by Jehovah’s undershepherds. The sheep know the shepherd’s voice; so you have to keep calling out to them. Not any voice, for sheep do not answer a strange voice. Jesus said: “The sheep follow him, because they know his voice. A stranger they will by no means follow but will flee from him, because they do not know the voice of strangers. . . . I am the right shepherd, and I know my sheep and my sheep know me, just as the Father knows me and I know the Father.” Then respecting the “other sheep” he had this to say: “Those also I must bring, and they will listen to my voice, and they will become one flock, one shepherd.”—John 10:4-16.
14, 15. What is the voice of the Right Shepherd? How is it being amplified?
14 Today the voice of the Right Shepherd is being amplified everywhere in over 160 countries. What is that voice? Why, the good Word of Jehovah and Christ Jesus. Not only our publishing of the holy Word itself, but our causing it to speak by our showing its fulfillment in conditions among God’s people and in the world. Call to mind the first time you perceived how God’s Word was being fulfilled. Did not your heart rejoice? You knew there is a God in heaven. He really exists. Possibly you have had doubts, but now you know that God is. What a joy and happiness! The Word was speaking to you. It was alive, a living Word, with power to make you think and act.
15 Multitudes are gathering to Jehovah’s witnesses today, and these persons of good will are coming in so fast that it is difficult to take care of them all. Why are they coming? Because they have heard the “voice” of the Right Shepherd. They have heard that God is with the true shepherd-organization. Our work, then, as faithful shepherds, is to make sure the voice is heard, and to do that we have to carry that voice into every place possible. The sheep are lost, so we have to search for them and keep on calling out so they will know the Right Shepherd is near. They want him, but they have lost their way.
16. Describe what we learn from the illustration of the one “lost sheep” today.
16 If we knew where to find these lost sheep it would be comparatively easy, would it not? But we have to search for them in house after house, street after street, village after village, city after city. There is really great happiness when they are found. Jesus gave the illustration of a shepherd with his one hundred sheep, and one was lost. So he left the ninety-nine and went after the one that was lost. “And when he has found it he puts it upon his shoulders and rejoices. And when he gets home he calls his friends and his neighbors together, saying to them: ‘Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.’” (Luke 15:4-7) Often it takes strength, time and money to keep on looking for the lost sheep, but oh the joy when they are found! Keep on sounding aloud the message of Jehovah’s truth, making the voice of his praise to be heard. You heard his voice and now you are happy. So keep on looking for the other lost sheep. Be a fruitful shepherd and gain approval.
CHARACTERISTICS OF TRUE SHEEP
17. What is the first responsibility of a true sheep?
17 Let us now consider the sheep themselves. As you read these words, why not ask yourself, Am I one of the Lord’s “other sheep”? Am I part of the flock of God? If your answer is in the affirmative, then you are a very privileged person to belong to such a marvelous inheritance. As one of God’s sheep you are not the possession of any man, but you belong to Jehovah God and His beloved Son. Therefore your first responsibility is to hear and follow their “voice,” and certainly you will not listen to the voice of anyone who is not speaking with their authority. Do not go after a strange “voice.” The Right Shepherd will certainly conduct you by well-watered resting places, refreshing your soul, greasing your head with oil, making you lie down in grassy pastures in safety. You shall never lack anything.—Psalm 23.
18, 19. What arrangement does the Right Shepherd make for the shepherding of the flock, and how may the sheep distinguish who are the “true shepherds”?
18 The Lord Jesus Christ, the true and right Shepherd, is invisible to your sight, but you are not left without his visible shepherds, whom he has given to look after the interests of the flock. Follow faithful shepherds. They will never lead you astray, nor cause any harm to come to you. But, you ask, how may true shepherds be identified? Of greatest importance, they must be appointed to the position by Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, and must have their approval, and that means they have the spirit of God. You will know this by their faith, their conduct and their works. One who just professes to be a shepherd is not necessarily one. The shepherds of the Lord God are not to be identified by some peculiar garb or by some high-sounding title or through the obtaining of some degrees of higher learning. They must be “taught of God.” True and faithful shepherds you may trust, but merely professing ones you may not. You must be careful, because your life could be in jeopardy. False shepherds can lead you astray. They are seeking, not your interests, but their own. A “hireling” shepherd will run when danger comes; a true shepherd will stay with you and will be thinking only of how he can help you to be at peace and to live for the service of Jehovah God. So never listen to a strange “voice.”
19 The true shepherds are faithful servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. They are preachers of the truth, sincere and honest, students of God’s holy Word. They are serving the Most High God and Christ Jesus, not for what they can get out of their service, but for what they can give to Jehovah in gratitude for what he has done. All their conversation is toward righteousness, toward holiness and toward peace. These shepherds will gladly suffer for the sheep. They will endure persecution and even be prepared to die for the sheep. True shepherds appointed by Jehovah God have his approval, and this is made manifest by their devoted lives. These are the ones who will lead you into “grassy pastures” and assist you to have a true and accurate knowledge of the Eternal Creator and of his Son, the Lamb of God. They will help you to praise and magnify the name of Jehovah and to exalt the name of his Son as King of kings and Lord of lords. Such shepherds you can depend upon, because they are serving in purity and in love.
20. True sheep will not have what characteristics? What must they do?
20 As one of the Lord’s sheep, you must have the right disposition or mental attitude, because you must recognize your service to the Great Shepherd and his Son in heaven. What is your disposition, your mental attitude? Are you proud? Are you presumptuous? Do you have the spirit of a boaster? Are you one that is always bragging? Are you selfish, pushing others to one side so you can get ahead? Are you materialistically inclined? Are you only concerned with yourself? Are you unthankful, ungrateful, unappreciative of all of Jehovah’s undeserved kindness? Do you disesteem others? Are you always inclined to be criticizing, belittling others, grumbling at what you have to do? If you have the goatish disposition or mental attitude reflecting any of these characteristics, then you will have to change, because you will not find happiness, neither will you find peace or contentment with the Lord’s sheep while you remain in such condition. No, you will have to make your mind over.
21. Describe the characteristics and the twofold protection of (a) natural sheep; (b) “other sheep.”
21 Let us consider the natural sheep. They are harmless creatures, are they not? They are often foolish, but they are inoffensive, docile and completely lacking in guile. They respond to kindness and are obedient to the call of their shepherd. All the shepherd has to do is to call the name of the sheep, and the sheep go running toward him. Sheep are quite defenseless on their own, yet they are exposed to many dangers, such as wild animals, robbers, etc. Where, then, does their defense lie? First, by keeping together with the other sheep in the fold, and, secondly, by trusting a faithful shepherd who keeps watch over them. So it is with the Lord’s sheep at the present time. You really know no means of defending yourselves against attack of ferocious men and organizations of this world. Then where is your defense? It is by keeping with the flock of God, within the fold, and by trusting with all your heart in Jehovah God, the Shepherd of spiritual Israel, and in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Right Shepherd, and in your faithful brothers who are appointed to be shepherds of the flock.
22. Belonging to the New World society means what? And how are you protected?
22 Today Jehovah God has a theocratic organization. The Lord Jesus is the King-Shepherd and Overseer of all that organization, and those who are appointed in the organization to be overseers have the responsibility of looking after the sheep belonging to the New World society. Those who are enlightened and who have their eyes opened to understand the truth know of the blessed arrangement created today for association together inside this theocratic fold, the organization of the people of God, Jehovah’s witnesses, who are governed by faithful shepherds working under the legal governing body of this organization, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society. Keep within its confines. Remember, there is no protection outside the provision Jehovah God has made for his people. Sometimes evil-minded men will try to take advantage of you; the faithful shepherds will be on the watch and will stop them. Organizations of this world will sometimes try to break through and hurt, but you are still protected by the Shepherds in heaven, and they have at their bidding the angels, “ten thousand times ten thousand.” You are protected, therefore, by faithful men here and by the invisible forces under the direction of the Lord Jesus Christ. You need have no fear, because you are God’s flock.
TRUSTING FAITHFUL HERDSMEN
23. (a) Why can you trust faithful shepherds? (b) If one becomes unfaithful, what measure is taken to protect you?
23 Can you trust your faithful brothers? Yes, for this reason: They will not be appointed to be shepherds by those having the responsibility in the Lord’s organization unless they have the proper qualifications. They must measure up to the right standards and have the proper ability to serve as shepherds of the flock. In the first place, they must shepherd the flock in the fear of God. If they do not really fear Jehovah God and Christ Jesus, then they are not true shepherds, and they will not be appointed to care for God’s flock. Sometimes it may be found that one so appointed has not been caring for the flock, and perhaps has been oppressing them. If this is so, and if in any way the flock has been hurt, he is first counseled and corrected, or disciplined, and if that shepherd does not alter his methods he will be removed from his appointed position as a shepherd and another will be appointed in his place. Why should this be? You are the flock of God, and in your association with God’s people in the New World society you will not be harmed, for only faithful shepherds will continue to serve. This means your brothers in the truth are most anxious on your behalf. They want you to gain everlasting life. They will not drive you, neither will they lord it over you, because you are the inheritance of God. Anyone hurting you is hurting God’s interests, and he will have to reckon with God and not with men.
24. (a) How is it that we are not “men servers” and yet serve under men? (b) And what correct attitude should be taken toward these shepherds?
24 Also, you may have heard some say, “We do not serve men. We serve Jehovah God and Christ.” Does this mean, then, that you can ignore men? Can you serve God without serving under men? No. Even in the days of natural Israel, Israel served under Moses their mediator, as well as under other faithful men. In the days of the apostles, did the sheep not serve under the apostles? “God has set the respective ones in the congregation.” (1 Cor. 12:28) The apostle Paul ruled: “Now we request you, brothers, to have regard for those who are working hard among you and presiding over you in the Lord and admonishing you, and to give them more than extraordinary consideration in love because of their work. Be peaceable with one another.” (1 Thess. 5:12, 13) Again, “Let the older men who preside in a right way be reckoned worthy of double honor, especially those who work hard in speaking and teaching.” (1 Tim. 5:17) From these scriptures it will be clearly seen that it would be wrong to ignore servants of the Lord, or even to treat them lightly, or in just an ordinary way, for they are appointees of Jehovah. They have been chosen to serve the flock of God. Therefore, to think the overseers among the flock could be ignored is God-dishonoring, and it will lead one into wrong paths.
25. Why must the sheep be submissive and obedient to those governing?
25 The sheep have a great responsibility toward the shepherd, which cannot be overlooked or side-stepped. The sheep must not only be submissively obedient to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus but also be submissive and obedient to those who are governing the flock. It is not the prerogative of the undershepherd to make rules for the sheep, but he must explain and apply Jehovah’s will for them. Listen to the good counsel of the apostle Paul: “Be obedient to those who are governing you and be submissive, for they are keeping watch over your souls as those who will render an account, that they may do this with joy and not with sighing, for this would be damaging to you.”—Heb. 13:17.
26. In whose fear has the “faithful and discreet slave” class governed, and why?
26 It is most vital to understand that the interests of the Kingdom pertaining to the earth have been placed entirely in the custody of the “faithful and discreet slave” class. (Matt. 24:45-47) This servant must watch over all the sheep constantly. What a tremendous responsibility! The souls of all these hundreds of thousands of sheep have been placed under the care of God’s shepherd class on earth, the “faithful and discreet slave.” That class must give an accounting to Jehovah God for their shepherding work. Let none of the sheep think that those who compose the shepherd class treat this great responsibility lightly. They know only too well that Jehovah God and Christ Jesus are holding them responsible for the lives of the sheep. You are being served and cared for today by God-fearing men who are aware that their treatment of you is being constantly considered by those in heaven. They are “as sent from God, under God’s view, in company with Christ.” (2 Cor. 2:17) Yes, those of the “faithful and discreet slave” class are serving you sheep in the fear of Jehovah God. You are a protected flock of sheep. No harm will come to you from your faithful brothers.
27. In what manner has the spiritual governing body and their appointees protected, led and fed the sheep?
27 The spiritual governing body of Jehovah’s witnesses, associated with the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania, has performed its service in the fear of Jehovah. The appointees of this governing body, following the Right Shepherd’s example, have been doing the same thing, and have also moved forward and performed their work in the fear of God. And have not the sheep been cared for? Yes, they have. The sheep have been fed all these years with rich spiritual food. There has been no hunger among them. Never have the sheep had to go without one spiritual meal. The faithful shepherd class on earth have never taken the glory to themselves, or tried to turn the hearts and minds of the sheep toward themselves, but always toward the heavenly Shepherds. The sheep have been protected from false doctrines and errors. Warning of the evil devices of Satan has been given to us. The sheep have been protected from straying into immorality, materialism, creature worship, friendships with the evil world, and from so many other dangers too numerous to mention. But why has this been done? The answer is, For your sakes these brothers have gladly given all they had to serve you sheep, so that you may live in the peace and favor of Jehovah God.
28, 29. Why are the sheep so blessed? What will lead to further increase?
28 The sheep have been assisted by the faithful shepherds to know how to serve Jehovah God and Christ Jesus in an acceptable way, how to preach the good news of the Kingdom, how to “tell the good news of salvation by him,” how to speak his praise, how to tell his glorious acts to the children of men, how to publish peace, how to make known the marvelous purposes of our heavenly Father and his Son Christ Jesus. (Ps. 96:2) The sheep have been trained to do these things themselves and have been taught how to train still others to do them. The sheep have been united, and the lost sheep have been brought into the fold. Blessed sheep! How wonderfully favored you are to be God’s sheep and cared for by faithful shepherds, to be confident in the knowledge that they are proved, faithful men! Flock of God, you are protected from harm, because your faithful shepherds on earth must render an account to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus on your behalf.
29 The time has come to increase the flock. All the sheep are to be gathered together, and Jehovah God has commanded his people to bring them from the north and the south and the east and the west. (Isa. 43:1-7, AS) Today the voice of the Right Shepherd is being sounded in more than 160 countries, speaking comfort to yet more of the straying sheeplike ones. They will come in their multitudes. The day is here to gather them all in. The prosperity of the flock is best promoted when shepherds are mindful of their great responsibility to Jehovah God and Christ Jesus. The members of the organization, the Lord’s sheep, facilitate the fulfillment of these duties by obedience and submissiveness.
30. To remain protected, what must sheep continue to do?
30 The flock of God keep together. They do not stray from the New World society. In the old-world organization there are snares and pitfalls. The dangers are everywhere. Men and organizations will take advantage of you, and you will have no protection. Keep inside God’s organization. To do this you must learn God’s will. You must become obedient to theocratic requirements. You must follow peace and obey righteousness. You must be guided and shepherded by those who have been appointed to be the shepherds. As you do these things you will be trained in the right way so you can offer praise to the Almighty God in heaven, whose name Jehovah is worthy of all our praise. Rejoice in your deliverance from the old world into the New World society, and be happy for all the things Jehovah God has done for you and is now performing in your behalf, and for those wonderful things he has in store for you as the new world itself is ushered in following Armageddon’s battle. You who are of this happy flock, rejoice in this Great Shepherd of spiritual Israel and in his Right Shepherd, and know that no harm will befall you, but evermore He will lead you in grassy pastures and by well-watered resting places for his name’s sake.
For unto as a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government shall be upon his shoulder: . . . Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom.—Isa. 9:6, 7, AS.

