A World Without Greed
“WITHOUT a global revolution in the sphere of human consciousness, nothing will change for the better in our being as humans, and the catastrophe toward which our world is headed . . . will be unavoidable.”—Václav Havel, president of the Czech Republic.
Many people recognize that the present world order cannot survive. Some, like Václav Havel, see a global change in human thinking and actions as the only solution. One observer of the current world scene, for example, says: “For hundreds of millions of the desperately poor, the outlook for food and other necessities of life will be no better . . . unless the nations of the world act decisively to alter current trends.”—Food Poverty & Power.
However, is it realistic to pin our hopes for survival on some kind of fundamental change in human nature? Can we confidently trust governments to “act decisively to alter current trends”? Some think so. ‘God gave us free will, and it is up to us to change things,’ they say. But the harsh facts of history raise serious questions about man’s desire and ability to make the changes that are needed. This view is not pessimistic, but rather, it is realistic. Would you put your life in the hands of a surgeon if you knew that all his previous patients had died?
A Problem of Education?
“The problem is an educational one,” says Ted Trainer, in Developed to Death—Rethinking Third World Development. He says that unless people can be educated to see that fundamental change is needed, “we cannot hope to achieve a transition to a sustainable world order.” No doubt there is a need to educate people on the importance of a change in attitudes and actions if the world is to survive. In fact, it is essential, and the Bible speaks about such an educational program. It says that the earth will “be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah.” Then, no one will “do any harm or cause any ruin” anywhere on earth.—Isaiah 11:9.
But no amount of education, not even God’s educational program, will of itself rid the earth of greedy people who do great harm and cause widespread ruin. Education will produce change only in people who want to change, people who want to conform to God’s standards. According to Jesus Christ, they are in the minority. (Matthew 7:13, 14) So the Bible does not base its promise of change on some illusory hope that one day all mankind will wake up to the magnitude of the problem and change their ways. It says that God will take direct action to rid the earth of greedy people.
Intervention by God
Many consider this idea of direct action by God a dream or a mirage. “Eighteenth-century intellectual breakthroughs forced us to relinquish the comforting notion of an interventionist God who would put the human house aright,” says World Hunger: Twelve Myths. But should we put our faith in the intellectual arguments and philosophies of those who have lost faith in “an interventionist God”? Are not their solutions a mirage?
It is wiser to base our hope for survival on the unerring prophecies found in the Bible that point to intervention on God’s part. It is not merely a “comforting notion” to believe God’s promises—it is the only realistic hope for survival that we have!
“Ruin Those Ruining the Earth”
What exactly does God promise? Well, for one thing, he promises to rid the earth of those who pollute and destroy the environment. Revelation 11:18 declares that he has an “appointed time” to “bring to ruin those ruining the earth.” What will that mean? It will mean an end to all of those who currently oppress the poor and vulnerable. God will ‘judge the afflicted ones of the people, save the sons of the poor one, and crush the defrauder.’ He will get rid of the greedy and allow their innocent victims to prosper. “He will deliver the poor one crying for help . . . From oppression and from violence he will redeem their soul.”—Psalm 72:4, 12-14.
What a change that will bring! According to the apostle Peter, this change will be so all-embracing that it will produce “new heavens and a new earth.” (2 Peter 3:13) In this “new earth,” everyone will enjoy a fair share of earth’s produce. (Micah 4:4) Even now, there is plenty of food for everyone. Unequal distribution is the problem. “It has been estimated that we could produce enough on the potentially cultivable area of the globe to support 38-48 billion people,” says Anne Buchanan, in her book Food Poverty & Power.
This planet will survive. Its Creator “did not create it simply for nothing [but] formed it even to be inhabited.” (Isaiah 45:18) God’s action against greedy people will mean a short period of “great tribulation.” (Matthew 24:21) Survivors of that tribulation will then enjoy a paradise earth, populated by people totally free of greed. (Psalm 37:10, 11; 104:5) It will be as the Bible promises: “Jehovah will certainly wipe the tears from all faces.”—Isaiah 25:8.
You can be one of the happy beneficiaries of God’s action to cleanse the earth of greed. If you really want to do God’s will, avail yourself of all the help provided to assist you to survive now in a greedy world. Take action to survive the “great tribulation.” Jehovah’s Witnesses are ready to help you learn what you need to know. Feel free to contact them at the local Kingdom Hall or write to the nearest address listed on page 5.

