From Our Readers
Reads From Cover to Cover  I’ve always liked Awake!, but I used to read only articles that caught my attention. Now I read the magazine from cover to cover and end up liking subjects that I formerly would skip. For example, I just finished reading “An Ancient American Indian Tradition” (March 8, 1996), and I simply loved it!
E. A. S., Brazil
Offending Others  The article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: What to Do When You Offend Others” (February 8, 1996) came at just the right time. A Christian sister suddenly stopped speaking to me. I asked her if I had done anything to offend her, and I apologized. But this did not change her attitude. I was deeply hurt by this and began to think that my service to Jehovah was not acceptable. What comfort I felt on reading the last paragraph of the article! It said that “once you have expended yourself to make peace, Jehovah will be pleased to accept your worship.”
M. R., Argentina
Cobra  The article “Would You Like to Meet a Cobra?” (March 22, 1996) was very interesting. But a picture caption on page 16 reads: “A black cobra spreads its hood while sunning itself on a warm rock.” As far as I know, the cobra spreads its hood only when it senses danger or when the cobra is annoyed.
R. F., Germany
This was explained in the article on page 18, paragraph 1, and on page 20, paragraph 2. Our correspondent in India says that in the photo the cobra was reacting to a provocation from the photographer’s assistant.—ED.
Disabled Driver  The article “Disabled—Yet Able to Drive” (May 8, 1996) arrived at the right time. As a disabled person, I find that my Christian ministry is very limited. Thanks to Jehovah, I now own a modified car, and this article has stimulated me to enlarge my ministry.
A. A. V., Brazil
Dancing  I enjoy dancing to classical, Latin, and soft popular music as a leisure activity. I truly appreciated the article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: Is Dancing for Christians?” (May 8, 1996) It helped me place this form of recreation under closer scrutiny. The soul-searching questions that you raised will help me remain blameless and “without spot from the world.”—James 1:27.
D. D. G., Trinidad
I am 15 years old, and I have found it very hard to decide what is proper and improper when it comes to dancing. Using the guidance that the article provided—along with the scriptures cited from the Bible—I can now decide what is proper.
M. R., United States
Provisions for Hearing-Impaired  I am deaf and blind, and I want to thank you for the article “Reaching Out With Hands That Sign.” (April 8, 1996) It told about the “Joyful Praisers” District Conventions of Jehovah’s Witnesses that were held in American Sign Language. It was very encouraging for me to know that many who are blind and deaf were there. I am very grateful for those who interpreted the convention program for me when we had our convention here in December 1995. I have never learned Braille, so in order to preach to others, I have memorized 121 Bible texts. It is my desire to see the fulfillment of God’s promise at Isaiah 35:5, 6, which tells of the deaf hearing and the mute speaking. I want to be able to sing praises to Jehovah in the coming Paradise!
A. F. A., Argentina

