The Kitchen Can Be Fun
“STAY out of the kitchen!” Many a hungry child has received that admonition while trying to get an early taste of supper. However, rather than keeping them out, parents have good reason to invite their children into the kitchen. Why so? Because the kitchen is, in effect, a fascinating classroom.
The kitchen is a place where children can develop creativity and problem-solving skills, a place where they can learn to serve others and work as part of a team, a place where meaningful conversations that touch the heart can spontaneously arise, a place where deeply held values can be quietly instilled. Yes, in the crowded cupboards and drawers and on the shelves of every kitchen lie many valuable lessons—ready to come to life with the preparation of the next meal.
In this age of technology and information, why use the kitchen as a place for training children? The answer is time. Many parents recognize that there is simply no substitute for spending time with their children—lots of it!a The problem is where to find it. Some authorities urge parents to look at the routine work they do around the home as an opportunity to do things with their children and educate them. This is in agreement with a commandment that God gave to parents in the ancient nation of Israel: “These words that I am commanding you today must prove to be on your heart; and you must inculcate them in your son and speak of them when you sit in your house and when you walk on the road and when you lie down and when you get up.”—Deuteronomy 6:6, 7.
Because we regularly have to spend time in the kitchen anyway, it would seem to be an obvious place for shared family activity. And unlike special outings, which often have to wait until we have the time, energy, or money to fit them in, healthy appetites refuse to be put off. Besides that, the kitchen has a natural attraction for children. After all, where else are they trained to use knives carefully and handle other utensils? Children having fun may even make an occasional mess! What lessons, though, does the kitchen have to offer?
Learning in the Kitchen “Classroom”
Louise Smith—known to her four-year-old students as the Gingerbread Lady—made this observation based on 17 years of experience in teaching cooking to young children: “Food makes a great teaching tool because it’s something all children relate to. Their senses of smell, taste, and touch are so keen at young ages that they become totally involved. And you can teach phonics, math, and problem-solving skills through food.” Pouring, pounding, peeling, sifting, stirring, and rolling help children develop manual dexterity and eye-hand coordination. Sorting (putting raisins and nuts in separate piles) and sequencing (nesting measuring cups in order) teach concepts that serve as building blocks for learning mathematics. Following a recipe is an exercise in the use of numbers, measurements, timing, logic, and language. And one cannot venture into the complex and hazard-filled world of the kitchen without learning something about safety, responsibility, personal organization, and teamwork.
Not to be overlooked is the value of learning to cook. It is not uncommon for children who start out by helping in the kitchen to be able to prepare entire meals by the time they reach their teen years. What busy parent wouldn’t welcome that from time to time? Furthermore, cooking helps youths develop confidence and self-sufficiency—qualities that can benefit them when they later take on adult responsibilities, whether they marry or remain single.—Compare 1 Timothy 6:6.
Lee, who remained single into his early 30’s, recalls: “My mother began training me in basic kitchen routines when I was about six years old. At first, I was mainly interested in making cookies, cakes, and other sweets. But by the time I was nine, I was able to plan and prepare an entire meal for our family, and I did it on a regular basis. Later, as a single adult, I found that knowing how to handle a variety of household duties, including cooking, made life easier. And I would definitely say that this has contributed to my now enjoying a successful marriage.”
Cooking Is Fun!
How can a parent find the time to train children in the kitchen? One mother suggests scheduling a time when there are as few distractions as possible. If you have several children, you may want to work with one child at a time when they are starting out. To do this, choose a time when the other children are taking naps or are at school. Plan on spending more time than if you were cooking alone. And be prepared to have fun in the kitchen!
For your first session, you might let your child select something that he or she enjoys eating.b Look for a simple recipe that brings swift results. Make sure it includes tasks that he can successfully complete. To keep your child from getting restless and bored, have him find some of the needed ingredients and utensils beforehand. You might even partially prepare some of the ingredients in advance so that the session does not become drawn out and tedious.
Read through the recipe with your child, showing him how to perform each of the tasks. Give your child his own space in the kitchen—perhaps a drawer with a couple of bowls and a few utensils—and give him an apron. Rather than have a boy wear a woman’s apron, you might get him one made for a male chef. Right from the start, emphasize the importance of safety and set sensible rules for the kitchen.—See the box entitled “The First Lesson—Safety,” page 18.
Most of all, try to make it fun. Don’t have your child just watch you; have him wash his hands, and keep them busy in the actual preparation of the food. Allow opportunity for him to explore, experiment, and ask questions. And when a dish doesn’t turn out perfectly, don’t worry. If your child made it himself, he’ll probably eat it anyway!
Family Togetherness
Undoubtedly, the greatest benefits to come out of the kitchen involve the unity and values of the family. You may have observed that in some households today, family members busily go about their separate activities without having much real contact with one another. Under such circumstances, the home may become little more than a rest stop, a refueling station. In contrast, a family that cooks together is more likely to eat together and to clean up together. These activities provide them with regular opportunities to communicate, interact, and keep in touch with one another. “I had some of my best discussions with my boys over the kitchen sink,” one mother recalls. And Hermann, a Christian father, adds: “We deliberately did without a dishwasher for several years, so that the dishes had to be washed and dried by hand. Our sons were assigned to do the drying, taking turns. There was no better time for casual communication.”
Yes, the time you spend in the kitchen with your children—week after week, year after year—provides a basis on which spiritual values and godly qualities can develop. It is during such unforced moments of togetherness that heart-to-heart conversations between parent and child can naturally arise and that the influence of a parent’s example can quietly affect a child’s heart. Such training can benefit a child for a lifetime, for Proverbs 22:6 says: “Train up a boy according to the way for him; even when he grows old he will not turn aside from it.”
So if as a parent you are looking for ways to spend more time with your children, why not invite them to help you prepare a cake or a whole meal? You may find that working with them in the kitchen is a means both to nourish and to nurture your family.
[Footnotes]
For a discussion of this subject, see the article “‘Quality Time’ Doled Out in Limited Quantities,” in the May 22, 1993, issue of Awake!, pages 16-17.
For the sake of brevity, after this the child will be referred to as “he.” However, the information applies equally to girls.
[Box on page 18]
The First Lesson—Safety
Be Safety Conscious
  • In a serious but nonfrightening way, explain the dangers of working in the kitchen, much as you would explain the dangers of traffic on a busy street. Set a good example yourself.
  • Provide adult supervision whenever children are working in the kitchen. Do not allow a child to use any utensil or appliance, especially electrical, until he can use it safely.
  • Keep your kitchen orderly. Clean up spills and clear away clutter promptly. Pets and other distractions should be kept out of the kitchen while you are cooking.
Protect Fingers
  • Electric mixers, blenders, and food processors should be used only when an adult is supervising. Make sure that the appliance is turned off and unplugged before your child puts a utensil into the bowl.
  • Keep knives sharp, since a dull knife requires more pressure and is therefore more likely to slip.
  • When your child is learning to use a knife, have him follow these steps: (1) pick the knife up by its handle, (2) place the knife on the food, (3) put the other hand on the back of the knife, and (4) apply pressure to cut the food.
  • Use a cutting board. To keep vegetables from rolling around while your child is trying to cut them, slice them in half first and place the flat side down on the cutting board.
Guard Against Burns
  • Always turn off stove-top and oven dials when not in use. Keep towels, cookbooks, and pot holders away from burners.
  • Position the handles of pans toward the center of the stove, where they cannot easily be bumped and cause spills.
  • If you let your child work at the stove, be sure that he is standing on a sturdy and stable surface.
  • Don’t pick up a hot item unless you already know where you are going to set it down. Make sure others in the kitchen know when you are carrying a hot item, especially if you are going to walk behind them.

