Presenting the Good News​—Are You Locating More?
1 It is a pleasure to report that Bible study activity is on the upswing. During the months of January through March you brothers succeeded in starting and conducting 35,040 more studies than you reported in December. At the end of March you were conducting 25,766 more studies than you were during March a year ago. Many congregations now are averaging one or more studies per publisher. We all rejoice to see these evidences of Jehovah’s blessing on our efforts.
2 It is true, of course, that many who obtain literature do not respond favorably to our offer of the study arrangement. We often find that the hearts of these people are on other things and, as we learned from our study of the March 1 Watchtower, it is the heart that motivates them as well as us.
3 There are many things that cause people to change their thinking and their desires, however. It may be the death of a close friend or relative, or a change in one’s financial situation or personal circumstances. It may be your regular visits in the ministry. Many are becoming disgusted with this old system of things. Yes, many people are changing their thinking and changing their desires, and we want to be on hand at the appropriate time to help them and to direct their minds and hearts to Jehovah’s Word and his new system of things, don’t we? This is one reason for us to continue to have as full and regular a share in the house-to-house work as possible. In the house-to-house work we are keeping God’s Word before the people and we are watching for those upon whom God’s Word makes a favorable impression so as to motivate them to righteousness. We plant and water the seeds of truth and look to Jehovah to make it grow.​—1 Cor. 3:6.
4 One circuit servant observed that, in many cases, it was the publishers who showed ‘continued effort and sheer determination’ who, with Jehovah’s blessing, succeeded in getting Bible studies started. Many are finding that rehearsing and practicing how they will handle things has increased their effectiveness in getting new studies started. Have you been following the good suggestions presented on Saturday evening at your circuit assembly and on page 8 of the February Kingdom Ministry? It may be that your preparing in advance in this way will help you to get a study started too.
5 During the week of the circuit servant’s visit the circuit servant and his pioneer wife, if he is married, have as a goal starting two or more home Bible studies and turning these over to publishers and pioneers in the congregation. Would you be willing to follow through and regularly conduct one of these studies? Tell the circuit servant of your willingness. With the efforts of the pioneer wife of a circuit servant to start studies, and the conscientious follow-through of the zealous publishers who regularly conducted the studies turned over to them, thirty persons in one circuit are now publishing.
6 When interest is located and studies are started, keep in mind the fine suggestions given on page 2 of the January Kingdom Ministry to aid us to protect these interested ones, strengthen their hearts and ‘keep Bible studies going.’
7 As you put forth an effort to start new Bible studies, pray that Jehovah will bless you in your efforts. Work with others who are having success in the work. Endeavor to make progress. Continue to exert yourselves vigorously. Yes, “let us not give up in doing what is fine, for in due season we shall reap if we do not tire out.”​—Gal. 6:9.

