Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING MAY 9
Theme: Help Others to Build a Healthy Faith. Song 12.
10 min: Introduction. Text, Branch Letter and Theocratic News. Family discussion after evening meal. Father quizzes family on what they remember about the foregoing.
10 min: “The Truth Book Can Help to Build a Healthy Faith.” Questions and answers.
 5 min: Offering the “Truth” Book. (1) Demonstrate and discuss three or more brief presentations. (See suggestions below.) (2) After each demonstration ask audience why they thought presentation was effective. (3) Ask one making presentation to comment on why he (or she) handled things as he did.
Arrange ahead of time with three able publishers so three different presentations are given. One might use the Scriptural presentation and theme “The Government That Will Solve Man’s Problems,” featured during the “Watchtower” campaign. (See December “Kingdom Ministry,” page 2.) One, without reading from the Bible, might offer the book direct, just featuring its contents. One might offer to demonstrate the Bible study arrangement and then offer the book if study arrangement is refused.
15 min: “Getting God’s Viewpoint on Marriage.”
(2 min.) Chairman: Briefly describe the situation outlined in the February 8, 1971, “Awake!” page 13. (A young girl became pregnant. They lived together without the benefit of marriage, having several children. The man refused to marry her.)
(8 min.) Ask congregation what Scriptural principles apply. With the use of the concordance some may be able to find the scriptures they refer to, such as verses forbidding loose conduct and fornication. Show the responsibility of parents to look after their children, the need to legalize marriage, live a clean moral life, etc.
Chairman can then relate briefly the story and the outcome Jehovah gave because this woman followed the counsel of God’s Word.
(5 min.) Ask what members of congregation can do​—husbands, wives and children—​to contribute to happiness and spiritual strength of other members of the family.
10 min: Concluding comments. Accounts report. Song 34.
WEEK STARTING MAY 16
Theme: ‘Go . . . teach.’​—Matt. 28:19, 20. Song 50.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
12 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers. Stress need for regular house-to-house work to find interested ones.
13 min: Starting Studies. Chairman: Read paragraph 4 in article “The Truth Book Can Help to Build a Healthy Faith.” Demonstrate suggestion. Then ask audience what they like about this approach.
You may wish to ask for experiences of publishers who have had success in starting studies. Encourage the brothers to prepare and practice together various ways to start studies.
15 min: Help Interested Ones and Ones Newly Associated to Appreciate God’s Organization. Audience participation: Where are the basic organization instructions for Jehovah’s Christian witnesses recorded? (Ps. 119:105) Whom has Jehovah appointed to be head of the Christian congregation? (Eph. 1:22, 23) Who is it Jesus has appointed “over all his belongings” here on earth? (Matt. 24:45, 47) What assignment of work have the anointed been given? (Acts 1:8) Give a Scriptural reason for the “other sheep” to give the remnant their full support. (Rev. 7:15; Matt. 25:40) Who make up the governing body today? Who made up the governing body in the first century? (Acts 15:2, 6, 23) On what does the governing body base its decisions? (Acts 15:15, 28) Why is it important to keep in close contact with Jehovah’s visible organization? How have we benefited from close contact with Jehovah’s visible organization? (For further information see the “Lamp” book, Chapter 2.)
15 min: To conclude program, congregation servant may wish to read paragraph five from article “The Truth Book Can Help to Build a Healthy Faith.” Then encourage publishers studying with others to appreciate urgency of work and need to help interested ones make progress. Concluding comments. Song 63.
WEEK STARTING MAY 23
Theme: Do Good to Those Related to Us in the Faith.​—Gal 6:10. Song 52.
 5 min: Introduction, text and comments.
10 min: How Can We Protect Ourselves? (2 min.) Chairman: Briefly describe the problem of pornography; available on newsstands, in offices, schools, etc. See January 22, 1971, “Awake!” on page 16.
(8 min.) Ask audience for Scriptural reasons to stay away from such things. Also, how can we protect ourselves, our children and our brothers?
17 min: “Keep Strong Spiritually.” Questions and answers.
(5 min.) Audience participation. Get comments from parents on WHEN they study with their families, WHAT they study and HOW they make it interesting for all members of the family.
15 min: Standing Firm for Godly Principles in School.
(3 min.) Chairman discusses some situations that require a Christian in school to stand firm for godly principles. (Holiday celebrations, religious ceremonies, patriotic acts) Adhering to Christian principles results in a witness. (“1971 Yearbook,” page 228, ¶3) Good for parents to review matter with children.
(7 min.) Demonstration: Father and mother review situations that might arise to test integrity of children in school. (Consider also temptations from schoolmates to do bad.) Turning to “1971 Yearbook,” father shows how standing firm for godly principles serves as a witness. (Page 214, ¶3) Mother mentions that standing firm helps other Witness children. (Page 93, ¶4; page 94, ¶1) Father draws attention to fact that good conduct is part of matter and leads to witness. (Page 175, ¶2) Children encouraged, determined.
(5 min.) Chairman shows that enduring trials makes one stronger and more determined to obey God. (Page 228, ¶3; page 306, ¶3) Consider local experiences and holidays coming up (Memorial Day) that require standing firm for godly principles.
13 min: Your Field Ministry. Talk using material from pages 70-77 of “Lamp” book highlighting seriousness of our commission. (Do not cover too much. Endeavor to reach hearts.) Concluding comments. Song 111.
WEEK STARTING MAY 30
This service meeting can be prepared in harmony with local needs. Feature the offer for June, “New World Translation” and “Is the Bible Really the Word of God?” for a contribution of $1.25. For suggestions on presenting the offer, see “Quick Presentations” on page 4 of the December 1970 “Kingdom Ministry.”
Consider Room Request Form and Application for Volunteer Service. (Pass out forms.) Review instructions for filling out rooming form. Remind brothers that if plans are changed after assignment is received, it is important to notify landlord and convention rooming department. While considering application for volunteer service some may want to fill it out and turn it over to the congregation servant after the meeting for forwarding to convention city. Consider Question Box. (This part can be scheduled for consideration earlier in May if congregation will be attending an early assembly.)
WEEK STARTING JUNE 6
Theme: Work with Counselors of the New Order Society. Song 102.
10 min: Introduction, text and talk on theme. See “The Watchtower” of June 1, 1971.
12 min: How Are Our Brothers Working in Africa? See reports in “The Watchtower,” February 15 and March 1, 1971, and “Awake!”, March 22, 1971. You may choose to use several brothers to give three or four short reports. Each can consider a different country, featuring certain experiences or activities of our brothers. (Be careful of timing.)
13 min: Working with Magazines to Spread the Good News.
Chairman: Report on how the congregation is doing and commend brothers for activity with magazines. Ask congregation to suggest occasions for presenting magazines: When offer is not taken, incidental witnessing, etc. Some carry them in pocket or purse and offer them when shopping, at gas station, on train or bus, to fellow employees, at school, to salesmen who call at the home, etc.
Encourage publishers always to carry magazines in the ministry and use them well. There is no objection to leaving an older magazine (just one, either “Watchtower” or “Awake!”) and a handbill where people are not home, especially if the magazine can be put under the door or through some open slot for receiving packages. Do not use mail receptacles. Extra magazines that are not current may be used in this way or given free to people who cannot afford to give a contribution. Good experiences have resulted from this.
As you help new publishers to be regular in the ministry, each week if possible, invite them to come with you and share in magazine work.
15 min: Prepare according to local needs.
10 min: Concluding comments. Song 101.

