From Our Readers
Conversation  Thank you for the article “Conversation Is an Art.” (April 8, 1995) I have been struggling with shyness for a long time. But I now realize that I am not the only person who has this trouble. I will put your suggestions to good use.
A. L., United States
Your suggestion to read articles in The Watchtower and Awake! really works. You’d be surprised how much there is to talk about when you do so!
V. M. J., United States
Concentration Camp  An acquaintance of mine read the article “My Hate Turned to Love.” (January 8, 1995) He claims that contrary to what the article stated, there was no sign “Arbeit Macht Frei” (Work Makes Free) in the Buchenwald camp.
H. J. Z., Germany
Please pardon the inaccuracy. The sign at the entrance to Buchenwald can be seen there to this day, and it actually reads “Jedem das Seine” (Each According to His Merits). The Auschwitz and Sachsenhausen camps had the sign “Arbeit Macht Frei.”​—ED.
Autism  Thank you very much for the article “Autism​—Meeting the Challenges of a Puzzling Disorder.” (February 8, 1995) Finally, I can understand the sickness that afflicts my daughter and know that it was not the result of something I did in bringing her up. My service to Jehovah gives me the strength to deal with her situation.
M. H., Switzerland
A lot of superstitious causes have been attributed to autism, such as a curse from ancestors or retribution for past deeds. What you have written will help create better understanding of this disorder. Thank you for such educational articles.
M. A., Nigeria
Orchids  I’m an orchid lover! In fact, I have orchids in my garden and a picture collection of them. Thank you for publishing the article “In Search of Orchids in Europe.” (January 22, 1995) I hope it’s not the last article you publish on this subject.
R. M., Philippines
Safe Driving  I am in my mid-40’s and was never allowed to drive because of epilepsy. After brain surgery, I got the green light from my neurologist to apply for a driver’s license! The article “Are You a Safe Driver?” (February 8, 1995) helped me appreciate the importance of having the right attitude while driving. It came right after I got my license!
G. S., United States
Unforgivable Sin  Thank you for the article “Young People Ask . . . Have I Committed the Unforgivable Sin?” (November 8, 1994) I had tears in my eyes while reading it because I too struggle with this unclean habit of masturbation. I followed the examples of Marco and Alberto, mentioned in the article, who each had the courage to talk to an elder. This helped me greatly.
A. M. C., Brazil
Masturbation is one of the toughest fights a young Christian could have. I have felt miserable and downhearted many times. The article encouraged me to keep struggling to win this battle.
F. G. M., Mexico
I got involved in loose conduct with the young man I was hoping to marry; it destroyed our relationship. I was severely depressed and had many tearful days and nights. I truly thought I would not be forgiven. Reading these articles restored my faith in Jehovah and his ability to forgive and forget.
L. C., Australia

