How You Can Live Forever
SINCE the human body clearly has the potential for a much longer life than humans enjoy today, some put their trust in science to discover how we can live forever. “As we gain a more complete knowledge of the chemicals of the body and how they interact,” Dr. Alvin Silverstein wrote, “we will unravel the essence of life. We will understand . . . how a person ages.”
With what consequence? It will lead to “a new era in human history,” Silverstein said. “There will be no more ‘old’ people, for the knowledge that will permit the conquest of death will also bring eternal youth.”
Will humans accomplish this? “Do not put your trust in nobles, nor in the son of earthling man, to whom no salvation belongs,” the Bible urges. “His spirit goes out, he goes back to his ground; in that day his thoughts do perish.” (Psalm 146:3, 4) Humans have been unable to isolate, much less correct, the inherent flaw that results in aging and death, even as we have seen. Only our Creator can do that.
Yet, is it really the purpose of God that humans live forever on earth?
God’s Purpose
Where did Jehovah God put the first human couple to live? It was in an earthly paradise. And they were instructed to “be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it.” (Genesis 1:28) Yes, God’s purpose was to have, in the course of time, the entire earth inhabited by a righteous human family living together in peace and happiness.​—Isaiah 45:18.
Although a death sentence was imposed on Adam because of his disobedience, God’s original purpose for humans to live forever in Paradise on earth did not change. (Genesis 3:17-19) “I have even spoken it,” God says, “I shall also do it.” (Isaiah 46:11; 55:11) God showed that his purpose had not changed regarding the earth when he said: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”​—Psalm 37:29.
As our Creator, God is in a position to correct the defect that causes humans to grow old and die. On what basis does he do this? Since that defect was inherited from the first man, Adam, God has provided as a ransom sacrifice the perfect human life of his Son, Jesus Christ, “in order that everyone exercising faith in him might not be destroyed but have everlasting life.”​—John 3:16; Matthew 20:28.
Jesus Christ thus replaces, in effect, the original Adam as our father, or life-​giver. That is why in the Bible Jesus is called “the last Adam.” (1 Corinthians 15:45) So instead of being condemned to die as children of the sinner Adam, obedient humans may be reckoned worthy to receive everlasting life as children of their “Eternal Father,” Jesus Christ.​—Isaiah 9:6.
Of course, “the King of eternity” and “the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ” is Jehovah God. (1 Timothy 1:17; Revelation 15:3; Colossians 1:3) Yet Jesus Christ, as well as being provided as our “Eternal Father” and “Savior,” is also the “Prince of Peace.” (Luke 2:11) As representative of his Father, Christ will exercise princely authority to bring peace to the earth.​—Psalm 72:1-8; 110:1, 2; Hebrews 1:3, 4.
Under the rule of Jesus Christ, the earthly Paradise that was lost will be regained. This will occur, Jesus said, “in the re-​creation, when the Son of man sits down upon his glorious throne.” (Matthew 19:28) Faithful followers of Christ​—altogether 144,000 of them—​will rule with him over the Paradise earth. (2 Timothy 2:11, 12; Revelation 5:10; 14:1, 3) Millions will benefit from that righteous rule by enjoying life on earth in Paradise. Included among them will be the criminal who died alongside Jesus and to whom Jesus promised: “You will be with me in Paradise.”​—Luke 23:43.
Thus, even the unrighteous dead will be resurrected and will be provided opportunity to qualify for everlasting life on earth. (Acts 24:15) The Bible beautifully describes the elimination of sickness, aging, and death, saying: “God himself will be with them. And he will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.”​—Revelation 21:3, 4.
How to Live Forever
Surely you want to be among those who will possess the earth and reside forever upon it. If so, you must meet the requirements for living forever in Paradise. In prayer to his heavenly Father, Jesus Christ declared a basic requirement, saying: “This means everlasting life, their taking in knowledge of you, the only true God, and of the one whom you sent forth, Jesus Christ.”​—John 17:3.
Jehovah’s Witnesses will be happy to help you to take in this life-​giving knowledge. Simply ask them and they will, free of charge, visit at a convenient time and discuss how God purposes to raise humankind to spiritual and bodily perfection. Be assured that our almighty Creator is fully capable of correcting the inherent flaw that causes aging and death. The time is coming, and it is near, when life no longer will be so short. Jehovah will bless his people with “life to time indefinite.”​—Psalm 133:3.
[Picture on page 10]
Under Christ’s princely rule, aging and death will be conquered

