VOL. XXIII. AUGUST 15, 1902 No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 

Views from the Watch Tower 243 

Industrial Feudalism 243 

What Will the Higher Critics 

Do With Paul? 244 

Is There a Crisis in Methodism? 244 

Living by Every Word Out Of 



the Mouth of God 245 

Journeying Toward Canaan 248 

Interesting Questions Answered 251 

We are Well Able to Overcome it 253 

page 242 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
--ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-131 GREEN ST., FOREST GATE, LONDON. 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE, 5c (2-l/2d.) A COPY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL 
TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS:- 

Those of the interested who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity 
or adversity, are unable to pay for the TOWER, will be supplied FREE, if 
they send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and requesting 
the paper. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our 
list continually. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Every letter you send through the mail may be a more 
or less potent messenger of the truth, even on its outside, 
by the use of these envelopes. They catch the attention 
not only of those to whom they are addressed, but postmen 
and others have an opportunity, and often the curiosity, to 
read their message of peace; the gospel in a condensed 
form. Price 25c per hundred post paid. 



WE ARE HOLDING some of the new Bibles for a time, for 
some of those who hope to find it more convenient to send the 
money later. We still have some of both styles of binding ($2 
and $3), and those desiring may order. 



"TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES" is out of 

stock temporarily (both English and German), but we 
hope to have plenty very soon. 



WALL CHARTS painted on cloth, on rollers, 5 ft. long, similar 
to the one in Dawn I. are again in good supply. They are 
of good appearance suitable for sitting rooms and small halls. 
Express prepaid $1.50. 



PAPER CHARTS 36 in. long with hangers, metal bound, 
showing chart of the ages and prophetic outlines, prepaid 25c 
each. 

We are preparing a smaller edition of this chart on very 
tough paper, suitable for inserting in the new Bibles. They 
will be very convenient for reference. Price postpaid 10c. 



R3056 : page 243 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER. 
INDUSTRIAL FEUDALISM. 



The Independent has recently published an article 
from the pen of Mr. W. J. Ghent which has attracted 
general attention. Mr. Ghent points us back to the 
days of feudalism when lords and barons led and 
governed the residents of their estates almost like 
slaves through under chiefs, and declares that in 
many respects similar conditions are now approaching. 
"The next distinct stage in the socio-economic 
development of America.. .will be something 
in the nature of a benevolent feudalism," is the way 
he puts it; "concentration of capital and the increase 
of wealth will continue,... 'the rich will grow 
richer, and the multi-millionaires will approach the 
billion-dollar standard.'" He proceeds:— 

"The more the great combinations increase their 
power, the greater is the subordination of the small concerns. 
They may, for one reason or another, find it possible, 
and even fairly profitable, to continue; but they 
will be more and more confined to particular activities, to 
particular territories, and in time to particular methods, 
all dictated and enforced by the pressure of the larger 
concerns. The petty tradesmen and producers are thus 
an economically dependent class; and their dependence 
increases with the years. In a like position, also, are the 
owners of small and moderate holdings in the trusts. The 
larger holdings— often the single largest holding— determines 
the rules of the game; the smaller ones are either 
acquiescent, or, if recalcitrant, are powerless to enforce 
their will. Especially is this true in America, where the 
head of a corporation is often an absolute ruler, who determines 
not only the policy of the enterprise, but the 
personnel of the board of directors." 



"The laborers and mechanics were long ago brought 
under the yoke through their divorcement from the land 
and the application of steam to factory operation. They 
are economically un-free except in so far as their organizations 
make possible a collective bargain for wages and 
hours. The growth of commerce raised up an enormous 
class of clerks and helpers, perhaps the most dependent 
class in the community. The growth and partial diffusion 
of wealth in America has in fifty years largely altered the 
character of domestic service and increased the number of 
servants manyfold. Railroad pools and farm-implement 
trusts have drawn a tightening cordon about the farmers. 
The professions, too, have felt the change. Behind many 
of our important newspapers are private commercial interests 
which dictate their general policy, if not, as is frequently 
the case, their particular attitude upon every public 
question; while the race for endowments made by the 
greater number of the churches and by all colleges except 
a few state-supported ones, compels a cautious regard on 
the part of synod and faculty for the wishes, the views, 
and prejudices of men of great wealth. To this growing 
deference of preacher, teacher, and editor is added that of 
two yet more important classes— the makers and the interpreters 
of law. The record of legislation and judicial 
interpretation regarding slavery previous to the Civil War 
has been paralleled in recent years by the record of legislatures 
and courts in matters relating to the lives and 
health of manual workers, especially in such cases as employers' 
liability and factory inspection. Thus, with a 
great addition to the number of subordinate classes, with 
a tremendous increase of their individual components, and 
with a corresponding growth of power in the hands of 
a few score magnates, there is needed little further to make 
up a socio-economic status that contains all the essentials 
of a renascent feudalism." 

"Macaulay's famous dictum, that the privileged classes, 
when their rule is threatened, always bring about their 
own ruin by making further exactions, is likely, in this 
case, to prove untrue. A wiser forethought begins to prevail 
among the autocrats of today— a forethought destined 
to grow and expand and to prove of inestimable value 

R3057 : page 243 

when bequeathed to their successors. Our nobility will 
thus temper their exactions to an endurable limit; and 
they will distribute benefits to a degree that makes a tolerant, 
if not a satisfied people. They may even make a 
working principle of Bentham's maxim, and after, of 
course, appropriating the first and choicest fruits of industry 
to themselves, may seek to promote the 'greatest happiness 
of the greatest number.' For therein will lie their 
greater security." 

Mr. Ghent considers "the present state machinery 
is admirably adapted for the subtle and extra-legal 
exertion of power by an autocracy" and hence 



that neither new laws nor violent methods will be 
invoked. He continues:— 

"The prevention of discontent will be the prior study, 
to which the intellect and the energies of the nobles and 
their legates will be ever bent. To that end the teachings 
of the schools and colleges, the sermons, the editorials, the 
stump orations, and even the plays at the theaters will 
be skilfully and persuasively molded; and the questioning 
heart of the poor, which perpetually seeks some answer 

R3057 : page 244 

to the painful riddle of the earth, will meet with a multitude 
of mollifying responses.... Literature will take 
on the hues and tones of the good-natured days of Charles 
II. Instead of poetry, however, the innocuous novel will 
flourish best; every flowery courtier will write romance, 
and the literary darling of the renaissance will be an Edmund 
Waller of fiction. A lineal descendant of the famous 
Lely, who 

'...on animated canvas stole 
The sleepy eye that spoke the melting soul,' 
will be the laureled chief of our painters; and sculpture, 
architecture, and the lesser arts, under the spell of 
changed influences, will undergo a like transformation. 

"This, then, in the rough, is our benevolent feudalism 
to-be. It is not precisely a Utopia, not an 'island valley 
of Avilion'; and yet it has its commendable, even its fascinating 
features. 'The empire is peace,' shouted the partizans 
of Louis Napoleon; and a like cry, with an equal 
ardency of enthusiasm, will be uttered by the supporters of 
the new regime. Peace and stability will be its defensive 
arguments, and peace and stability it will probably bring. 
But tranquil or unquiet, whatever it may be, its triumph 
is assured; and existent forces are carrying us toward it 
with an ever-accelerating speed. One power alone might 
prevent it— the collective popular will that it shall not be. 
But of this there is no fear on the part of the barons, and 
but little expectation on the part of the underlings." 

The writer of the above seems to have a clear 
grasp of the subject and presents it well. Our only 
disagreement with his hypothesis is that it will not 
work out as the wealthy intend it shall. The next 
great world-wide financial depression which we believe 
to be but a few years ahead of us will disconcert 
these plans and confound the whole world. Stockholders 
will demand dividends even on watered 
stocks; and managers however benevolently disposed 
and however prudent will be compelled either to advance 
prices or to curtail expenses or both and in the 
end the lower classes are sure to be so hard pressed 
that the Scripture predictions respecting our times 
will be fulfilled.-James 5:1-5; Dan. 12:1. 

WHAT WILL THE HIGHER CRITICS DO WITH PAUL? 



"Let the Gospel accounts of the resurrection of Jesus 
be given up as non-historical, there still remains the unquestionably 
historic and authentic testimony of Paul." 
This is the keynote of an article by Rev. Dr. William 
Cleaver Wilkinson, of Chicago University, in which he 
dwells upon the incalculable need the Christian Church 
has for Paul, as one whose testimony "no fiercest crucible 
fires of historical criticism can possibly in the least affect." 
Dr. Wilkinson (who writes in The Homiletic Review, 
June) does not think that this importance of Paul's testimony 
is adequately appreciated. He says: 

"The cry, so rife everywhere about us, 'Back to Christ!' 
really means, from the lips of many who utter it, 'Away 
from Paul!'— nay, even, almost, 'Away with Paul!' With 
many zealously active and widely influential Christian 
teachers and writers the feeling has been growing stronger 
every day for now a decade of years or more that the 
Apostle Paul has too long been suffered to dominate, too 
exclusively, our conceptions of Christianity. The view 
has been propagating itself by boldly declaring itself that 
the proper way to regard Paul's writings is to regard them 
as setting forth, not authoritatively the true doctrines of 
Christ, but only as setting forth one great mind's own individual 
way of conceiving those doctrines. The doctrines 
themselves, it is urged, in their unadulterated purity, are 
to be sought in the words of the living Jesus, as those 
words are reported by the four evangelists, but especially 
by the three synoptic evangelists so called, Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke. The records of these historians, we are told, 
are to be carefully sifted; for the truth which they give 
is mingled with error— the error of imperfect report and 
imperfect transmission. Besides this, so we are further 
given to understand, there is the error, an uncertain 
amount, to which Jesus himself, as proved by his own admissions 
of ignorance on some points, was liable." 

From this "pitiable state of hopeless incertitude," Paul 
rescues us by his witness to a "living, an ascended, a 
glorified Christ." It was for the sake of this service that 
Christ waited until after his resurrection and ascension 
before calling Paul to the apostleship. It is Paul alone 
who gives to Christ's pre-existence and to his exaltation 
after death the proper prominence, making almost nothing, 
in comparison, of the Lord's earthly life. It was not upon 
Jesus as a man among men, but upon Jesus as supreme 
divine Lord over men that Paul laid commanding emphasis. 
Dr. Wilkinson continues: 

"The Christian Church can not afford to obey the call 
'Back to Christ!' if that call be understood to mean back 
to the earthly Christ of the Gospel histories, away from the 
heavenly Christ of the epistles of Paul. The tendency, 
now so strong and prevalent so widely, to deal with Jesus 
on severely 'scientific' principles of historical criticism, 
simply as a man who lived once in Palestine, and whose 
words and deeds were very imperfectly reported by very 



ill-qualified biographers, biographers that must be halted 

with challenge at every point and not confidently relied 

upon, unless they all three happen to relate the same thing 

in the same way— I say all 'three,' not all four, because 

John is to a great extent discredited and counted out as 

not John, but another man by the name of John— this tendency, 

however it may suppose itself to be peculiarly loyal 

to Jesus is, in deepest truth, the most specious and the 

most dangerous disloyalty to him that he has ever encountered 

in all the centuries since he finished the work 

on earth that was given him to do. 

"Let it be duly considered, if Christ comes at length 
to be measured by this rule, the time will then not be distant 
when he will be still further reduced; and from being 
the pre-eminent, the ideal, the flawless man, will be 
found out to be at best a man not well enough known to 
deserve such distinction, and, at worst, a man shown to 
have had his limitations, his weaknesses, his infatuations, 
even his faults of temper in speech and in behavior, such 
as bring him down after all quite comfortably near the 
level of the better sort of average human nature." 

In the opinion of Dr. Wilkinson, however, "nothing 
even conceivable, except the actual literal resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead, can account for the undoubtedly 
historical phenomenon of the Apostle Paul, his career, 
and his written words." 

The above from the Digest is a great satisfaction 
to us. We rejoice that the Chicago University 
has one professor still sufficiently true to God's Word 
and to logic to acknowledge the Apostle Paul's 
sound words, and their accord with the mind and 
words of our Lord Jesus. None who appreciate the 
divine plan of the ages can for a moment question that 
the Lord specially raised up the great Apostle to the 
Gentiles. We, yes, the entire cause stands or falls 
with this great mouth-piece of God. 

IS THERE A CRISIS IN METHODISM? 



Rev. Dr. L. W. Munhall, an evangelist of the Methodist 
Episcopal Church, is very sure that there is a crisis 
and that he knows what has caused it. The cause is "the 
dishonor put upon God's Holy Word" by Methodist professors, 
editors, and preachers. He does not hesitate to name 
them, and his list includes the names of many of the most 
notable in the denomination. Dr. Munhall's charges are 
not strictly new. He has been making them for at least 
three years. On June 23 he repeated them before a Methodist 
ministers' meeting in Philadelphia, where he secured 
the passage of resolutions denouncing "higher criticism" 

R3057 : page 245 

as "wretched stuff." He has now published his views in a 



pamphlet entitled "A Crisis in Methodism," in which he 
asserts that the spiritual life of Methodism is dying out. 
He writes: 

"What is the real cause of our spiritual decline? 
Many causes have been named, some of which explain in 
part; but, for myself, I believe the real cause of it all is the 
dishonor put upon God's Holy Word in many of our educational 
institutions, by some editors of church periodicals, 
and not a few preachers; because of which the Holy Spirit 
has been grieved and withdrawn His power in large measure 
from us. Because of their commanding influence, our 
educational institutions are the chief offenders. Of course, 
I know that all these institutions are not given to this mischievous 
business, but most of the leading ones are. In 
the faculties of these institutions are men who are skeptics 
and rationalists; who do not at all believe the Bible is 
God's Word and in the doctrines of Methodism, and who 

R3058 : page 245 

do not hesitate to let the students know their position. 
They repeat infidel objections to the Bible and call it modern 
scholarship, and then give the young men under them 
for instruction to understand that they believe it all, and 
many of these young men take up with these skeptical 
views, and go out into the ministry, not to preach the 
Gospel of the blessed God, but their questionings, rationalism, 
and agnosticism." 

Dr. Munhall includes in this indictment, by name, 
Prof. H. G. Mitchell, of Boston University School of Theology, 
who is accused of boasting that "he would revolutionize 
Methodist theology"; Prof. C. W. Rishill, acting 
dean of the same institution, whose book, "The Foundations 
of Christian Faith," "is full of poison"; Prof. Milton 
S. Terry, of Garrett Biblical Institute, who is charged with 
teaching the unhistoric character of Genesis; President 
Charles J. Little, of the same institute, and President 
Samuel Plantz, of Lawrence University, who are charged 
with "a denial of the omniscience of Jesus"; President 
Bradford P. Raymond, of Wesleyan University, who also 
teaches the limitation of Christ's knowledge; President 
William F. Warren, of Boston University, who indorses 
Professor Mitchell's "extremely rationalistic and Unitarian 
position"; President J. W. Bashford, of Ohio Wesleyan 
University, who is "a little more cautious in his statements 
than the other presidents named, but sympathizes with 
their views"; and, especially, Chancellor James R. Day, of 
Syracuse University, who is charged with staying away 
from Dr. Munhall's evangelistic meetings in that city three 
years ago because the latter assailed the critics who "teach 
infidel objections to the Bible." Others named in the indictment 
are the editors of Zion's Herald and The Methodist 
Review, and Prof. "Borden P. Bowen" (Bowne), of 
Boston University. Dr. Munhall quotes Dr. James M. 
Buckley as saying three years ago to Prof. M.S. Terry that 
if the latter were a professor in Drew, he (Dr. Buckley) 



would prefer charges of heresy against him. Dr. Munhall 
expresses himself as follows: 

"I solemnly, positively, and most emphatically declare 
such teachings to be unbiblical, unmethodistic, and infidel; 
that they are destructive of spiritual life in the church 
and subversive of the Christian faith and hope. If any one 
doubts this, it is with him to explain why revivals that 
were once common in our educational institutions are seldom 
or never known; and why the faith of many of our 
young men is being wrecked while in college." 



R3058 : page 245 

LIVING BY EVERY WORD OUT OF THE MOUTH OF GOD. 

"Man shall not live by bread alone; but by every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God."— Matt. 4:4. 

BREAD is a general name for food; for that 

which satisfies the cravings of hunger; for 

that which builds up and strengthens; for 

that which enables the continuance of life. It was appropriate, 

therefore, that the Lord should use bread 

as a symbol, or figure of that heavenly sustenance 

which God has arranged should now upbuild and 

strengthen his people, and eventually, by the first 

resurrection, impart to them life everlasting. Divine 

truth is represented as being such spiritual food; 

and our Lord himself, because in the divine plan he is 

the channel of the truth,— "the way, the truth, the 

life,"— is spoken of as being also "the bread of life" 

for his people. We are to eat, or partake of the life-giving 

qualities which he freely gives us in himself, if 

we would reach the goal of our hope— eternal life. 

Our text is our Lord's reply to the Tempter 
when he was in the wilderness fasting and hungry. 
The Tempter had suggested the use of the powers 
which Jesus had received a few days previous when, 
at his baptism in Jordan, he received the holy spirit, 
and with it the gifts and powers which subsequently 
enabled him not only to heal the sick, but to turn 
water into wine and to feed a multitude by increasing 
the two barley loaves and the two small fishes. 
The Adversary's proposition was that the Lord should 
use this power for the gratification of his own appetite. 
He said, "Command that these stones be made 
bread." 

However pleased the Lord was to have these divine 
powers communicated through the holy spirit 
he had received, however glad he was, at appropriate 
times, to perform the miracles incidental to his 
ministry, he knew that the powers were not given 
him for any selfish use, for any self-gratification; and, 
therefore, he declined the suggestion and his reply 



is our text. In passing, we note that there is a lesson 
here worthy of the attention of all God's people; 
that spiritual and divine things are not to be used in 
a mercenary or selfish manner. So far as they can 
discern matters, the Lord's people are to keep separate 
and distinct their own personal preferences, desires 
and appetites, from the heavenly and spiritual 
things; and not use the latter for the services of the 
flesh, however pure and good the fleshly desires may 
be. 

Our Lord's words accept the suggestion that 
bread, food, necessary to human sustenance under 
present conditions; but they carry the thought further 
—they draw our attention to a higher life than the 
present one. The present life is not really life, but 
death: the world is under divine sentence of death; 
and only those who have come by faith into relationship 
with God have "passed from death unto life;" 
as our Master on another occasion said, "He that 
hath the Son hath life, he that hath not the Son shall 
not see life." And again he said to one who was 
thinking of becoming his servant, his follower— "Let 
the dead bury their dead, follow thou me." 

From this standpoint we see that man cannot live 
by bread alone. He has the divine sentence against 
him, "dying thou shalt die"; and he can find no kind 
of bread, no kind of food, that will produce life in 
the full and complete sense of that word— that will 
swallow up death in life. He must look for another 
kind of "bread of life" than any earthly food; he must 

R3058 : page 246 

have another kind of "water of life" than any earthly 
drink. It is this heavenly food or supply to which 
our Lord refers; saying, "Man shall not live by bread 
alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God." 

But how is it possible for us to live by the 
words that proceed out of the mouth of God? 
What did Jesus mean? How can God's words give 
us life? 

He meant that all hopes of eternal life depend upon 
God— upon the divine plan and its promises. 
Looking into these promises we can see distinctly 
that the divine plan, dating from before the foundation 
of the world, is that all of God's creatures, created 
in his likeness and abiding in faith, love and 
obedience, in harmony with him, shall have life everlasting 
This is God's general word upon the subject; 
namely, that obedience is the condition of life everlasting. 
This is, undoubtedly, what our Lord had in 
mind in using the words of our text: he may also 
have had the thought that he had come into the world 
upon a special mission, to do the Father's will, and 
that his understanding from the beginning was that 



his perfect obedience to the divine will would insure 
him glory, honor, immortality with the Father, eventually; 
but that any disobedience would mean the forfeiture 
of divine favor, and would involve the sentence 
of disobedience; namely, death. 

Our Lord's prompt decision, therefore, was that 
to disobey the Father's will, and thus to secure bread 
for the sustenance of his body, would be a great mistake; 
that food thus secured could sustain life for 
but a little while;— that his better plan would be to 
trust in the Word of God, the divine promise that 
those who love and serve and obey him shall ultimately 
come off conquerors and more, and have eternal 
life with God. And this, our Master's conclusion, 
is full of instruction for us who are his disciples, 
seeking to walk in his footsteps. We are to learn the 
lesson that a man's life consists not in the abundance 
of things which he possesseth— food and raiment— 
but that his life in the fullest, grandest, highest sense, 
is dependent upon his complete submission to the divine 
will— his careful attention to every word that 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God. 

The words of God's mouth to us are not exactly 
the same as to our Lord Jesus and to the holy angels; 
—because we are by nature children of wrath even 
as others— sinners: we must, therefore, be addressed 
from a true standpoint to begin with. Thus it is that 
we hear the words of God's mouth in different languages 
at different times in our experiences. 

(1) The first word of God's mouth to us is the 
message of justice— informing us that we are sinners, 
imperfect, helpless, as respects our own restoration 
to the divine image. This first word which proceedeth 
out of God's mouth to us is alarming; he declares 
us to be under a sentence or curse of death because 
of sin;— that "the soul that sinneth shall die"; 
that "the wages of sin is death." It tells us that by 
nature we are "children of wrath even as others,"— 
strangers and foreigners, aliens from God and all his 
blessings, which are held in reservation for those who 
love him and obey him and maintain the perfection 
in which they were created. It is necessary that we 
should hear this voice; necessary that we should be 
alarmed and feel fearful of the penalty of death; and 
necessary that we feel lonely and discouraged in our 
separation from God and our alienation from his 
gracious provisions for those who love him and whom 
he loves. This fear and dejection are necessary in a 

R3059 : page 246 

general way to prepare us for the next word which 
proceedeth out of the mouth of God; namely, 

THE WORD OF GOD'S PITY AND AID. 



(2) The message that God, while manifesting his 
absolute justice and the immutable integrity of his 

first word and sentence, is, nevertheless, kindly disposed 

toward us— that he pities us in our fallen condition. 

This word is not to the effect that divine pity 

will admit us as sinners into divine favor, present and 

future; but that divine pity contemplated in advance 

a ransom-price which, meeting the claims of divine 

justice, would permit of man's recovery from his condition 

of sin and death,— back to a condition of holiness 

and life everlasting— as though he had never 

sinned, had never been sentenced. This word which 

proceeded out of the mouth of God, prophesying a 

blessing and opportunity for recovery to as many as 

will accept, was first a voice to Abraham saying, 

"In thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the 

earth be blessed." As this hope begins to dawn in 

the heart of the penitent one, seeking life-eternal at 

the fountain of grace and truth, the ears of his understanding 

listen intently for other words of life 

from his Creator and he hears (Acts 10:36), 

THE VOICE OF GOD "SPEAKING PEACE BY 
JESUS CHRIST." 

(3) The message of peace is that God has already 
provided the ransom price for sinners;— that 
Jesus Christ by the grace of God tasted death for 
every man"; that "Christ died for our sins according 
to the Scriptures and rose again for our justification." 
This word from God's mouth informs us that through 
this transaction, which is entirely his own without 
our instigation or aid, "He may be just and yet the 
justifier of those who believe in Jesus." (Rom. 3:26.) 
Oh, what joy, what hope of life comes into our 
hearts as we hear this word which proceeded out of 
the mouth of God! We exclaim with the Apostle, "If 
God be for us who can be against us?" If God so 
loved us while we were yet sinners, much more does 

he love us since we are seeking him, desirous of returning 
to fellowship with him, and since we accept 
the provision of his grace in Christ Jesus our Lord. 
Thus to all who accept the atonement which is in 
Christ Jesus, through his blood, God indeed speaks 
words of grace and peace— forgiveness, reconciliation, 
mercy, love, kindness. 

GOD'S WORD TO RECLAIMED SONS. 

(4) Another word or message proceeds from 

the mouth of God, to such as have heard of his grace 
in Christ and have accepted it. He calls them children— 
not now "children of wrath," not now "children 
of the Evil One," but he addresses them as reclaimed 
children, as his own, as those to whom he is pleased 
to give his blessings upon certain conditions which 



R3059 : page 247 

he specifies; saying, "My son, give me thine heart." 
This call for the heart is a call for full consecration, 
for complete setting apart to the Lord and to his 
service. Our will is the center of our intelligence, our 
being; if the heart, the will, be given to God, it carries 
with it the title to every action, word and thought. 
It is such only as delight to respond to this Word or 
message from the mouth of God that he is pleased to 
own in the special sense of sonship which pertains 
to this Gospel age— sonship in the house of sons, of 
which Christ Jesus, our Lord, is the Head. 

"THE WORD OF PROMISE." 

(5) In our ignorance of the greatness of our 
Heavenly Father and the richness of his grace toward 
us in Christ Jesus our Lord, we might fail to 
appreciate the necessity or desirability of a full consecration 
of our hearts to him. In our ignorance we 
might prefer to say, 

"Some of self and some of thee." 
Knowing this, God, in his compassion, has been 
pleased to set before us certain features of his plan, 
and hence we hear his voice again in the "exceeding 
great and precious promises" of his Word. In these 
he points out to us the wisdom of a full consecration 
and complete obedience to him— assuring us in these 
promises that by obedience to them we may become 
partakers of the greatest of all blessings,— the divine 
nature. (2 Pet. 1:4.) Oh, how wonderful that the 
great Creator should condescend not only to redeem 
sinners but to urge, to entice them to receive his 
bounties and blessings! From the time the consecration 
begins a measure of the holy spirit is granted, 
that the consecrated one may, by application— by 
hungering and thirsting for the words which proceed 
out of the mouth of God, and by feeding upon them, 
—be enabled to "Comprehend with all saints what 
is the breadth and length and depth and height, and 
to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge." 
(Eph. 3:18,19.) Ah, yes! those who have heard and 
have fed upon "the words which proceed out of the 
mouth of God" thus far, find indeed a new life begun, 
a new vitality, a new energy,— new hopes, new 
aims, new ambitions, "old things are passed away," 
everything is tinged with the glories of the heavenly 
things which "eye hath not seen nor ear heard, neither 
hath entered into the heart of man to conceive"— the 
things which God hath in reservation for them that 
love him;— an understanding and appreciation of 
which God, in some measure, gives to such by his 
spirit, which "searcheth all things, yea, the deep 
things of God." 



FEEDING ON THE WORD OF ADMONITION. 

(6) Hearkening further for the words which 
proceed from the mouth of God— "Beautiful words, 
wonderful words, wonderful words of life"— we hear 
a word of admonition. The Father instructs us, that 
the glorious things to which he now calls us cannot 
possibly be ours unless our consecration to him and 
submission to the influences of his providences and 
promises shall change, transform, renew our minds; 
—so that the things once loved we will hate, and the 
things once hated we will love. As a father spareth 
not the rod of chastisement from the son whom he 
loves, so the Lord will not spare the rod of affliction 
and chastisement from those who are truly his; because 
he loves them, and because he desires to develop 

in them such a character as will be pleasing to 
him, and as will permit him eventually to make them 
his sons on the plane of glory, heirs of God, joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ, their Lord. 

This word respecting the necessity of chastisement 
and our correction in righteousness, that 
we may become conformed to the image of God's dear 
Son (Rom. 8:29), is accompanied with assurances of 
love from the Father— assurances that "Like as a 
Father pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them 
that reverence him." He says to us also, through another 
apostle, "Faint not when thou art rebuked of 
him: for whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and 
scourgeth every son whom he receiveth." He explains 
that such discipline is not prompted by anger 
towards us, but by his love, and if we are rightly exercised 
by the disciplines, trials, experiences of life, 
they will "work out for us a far more exceeding and 
eternal weight of glory;"— they will work out in us 
such characters as the Lord will be able to use in the 
service to which he hath called us— the service of 
the Millennial age— the service of the royal priesthood, 
to be associated with Christ in the work of judging 
and blessing the world of mankind. The proper 
response of all who have the true spirit of sonship is 
expressed in the language of our Lord and Master, 
"Not my will but thine be done," O Lord; "I delight 
to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy law is within my 
heart." Such as thus respond to the chastisement of 
the Lord, step more and more into divine favor, and 
hear other words of comfort, of grace, of help. 

"YE HAVE NEED OF PATIENCE." 

(7) God's Word or message of patience is, "Let 
patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect 
and entire, wanting nothing." (Jas. 1:4.) How necessary 
to our perfection is this divine counsel— this 

Word which proceeds from the mouth of God! We 



might imagine that we had received sufficient testing 
and proving to indicate our loyalty to the Lord, to 
the principles of righteousness, long before we had 
been sufficiently proved according to the Lord's 
standards in the testing of character. He therefore 
graciously explains to us how necessary patience will 
be, that we should not think it strange concerning the 
fiery trials which must test us, as though some 
strange thing had happened unto us. (I Pet. 4:12.) 
On the contrary he points out to us as we grow in 
grace and in knowledge and in ability to comprehend 
—that the glory, honor and immortality to which 
he has invited the Church of this Gospel age, is so 
high, so grand a position, that those who would share 
those honors must expect, necessarily, to be severely 
tried and tested that their absolute loyalty to 
the Lord and to the principles of his righteousness- 
justice, truth, love— shall be beyond question. Our 
characters must become crystalized along these lines, 
firm as adamant, before we shall be ready to be received 
as the "overcomers" who shall inherit all 
things, and share the kingdom and glory with the 
Captain of our salvation. He points out to us, further, 

R3059 : page 248 

that if it was necessary for the Captain of our 
salvation to be tempted and tried, tested and proved, 
much more reasonable is it that we who were children 
of wrath, and justified only through his grace, should 
be thoroughly proven as respects our loyalty. 

WORDS OF CONSOLATION FROM THE MOUTH OF GOD. 

(8) We might well be exercised with the 
strictness of the divine requirements as respects this 
overcoming class, and might say to ourselves, Others 
may attain to such glories and blessings; but we are 
too weak in the flesh through the fall and cannot hope 
to come off victors— cannot hope to stand the trials 
and tests which the Lord would impose. And here 
the Lord speaks again, a gracious word of comfort, 
consolation and encouragement, informing us that 
the perfection he is expecting is not a perfection in 
the flesh and of the flesh which is weak and imperfect, 

R3060 : page 248 

but a perfection of the heart, of the will, of the mind, 
of the intention. He informs us that he is not judging 
us as human beings according to the flesh, but as 
new creatures according to the mind, the new will. 
He informs us that although he will expect the new 
mind to do its very best in the matter of controlling 
the flesh and bringing it into subjection, yet, nevertheless, 
he knows that the flesh being imperfect, perfection 



according to the flesh is an impossibility to 

any of the fallen race: and that, therefore, his arrangement 

through Christ under the New Covenant 

is, that the imperfections of the flesh which are not 

assented to by our wills are not counted as ours. 

They are covered by the merit of Christ's sacrifice, 

and are ignored in the Heavenly Father's reckoning 

with us. He assures us that we are to be judged according 

to the spirit (will, intent) and not according 

to the flesh. 

What comfort and consolation are in these assurances ! 
These are wonderful words of life, indeed! 
They inspire us with hope. If God will accept perfect 
heart-intentions, as instead of the absolute perfection 
of the flesh,— then indeed we have hope of 
attaining to the standard which he has marked for 
us,— the standard of perfection. We can be perfect 
in intention, in will, or, as the Master expresses it, 
"pure in heart", even though we cannot be perfect in 
the flesh. We hear through the Apostle the word 
proceeding out of the mouth of God to this effect, 
"The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us who 
walk not after the flesh but after the spirit." (Rom. 8:4.) 
We can walk after the spirit, though, so far as 
our mortal bodies are concerned, we cannot walk up 
to the spirit's requirements. Our minds can walk up 
to the spirit, our intentions can be perfect; and this 
is what our Heavenly Father seeks in us, perfection 
of intention. 

THE WORD OF RESURRECTION. 

(9) A further word from the mouth of God assures 
us that he knoweth our frame, he remembereth 
that we are dust— under sentence of death, "Dust 
thou art and unto dust shalt thou return"— weak, imperfect, 
dying; and that it is not his purpose that we 
shall always be in conflict with ourselves— perfect 
will against imperfect body,— that he has provided 
that in the resurrection we shall have new, perfect 
bodies in full accord with our new minds. He assures 
us that he is able and willing to do all this, and that 
he proposes to give to his "elect" bodies of a still 
higher order than the human— that he will give us 
spiritual bodies. They shall have a part in the first 
resurrection, and thenceforth be able to do the 
Father's will perfectly in every respect— as they now 
show themselves desirous of doing his will so far as 
they are able. Oh, gracious provisions! O wonderful 
words of compassion, inspiring us to wonderful 
hopes of eternal life and glory! It will be to such as 
thus overcome in spirit, in faith (I John 5:4), that 
the Lord will give the final word of his mouth— "Well 
done good and faithful servant, enter thou into the 
joys of thy Lord." 

Every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of 



God— every admonition, every encouragement, every 
promise, is necessary to the development of those 
whom God is now calling to eternal life as joint-heirs 
with his Son in the Kingdom. The eating of natural 
food could not bring this life-eternal, nor its attendant 
glories; but the eating and appropriating of these 
words from the mouth of God can bring to us all these 
blessings which we crave. Let us then, more and 
more, as the disciples, pupils, of the Lord Jesus, keep 
in memory and act upon the suggestion of the words 
of this text, "Man shall not live by bread alone: but 
by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of 
God." 



R3060 : page 248 

JOURNEYING TOWARD CANAAN. 

-NUM. 10:ll-13,29-36-AUGUST 17.- 

Golden Text:— "For thy name's sake 
lead me, and guide me."— Psa. 31:3. 

ISRAEL spent nearly a year in the vicinity of 
Mt. Sinai. It was about a year and fifty 
days after their departure from Egypt that, 
by the Lord's instruction, they broke camp to journey 
toward the promised land— Canaan. Doubtless, 
their first impressions respecting the matter were that 
the Lord, through Moses, would lead them directly 
into the Land of Promise, and no doubt they wondered 
at the delay. We can see, however, that a nation 
reduced almost to the condition of slavery, 
would need many lessons to prepare the people for 
the glorious heritage which the Lord had promised 
them. In previous studies we have seen how the 
Lord inculcated lessons of trust, duty, obedience, worship 
and temperance, and subsequent events will 
prove to us that even with all these instructions the 
people were not yet ready to trust and obey the 
Lord so as to be properly fit for their inheritance. 
During the eleven months spent in the vicinity 
of Mt. Sinai, important arrangements were effected 
—all tending to a larger degree of organization, government 
and personal responsibility amongst the people. 

R3060 : page 249 

When ready to leave Mt. Sinai they had not 
only their tribal organizations, but were additionally 
grouped in companies of ten and these into fifties 
and these again into larger groups or commands, so 
that the entire host was well marshalled. Besides 
this, they had in each tribe a Judge or lawgiver for 



minor questions; weightier matters being brought to 
Moses and through him to the Lord. Moreover, the 
Lord put his spirit upon seventy of the elders of the 
people, of all the tribes, so that they prophesied or 
taught the people, each in his own department; while 
the tribe of Levi had been specially set apart to the 
divine service. The Tabernacle had been made with 
all its appurtenances, and the regular order of worship 
had been established— typical, like the people, 
of the better things coming afterward. 

If, as we see, it was appropriate that Israel according 
to the flesh should have training-lessons in 
trust, obedience, etc., we can readily understand that 
their antitype, spiritual Israel, has much need of instruction, 
much need to learn lessons along the 
same lines,— and still more particularly, if they would 
be prepared to enter into typical Canaan. We need 
to learn to trust the Lord implicitly after we leave 
Egypt, the world, and set forth on the way to our 
Canaan; we need to learn that he alone is able to deliver 
us from the spirit of the world which would still 
pursue us and bring us back into captivity; we need 
to learn to trust the Lord for the heavenly manna 
and to gather it day by day; we need to learn confidence 
in the Lord, not only in the presence of the 
leaders whom he raises up for us, but also in their 
absence, and not to set up for ourselves earthly idols 
to draw our hearts away in any measure from the 
Lord and his arrangements, and the great purpose 
for which we have started under his leadership; we 
need to learn the import of the Covenant which he 
has graciously made with us, sealed with the precious 
blood;— to be faithful to our share therein to 
the extent of our ability, and to trust the remainder 
to our great Mediator. 

We need also to learn the Tabernacle lessons- 
how and under what conditions we may have fellowship 
with God— may enter into the court and still 
further into the Holy, and ultimately, as members 
of the High Priest's body, into the Most Holy. We 
need to learn order in respect to natural as well as 
spiritual things; and that while the liberties of the 
Lord's people are to be conserved and bondage to 
evil is to be avoided, that, nevertheless, in all of the 
Lord's arrangements there is order, as represented in 
the order established amongst the Israelites. We are 
to learn first of all to be subject to the Lord, and 
secondly, to every ordinance of God; we are to consider 
the truly consecrated people of God as a unit 
and are to seek to co-operate one with another, and 
to remember the Apostle's words, "Remember them 
which have the rule over you," (Heb. 13:7), and 
again, "Yea, all of you be subject one to another." 
(I Pet. 5:5.) All of these lessons are necessary to us, 
as similar lessons in type were necessary to typical 
Israel. 



The cloud, representing the Lord, rested over 
the Tabernacle during the sojourn in the vicinity of 
Sinai; but in harmony with the instructions given 
through Moses, when the appointed time had come, 
the cloud lifted from the Tabernacle and went before 
the people and about one hundred and fifty 
miles distant, rested over another wilderness nearer 
Canaan. The people followed it in marching order 
and apparently at first with great enthusiasm, praising 
the Lord. Vs. 35 seems to refer to Psalm 68 
which describes the journey; see also Psa. 132:8. 
But whatever were the joyful anticipations of the people, 
they found the wilderness of Paran into which 
the Lord led them the scene of great trial, for it was 
much more rugged than the wilderness of Sinai and 
much less adapted to the care of their flocks and 
herds. This brought to the people fresh trials of faith 
and courage and endurance and confidence in the 
Lord and appreciation of his promises. 

So with spiritual Israelites: after the Lord has 
given us certain lessons and experiences, some of 
which come to us under quiet and restful conditions, 
the order of procedure may be changed, and the indication 
of the Lord's providences may lead to some 
breaking up of conditions which had been both favorable 
and unfavorable in some respects— leading into 
new circumstances and conditions. It is not for the 
true spiritual Israelite to murmur or complain or 
even to express a choice; but to look to the Lord 

R3061 : page 249 

for guidance. If he can discern the leadings of divine 
providence, even though it be in a wilderness 
condition more arid and undesirable than that in 
which he has previously been, he is to follow the 
Lord's leadings unquestioningly and with songs of 
faith and confidence. We are marching toward Canaan 
and know that other experiences are due us 
and must be undergone ere we can inherit the promises. 
The lesson for us is prompt and thorough obedience 
to the Lord's leadings without murmurings— 
with joyfulness; and this can only be expected on the 
part of those who have learned the lessons previously 
given them, and above all the lesson of faith,— 
confidence in the Lord's power and goodness and 
faithfulness. 

REBELLION AGAINST GOD'S PROVIDENCE. 

It was while in Paran that the people began to 
murmur again— for the leeks and onions and garlic 
and fish, etc., of Egypt. As little children to a father, 
they lamented to Moses— even regretting that they 
had been led out of bondage. Moses appealed the 
matter to the Lord, and the latter granted the request 



in displeasure, telling Moses that he esteemed the 
people to be murmurers against himself; because he 
was the real Leader and Moses merely his servant. 
The people wanted more meat, expressing themselves 
as wearied of the manna, so God sent them quails. An 
immense flock of quails was blown by a providential 
storm from the south and east over the Elantic Gulf 
into their camp. A writer on Eastern subjects says: 
—"These quails cannot sustain themselves long on 
the wing, and after crossing the desert 30 or 40 miles 
they would scarcely be able to fly.. ..When exhausted 
they would easily be taken as they flew at 
a height of about two cubits (3 or 4 feet) from the 

R3061 : page 250 

ground." The people got an abundance; but ate so 
greedily that a pestilence broke out among them, 
which cost the lives of many, so that they called that 
place Kibroth-Hattaavah— "Graves of Greediness." 
Thus the Lord permitted their discontent and spirit 
of rebellion to work out a severe penalty in a natural 
way. 

Is it not sometimes after the same manner with 
the Spiritual Israelites? Do not some after being well 
fed on spiritual manna permit a selfish, craving spirit 
to interrupt their fellowship with the Lord to some 
extent— hankering for earthly, fleshly, good things; 
—forgetting the wisdom of our Leader, the Lord, and 
that his love which thus far has delivered us, and fed 
and led us, is still with us, as wise and as good as 
ever? Sometimes it is a repining against our lot in 
life, a desire for more ease and comfort and wealth 
and social influence, than are within our reach: sometimes 
it is a protest against our share of the aches 
and pains of the groaning creation and our inability 
to get rid of these: sometimes it is a protest against 
the illness and death of a loved one. 

How unwise! Should not those who have been 
fed on the spiritual manna realize that all of Spiritual 
Israel's affairs are under the Lord's care and supervision? 
Should they not remember that,— He doth 
not willingly afflict the children of men, but for their 
good? (Lam. 3:33; Heb. 12:10.) Ah! some have 
found that the prayers of murmurers, even when answered, 
as were Israel's, sometimes bring unexpected 
drawbacks;— that selfish prayers are too expensive. 
Some have gained wealth and lost the truth and its 
service: some have gained health only to find that 
with it they gained other trials no less severe: some 
have had their dear ones restored to them from the 
very jaws of death, only to wish afterward that God 
had not answered their prayers;— or, more correctly, 
to wish that they had accepted the Lord's wisdom 
and providences trustfully, contentedly, 
uncomplainingly. 



The lesson to Israel was, that they should trust 
the Lord implicitly; and accepting and using all that 
they had, all that the surroundings would supply, they 
should have used it as wisely and as thoroughly as 
possible— accepting all things, natural as well as miraculous, 
as God's gifts. And therewith they should 
have been content, thankful, happy. So, too, Spiritual 
Israel should use wisely such things as are within 
their reach— accepting all as God's gifts with thanksgiving; 
but their petitions should be for spiritual gifts 
—including patient-endurance and heart-contentment. 

REBELLION AGAINST THE DIVINE ORDER. 

It was in Paran that Miriam and Aaron rebelled 
against Moses' leadership asserting themselves his 
equals in authority. Miriam, the prime mover in the 
matter, referred to Moses' marriage to a negress 
(Ethiopian) as an evidence of his general incapacity 
to manage his own affairs, much less those of a nation. 
The text of the complaint is given only in part, 
but undoubtedly the fact that they were now near to 
Canaan and well organized and that it was now comparatively 
easy to lead the people, led to this wrong 
position. Both were quite willing that Moses should 
be leader when the start was made and when all the 
chances seemed to be against the success of the 
movement. 

Poor Moses ! If it almost crushed him when the 
people murmured against him, how must he have 
felt when his two most trusted advisers thus showed 
that they too had a wrong view of the Exodus, and 
considered Moses a self-appointed leader! True, it 
does appear to us as though his meekness had led him 
into a marriage in every way beneath his education 
and station in life; but then, was he not under divine 
supervision in all his affairs? And could not the 
Lord have hindered the marriage unless he saw some 
way in which it could prove advantageous? And 
should not Miriam and Aaron have remembered this, 
and minded their own business? As a matter of fact 
we believe that the Lord was favorable to the marriage; 
—that thus he forestalled any inclination on 
the part of Israel to accept the children of Moses as 
their kings and lawgivers to the subversion of the divine 
program. 

The Lord's indignation was shown in smiting 
Miriam with leprosy and refusing to heal her for 
seven days even at the entreaty of Moses;— that 
thus the camp of Israel might also get a lesson in harmony 
with a subsequent statement,— "Touch not 
mine anointed, and do my prophets no harm." 

The lesson of trusting to the Lord's vigilance in 
minding his business and the lesson that each Israelite 
indeed should mind his own business, are still 
closely identified. Many, nay all, still need to learn 



these lessons. The officiousness which inclines so 
many to think that the Lord's work will go to wreck 
unless they control the lever and pass their judgment 
upon everybody and everything, is dangerous to all 
who have it, and their name is legion. It is born of 
too great self-conceit mixed with lack of respect for 
God's wisdom and with a desire to meddle as "busybodies 
in other men's matters." Each should early 
learn that while doing his own part with his might he 
should trust much to the Lord, and that to him each 

"COME THOU WITH US AND WE WILL 
DO THE GOOD." 

servant stands or falls. Failure to do this leads to 
leprosy— sin. 

Hobab, here introduced to our attention (vs. 29), 
was Moses' brother-in-law. (Judg. 4:11— R.V.) 
Raguel is here given as the name of Moses' father-in-law 
and is supposed to refer to the same person called 
Jethro in another place. The explanation offered is 
that Raguel was his proper name and Jethro, which 
signifies Excellent, was his title as a chieftain of the 
Midianites, of the clan known as Kenites which 
dwelt in Midian east of Sinai. Hobab, therefore, was 
also a chieftain amongst the Kenites and undoubtedly, 
as Moses' words suggest, was well acquainted 
with the country through which Israel would pass. 
Moses invited him to cast in his lot with the Israelites 
promising him that thus he, and such of his tribe 
as would come with him, should become joint-participators 
with the Israelites in the promises God had 
made them,— "Come thou with us and we will do 
thee good, for the Lord hath spoken good concerning 

R3061 : page 251 

Israel. ..and it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, 
it shall be, that what goodness the Lord shall do to 
us, the same will we do unto thee." Although Hobab 
at first refused, the promise of a share with Israel 
apparently influenced him favorably; because 
mention is made elsewhere of the Kenites as having 
share with Israel in the promised land.— Judges 1:16; 
4:11; I Sam. 15:6;IChron. 2:55. 

Doubtless this narrative of divine arrangement 
with Hobab through Moses, was intended to convey 
a lesson to spiritual Israelites also. It represents 
that some who are not children of the promises according 
to the flesh, were, nevertheless, accepted of 
God because of the exercise of faith,— because of 
their willingness also to endure the trials and difficulties 
and warfare of the children of Israel, that they 
might be participators with them in the rewards and 
promises. So to-day, we may say to those who are 
still aliens, strangers, foreigners to the Lord's covenants, 



"Come thou with us and we will do thee 
good." We may tell whoever has an ear to hear of 
the gracious things which the Lord has promised, of 
everlasting life in Paradise, to all who are his,— 
faithful to the end of the journey; and yet, it will be 
a matter for the exercise of their wills: if they share 
in the blessings, they must also be willing to share 
the difficulties of the way, and the reproaches of the 
Lord's people. Not only may we thus speak to people 
orally, inviting them to join with us, but our lives 
in general should be "living epistles," giving testimony 
of our faith in the Lord and in his promises;— 
helpful, encouraging and attractive to others. 

Our Golden Text applies to every spiritual Israelite, 
and surely all such must recognize the leadership 
of the Lord, else they cannot have peace and 
joy and blessing, and cannot make progress toward 
our Canaan. The Israelites learned to look for the 
movement of the cloud by which the Lord led them, 

R3062: page 251 

and only once is it recorded that they ever disobeyed 
its leading— and that once was accompanied by their 
reverse in battle before their enemies, which doubtless 
impressed the lesson. (Num. 14:44,45.) Similarly, 
one of the most important lessons for the spiritual 
Israelite is to learn to look to the Lord for leading 
in all of life's affairs— never to attempt any undertaking 
either temporal or spiritual without seeking 
to note the will of the Lord concerning the same. 

The sooner this lesson is learned, the sooner disasters 
in life will be obviated; nevertheless, we are 
to remember that the Lord's providences may lead 
us into trying circumstances and conditions, and not 
always into pastures green. Yet in these, faith will 
be tested and developed and faithfulness to the Lord's 
leading will gradually bring us assurances that all 
things are working together for our good, for our 
spiritual welfare— the matters which appear to be favorable 
and comforting, and the experiences which 
seem to be rough and distressing. We are not to ask 
or expect the Lord's leading for our own sakes, nor 
for any merit or worthiness in us, but, as our Golden 
Text expresses it, for the Lord's sake— in accordance 
with his promise to us as spiritual Israelites, the 
seed of Abraham;— for his own name's sake and 
work's sake, in that he has purchased the blessing of 
the world, and is now taking out a people for his 
name to be his agents in this work of blessing,— for 
his own name's sake in that he has invited us, promised 
us the victory if we abide in his love. 



R3062: page 251 



INTERESTING QUESTIONS ANSWERED. 



IS THE COVENANT STILL BINDING ON THE JEW? 



Question.— Does the Jewish Law Covenant still 
exist? or was it fully terminated at the introduction of 
the New Covenant sealed by our Lord's death? If it 
still exists as a covenant, are all Jews now living still 
under and bound by that Sinaitic covenant? and if so, 
is the offer to the Jew still good that if he can still fulfil 
his part of that Law Covenant, he may have eternal 
life as a reward therefor aside from Christ? 

Answer.— The Law Covenant was an agreement 
between God and the nation of Israel by which God 
pledged himself to give certain rewards to that nation 
if obedient; and Israel in turn bound itself to keep that 
law, and consented in event of failure to do so, that 
they had no claim upon the promises, but that they 
would justly come under divine sentence afresh. That 
covenant ceased, so far as God was concerned, when 
that nation was rejected at the time they rejected Jesus, 
and their rejection was noted in our Lord's words, 
"Your house is left unto you desolate." The rewards 
of the law were, nevertheless, secured by one Jew; 
namely, our Lord Jesus, because of his perfect obedience 
—even unto death. To him therefore, legally 
went all the blessings and privileges contained in and 
implied by the Law Covenant and the Abrahamic 
Covenant, to which it was merely "added." Thus we 
see that from God's standpoint the covenant arrangements 
have been fulfilled in Jesus, the faithful Jew, 
and that its provisions, therefore, cannot in any manner 
be extended to others now— nor could others ever hope 
to claim its provisions, even if they were open now. 

However, while God has thus accomplished his 
side of the covenant, the Jews have never accomplished 
their side. Every circumcised Jew comes under the 
provisions of the Law Covenant and is subject to all 
its conditions, and can escape those conditions only in 
the divinely appointed way— by accepting Jesus as his 
Savior, the curse of the law: for he is the end of the law 
for righteousness [righteously] to every one that believeth 
(Rom. 10:4), but not to others. A believing Jew, in 
accepting Christ, ceases to be a Jew and becomes a 
Christian. Consequently all Jews not thus believing 
are still under the Law Covenant to which they have 
subscribed and to which they are bound by their own 
covenant or engagement; and there is no way for them 
to get free from their obligation to keep the whole law, 
except by believing into Jesus and thus in his sacrifice, 
having the righteousness of the law fulfilled in them. 



(Rom. 8:4.) The curse which they brought upon their 
own heads remains with them. "His blood be upon 
us and our children." (Matt. 27:25.) They can only 
escape the curse of the law and the additional curse of 
this gross violation of it, by having the merit of his 

R3062 : page 252 

blood, his sacrifice, imputed to them, as a sin sacrifice, 
the atonement of their guilt. 

A COMPARATIVE ESTIMATE OF THE ELECTION. 



Question.— There is a difference of opinion 
amongst us respecting your meaning in the article "A 
Comparative Estimate of the Election," page 26, in 
Jan. 15, 1902 number of the WATCH TOWER, hence I 
inquire, Is it your thought that the consecrated number 
includes only those who have come to a knowledge 
of present truth? If so, are we to understand that for 
every one who now comes into fellowship in the light 
of present truth, some other one has gone out of this 
light into darkness? 

Answer.— Quite to the contrary. We understand 
that consecration to the Lord is necessary in every case 
before there will be a proper ability to receive the truth 
in the love of it— the truth respecting the deep things 
of God. It is our thought that of the suggested 3 1 ,500 
already consecrated in 1881, scarcely any had any 
knowledge of what we term "present truth." Our 
thought is that a knowledge of present truth will be 
brought to all of these consecrated ones and will constitute 
a test of their consecration, of their sincerity; 
just as at the first advent our Lord offered himself not 
to the Gentiles, the unconsecrated, but to Israel the 
consecrated, typical people. The offering constituted 
a test to the Israelites; such as were meek and lowly 
of heart were the better prepared to receive the Messiah; 
such as were proud, vain-glorious either of their 
own persons or of their sects or parties, were thereby 
blinded and stumbled and hindered from accepting the 
truth. So it is today; the meek, the humble, the lowly 
of heart who are following the Lord implicitly have 
much advantage every way over the majority of God's 
consecrated people now, beset by worldliness and personal 
or sectarian pride and ambition. Nevertheless, 
having made a consecration and having been accepted 
of the Lord, a reasonable time should properly be 
granted to such to make their calling and election sure, 
to learn life's lessons respecting the emptiness of pride 
and ambition, and the fact that the true peace and joy 
in the Lord are to be found in humility of heart and 
closeness to the Master. We believe that in the Lord's 
providence "present truth" has been presented time 



and again to many of these consecrated ones and that 
some were ready and received it the first time, while 
to others it came two, three, four times before they 
had learned their lessons properly so as to be able to 
discern the emptiness of sectarianism and the bitterness 
and nausea of human creeds and theories in order 
that they might be able to appreciate the good tidings 
of the Word and plan of God. Others failing to profit 
by experiences granted them will, we believe, be rejected 
from the "overcomers" class. 

In all reason we must expect that the period of 
favor with many of these is expired and that the 
crowns apportioned to them at the time of their consecration 
are no longer held for them, but will be granted 
to others who will take their places; and that their 
names will no longer be written amongst the victors, 
but will be blotted out from that glorious place, though 
not blotted out of God's memory, nor blotted out of 
existence, but rather that they may be re-entered as 
members of another class, the "Great Company," who 
shall pass through the great tribulation which, peradventure, 
may work in them blessings which they were 
not prepared otherwise to receive. 

We are not to expect that the Lord would wait 
until these names began to be stricken from the list 
before he would begin to prepare others for their places: 
rather we are to presume that he would have in training 
a considerable number already consecrated but not 
accepted to the high calling (because the general call 
has ceased) and therefore not at once made acquainted 
with present truth. As vacancies shall occur amongst 
the accepted, or "elect" class because of failure to fulfil 
consecration vows, it will open the way for these later 
consecrated ones to be accepted to the "high calling" 
and then it will be proper for them to come to an appreciation 
of present truth, and to discern clearly the 
prize of our high-calling, the race course leading to it 
and the requirements of every faithful runner. That 
this has been the Lord's method since 1881 is evidenced 
very clearly by the fact that now at the time when we 
would expect that a good many names would be blotted 
from the roll as having failed to be victors, there 
are, we find, a considerable number consecrated since 
1881, ready to receive the truth. And so deep is their 
consecration and earnestness and zeal that once they 
come into contact with the truth they assimilate it 
quickly, with understanding and appreciation, and 
make rapid progress in the race course toward the mark 
of the prize— perfect love. 

Of course we must expect that some, even after 
receiving the light of present truth, will prove unfaithful 
to it and go out into the "outer darkness" of the 
world, where shortly, in the great time of trouble, 
they will share in the predicted "weeping and gnashing 
of teeth;" and we must expect that the going out 
of the race by these will be followed by the letting of 



others into the race course as well as in case of those 
who were consecrated prior to 1881, and whose testing 
largely consists in their coming into contact with the 
light of present truth. However, those who have come 
into the light of present truth under consecration made 
since October, 1881, will be much less likely to be 

R3063 : page 252 

finally rejected than those who were consecrated prior 
to 1881; because the receiving of the light of present 
truth constitutes one trial or sifting in every case, and 
this test is already past by those now being accepted. 

"GOD GIVETH IT A BODY." 



Question.— In explaining the resurrection of the 
dead, in I Cor. 15:36-38, the Apostle uses the illustration 
of wheat, or any kind of grain, saying, "That 
which thou sowest, thou sowest not the body that shall 
be, but a bare grain," "but God giveth it a body as it 
hath pleased him." My question is respecting this 
latter part of the text— "giveth it a body." Would 
not this seem to imply that as in a grain of wheat or 
corn there is a germ which survives the death of the 
remainder of the kernel, so in mankind there must be 
something to survive the death of the body— some kind 
of an "it" to which the Lord will give a body in the 
resurrection? What is this "it" in humanity? 

Answer.— If we say that the "it" represents the 
soul we state the matter truthfully, but in a manner 
liable to be misunderstood by the average reader or 
hearer, because very few seem to understand what a 

R3063 : page 253 

soul is, according to the Bible usage. There are any 
number of views and theories respecting what a soul is, 
yet all of them, except the Scriptural definition, are 
vague, indefinite, inconsistent, unreasonable. According 
to the Scriptures the word "soul" is the equivalent 
of the word "being;" and stands for the intelligent 
person or "sentient being." The body is not the soul, 
though there could be no soul without a body; and the 
breath of life or spirit of life is not the soul, though 
there can be no soul without the spirit of life. As 
elsewhere explained,* when a body has been organized 
and infused with the spirit or energy of life, so that 
intelligence and thought result, that resultant condition 
is sentient being, or soul condition. 

God's sentence of death as the wages of sin is 
against the soul: "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." 
And this sentence is executed through the deterioration 
of the body, either by sickness or otherwise, snapping 



the golden cord of life, causing the spirit or energy of 
life to break its union with the body. The result we 
call death, even before the putrefaction sets in which 
destroys the body. It is the death of the soul, the 
cessation of being, which has occurred. 

In the divine arrangement God has provided in 
the death of our Lord Jesus a ransom for all (I Tim. 2:5,6), 
—all the souls of the human family— for Adam 
and Eve, and all the souls begotten, generated, by 
them. Consequently, although the divine sentence is 
upon every soul of man unto death, in view of this 
atonement which God has provided we who have faith 
in the efficacy of the atonement and in the ultimate 
carrying out of the divine plan are permitted to speak 
of these dead souls as though they were not dead, but 
merely asleep— "them that sleep in Jesus." (I Thess. 4:13,14.) 
All who were dead in Adam, having been 
bought by Jesus are not yet made alive by him, nor 
even in any measure resuscitated, but are spoken of as 
no longer extinct but reckonedly sleeping— waiting for 
the Millennial morning, when all that are in their 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and shall 
come forth again to being and to the opportunities of 
a raising up, or restoration to all that was lost— the 
process of raising up being betokened by the judgments 
of the Millennial age— rewards for those who will do 
well, chastisements for those who do ill, destruction if 
they persevere in ill doing. This judgment, in our 
common version Bible, is mistranslated "damnation." 
-John 5:29. 

The "it" in the case of the world is the soul, or 
being which became extinct in death, but which was 
redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, and is to be 
the subject of restitution power at his second advent. 
Each "it," each soul, each sentient being of the human 
family, redeemed by our Lord, was designed to 
have a body. Indeed, it cannot awake or come into 
being at all without a body. It will be necessary that 
the body shall be produced, created, and that, so far 
as the brain at least is concerned, identical with the 
body that perished when the soul fell asleep. Thus 
for the world the Lord will give "it" a body of its own 
kind;— human kind— a body which can go onward and 
upward to restitution and full human perfection, if the 
mind, the will, the soul, governing it, shall become 
obedient to the great Prophet, Priest and King, the 
glorified Christ, during the Millennial age; otherwise 
it will be cut off in the Second Death, and that without 
hope of recovery.— Acts 3:21-23. 

In the case of the Church, a justification by faith 
is granted to believers, by which they are accounted 
free from the sentence of death, and permitted to consecrate 
their justified lives as sacrifices in the Lord's 
service— joint-sacrificers with their Lord, in whose 
foot-steps they are called to follow. These, in their 
consecration, are reckoned as dying to the human nature 



entirely, and their new minds are reckoned as 

having been transformed, as being no longer human 

minds or wills, but spiritual minds or wills— "We have 

the mind of Christ." This will, still exercised through 

a human body, is by the Lord and by his children accounted 

as the beginning of the new nature, the nucleus 

or new will of the "new creature." This new 

creature, however, has no suitable spirit body at the 

present time, but tabernacles in the earthly, dying 

body— which indeed perishes as the new creature develops. 

The faithful of this class will constitute the 

first resurrection, described by the Apostle. (I Cor. 15:42-44.) 

The new mind is the "it" in this case; 

no longer a human mind or will or spirit, but a new 

spiritual one, changed; and in the resurrection God 

will give "it," this embryo new creature, a spiritual 

body, as he has promised, and as it hath pleased him. 



♦Millennial Dawn Vol. V., Chap. 12. 

R3063 : page 253 

"WE ARE WELL ABLE TO OVERCOME IT." 

-NUM. 13:26-14: 10.-AUGUST 24.- 

"Blessed is the man that maketh 
the Lord his trust."-Psa. 40:4. 

ISRAEL having been taught certain great lessons 
in the wilderness, journeying toward 
Canaan, and having learned them to some 
extent, was now at Kadesh Barnea on the southern 
borders of the land of promise. The people suggested 
the sending of spies to investigate the condition 
of things in Palestine before going further. (Deut. 1:22.) 
The Lord acceded to the proposition and 
through Moses made selection of twelve chief men, 
one from each of the tribes— excepting the tribe of 
Levi and counting both Ephraim and Manasseh for 
Joseph. This caution in sending the spies was not 
condemned of the Lord; nevertheless, the people who 
for more than a year had been guided in all of their 
affairs by the pillar of cloud by day and the pillar of 
fire by night— directing their marchings, locations 
and camps, the time of their stay, etc.,— the people 
who had been miraculously fed with the quail and who 
had experienced the continuous miracle of the manna, 
and who had witnessed the discomfiture of their 
enemies by divine power when the hands of Moses 
were held up;— these people might have had faith 
enough in the Lord to have continued under his leadership 



whensoever and wheresoever he led them, confident 
of his care and of his power. 

R3063 : page 254 

The twelve spies quite probably separated into 
small groups and thus made the more extensive investigation; 
however, their return seems to have been 
at one time, which is rather against this supposition. 
Ten of the number reported favorably as respected 
the land, but unfavorably respecting the possibilities 
of conquering it; the other two, Joshua and Caleb, 
with greater faith in the Lord, were less apprehensive 
and assured the people, "Let us go up at once 
and possess it; for we are well able to overcome it." 
However, the people had not fully learned the lesson 
of faith in God their Leader, and hence the report of 
the majority thoroughly aroused their fears and discouraged 
them from attempting the conquest. 

The majority report was given with an appearance 
of great equity, telling, on the one hand, that 
the land indeed was a goodly one, and exhibiting 
in demonstration some fruits, amongst which was the 
renowned bunch of grapes from Eshcol, which they 
had carried suspended on a pole between two of their 
number; but, on the other hand, they seem to have 
exaggerated in their description of the difficulties:— 
having reached a conclusion in their own minds they 
sought to impress it upon their report; and, like many 
of our own day, considered that in order to secure 
their end, a little exaggeration was justifiable;— the 
people were giants and the Israelites in comparison 
as grasshoppers; the cities were immense and were 
walled up to heaven; the land though rich, as evidenced 
by the fruits they brought, they reported "eateth 
up the inhabitants thereof";— meaning either 
that local warfare was prevalent or that it was a pestilential 
land, not healthy, or that as a whole it was 
a barren land and the samples of fruitage they 
brought represented exceptional portions. 

No wonder the people who had looked forward 
so longingly to this land of promise felt greatly discouraged; 
such a report would be well calculated to 
discourage anybody. Yet it was just such a report 
as the people in general would have made, since it 
was made by their representatives out of every tribe. 
The report was an "evil" one, not only in that it exaggerated 
the difficulties, but in that it also entirely 
ignored the divine supervision of the past. Among 

R3064 : page 254 

other things that inspired fear was the report of the 
giants— Nephilim: these they represented as being 
descendants of the Nephilim, or giants which had 
caused such terror to the world before the flood. 



(Gen. 6:4.) The people were so thoroughly disheartened 
that they set up a great wail of despair;— 
it was a night of sadness when they had expected joy; 
it seemed to crush out all the hope which had previously 
buoyed them up in the journey; they murmured 
against the Lord as well as against Moses and 
Aaron, declaring that they would have preferred to 
have died in Egypt or in the wilderness. They seem 
to have concluded that the Lord through Moses 
would now force them into the land of Canaan,— 
seemed to see themselves destroyed by the sword, 
and their families a prey to their enemies. In their 
frenzy they said, Let us choose from our number a 
leader instead of Moses, reverse the program— return 
to Egypt and call it the land of favor! 

It must have been a sad occasion for the meek 
Moses: once before the people had proposed to 
choose another captain or leader, but this was during 
his absence in Mt. Sinai; now in his presence they 
repudiated him and all that he had endeavored to do 
for them. Only Joshua and Caleb stood by the Lord 
and defended Moses and Aaron who had fallen on 
their faces before the assembly; these two professed 
faith in the Lord; saying, "If the Lord delight in us, 
then he will bring us into this land, and give it us; a 
land which floweth with milk and honey. Only rebel 
not ye against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of 
the land; for they are bread for us; their defense is 
departed from them, and the Lord is with us; fear 
them not." But these noble and courageous words 
of faith were lost upon the angry people: discontent 
and fear had gained thorough control of their minds, 
so that instead of loving and appreciating these noble 
men and their counsel, they were about to stone 
them to death. 

Then the Lord interfered as on a previous occasion; 
a bright light shining out from the Tabernacle 
reminded the people that the Lord their Leader was 
not only gracious and careful, but just; and that he 
could and would punish transgression as before. A 
pestilence broke out amongst them, and among its 
first victims were the ten spies who had brought the 
discouraging report. Moses pointed out these matters 
to them and showed what a lack of confidence in 
God their Leader they had manifested. He gave 
them also the Lord's message that because of unbelief 
they had failed to improve their opportunities, 
and in consequence none of them above twenty years 
of age should ever enter the land of promise— the 
youth and children, being held of the Lord as not responsible, 
were exempted. The Lord explained to 
them that for every day that the spies had spent in 
searching the land to bring an evil report, there 
should be a year of delay in eventually reaching it. 
Thus God here answered their prayer. "Would to 
God that we had died in the wilderness!"— God determined 



that they should all die there. 

Shortly their courage revived and they determined 
that having come thus far to enter the land of 
promise they would go forward and take possession 
of it;— they would ignore the Lord's declaration that 
they might not now have it;— they would take it anyway 
for themselves. Another evidence is here given 
of their lack of faith in the Lord; they did not realize 
as they should have done how much the Lord's hand 
had been connected with all their progress thus far, 
and that without him they could do nothing. When 
they informed Moses of their purpose, he refused his 
consent and co-operation, and forewarned them of 
disaster in any enterprise in which the Lord was not 
their leader, nevertheless they marshalled a host and 
went forth, soon to retreat in disorder before their 
enemies, leaving numbers of their brethren slain upon 
the field of battle. It was a difficult matter for 
them to learn to rely, not upon themselves, but upon 
the Lord. Thence their journey turned again into 
the wilderness. 

LESSONS FOR SPIRITUAL ISRAELITES. 

That the land of Canaan and its rest from the 
wilderness journeying is intended to be a type for 

R3064 : page 255 

the spiritual Israelites, is clearly shown by the Apostle 
in his reference to it, and to how Joshua led the 
people into its rest. (Heb. 4:3-8.) Canaan evidently 
cannot typify the perfect heavenly state into which 
the Church hopes to enter; because when Israel did 
enter Canaan there were years of battling with the 
inhabitants thereof,— finally overcoming them by the 
Lord's assisting power. The Scriptures teach us, on 
the contrary, that when the Church shall have experienced 
the First Resurrection change, all her trials and 
difficulties, her conflicts with the Amalekites and Hittites 
and Jebusites and Philistines will be ended;— 
that which is perfect shall have come, and that which 
is in part shall have been done away. We must, 
therefore, understand Canaan to represent the Millennial 
Kingdom condition, into which all who are 
the Lord's people shall be brought, under the leadership 
of the antitypical Joshua (Jesus), the Church 
being the priesthood glorified. The antitype of Canaan's 
trials and difficulties will be experienced in 
overcoming the weaknesses pertaining to the flesh, 
and in developing more and more under the Lord's 
guidance and blessing into the full perfection of human 
nature— by restitution processes then in operation, 
rewarding every act of obedience and reproving 
and punishing every act of disobedience. 
Fleshly Israel not only made this type in the wilderness, 



but accomplished in considerable measure 
its antitype; for during the 1600 years of their experience 
they were, under the Lord's guidance, being 
prepared for the Millennial Kingdom (Canaan). 
At our Lord's first advent they as a nation had 
reached a place corresponding to Kadesh Barnea, a 
place of decision in respect to entering into the Kingdom 
condition. Had they been in the right attitude 
of heart, full of faith and trust in the Lord, they would 
have received him, and the Kingdom of God could 
at once have been established. But in unbelief they 
rejected him who was the antitype of Moses and 
Aaron and therefore did not enter into rest; instead, 
another long, wearisome journey in the wilderness 
has been their portion, for now nearly 1900 years. 
Shortly, at the second advent of our Lord, he, as the 
antitype of Joshua, will lead all his people Israel, as 
many as shall come into the faith of Abraham, and 
thus become his people, into the land of promise— 
into the Millennial Kingdom with its blessings, mercies 
and promises. 

But is there a lesson for spiritual Israelites in 
connection with these Canaan fightings, etc.? Yes, 
we answer: we are to be like Joshua and Caleb, and 
by faith are to enter into the land and confirm the 
Lord's promises and give a good report thereof. By 
faith we have already entered into divine favor; we 
must have already tasted that the Lord is gracious; 
we have already experienced forgiveness of sins; we 
know as the remainder of mankind know not,— even 
those who seek righteousness and harmony with God 
—that the Lord's power is not limited. We realize 
that we are fully able to meet the conflicts and difficulties 
and trials belonging to a consecrated life. 
By faith we are already living in this Kingdom; already 
we are battling with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, day by day, but at the same time resting— in 
the promises of the Lord; in the strength and grace 
which he supplies; in the victories which he grants us. 

It will be remembered that the name Joshua is 
otherwise translated Jesus (see Heb. 4:8) and means 
"deliverer of his people— help of God." The name 
Caleb signifies "dog"; and this reminds us that the 
poor of this world, rich in faith, who are to be heirs 
of the Kingdom with their Lord Jesus, were represented 
in our Lord's parable as being on a level with 
the dogs. As the rich man, representing Fleshly Israel, 
to whom belonged the promises as the child of 
Abraham, failed to enter into them because of his 
unbelief and rejection of Jesus, and was cast off from 
divine favor for a time, so Lazarus represented those 
"dogs" who have, during this Gospel age been accepted 
as children of Abraham through faith. Viewing 
Joshua and Caleb from this standpoint as representing 
the Lord and the faithful though despised 
few who share with him the people's wrath for their 



good report, we can see that these alone, at the 
present time, have the proper faith in God to enter 
into his rest in advance of the world, and to make 
full consecration of themselves to him and his service, 
and to battle with the world, the flesh and the 
devil, and to conquer through the blood of the Lamb. 
And these, now by faith fighting the good fight, shall 
in the near future as God's representatives lead forward 
all the hosts of his people— redeemed mankind 
—who, learning lessons of bitter experience in the 
wilderness condition, will eventually be glad to enter 
into Millennial Canaan, there to inherit the rich 
promises of God's Word. 

The essence of this lesson is represented in the 
Golden Text. Faith and trust in the Lord is the 
paramount essential for acceptance and blessing at 
his hand,— "Without faith it is impossible to please 
God." "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith." If we leave the world (Egypt) 
to become the Lord's people, and receive the lessons 
of experience at his hand with proper faith in 
him, the outcome will surely be a readiness and 
promptness to make a full consecration, a full submission 
of ourselves to do the Lord's will; to follow 
his leadings; to inherit whatsoever he has for us. 
And if the faith be of the proper kind we will say with 
the Prophet, "I will fear no evil for Thou art with 
me— thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." Such, 
and such alone, can be lead of the Lord in this present 
Gospel age, in which we must walk by faith, not 
by sight. Such alone will have the confidence to go 
forward encountering the various oppositions within 
and without in the present time. Such will eventually 
be God's representatives and leaders in the blessing 
of the world in the Millennial age. Let us learn 
well the lesson of faith, of trust: as God informs us 

R3065 : page 255 

of his appreciation of this quality, and that he can 
deal with us only in proportion as we possess it, so in 
our own experiences we find that we love most to 
assist and encourage those who manifest an abiding 
confidence in us. 



page 257 

SEMI-MONTHLY. 