VOL. XV. DECEMBER 15, 1894. NO. 24. 

"WHO SHALL ASCEND." 



"Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall 
stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands 
and a pure heart: who hath not lifted up his soul unto 
vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall receive the 
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from 
the God of his salvation. This is the generation 
of them that seek him, that seek the face 
of the God of Jacob."-Psa. 24:3-6. 

IN this psalm the prophet David takes the 
standpoint of the dawn of the Millennial age, 
when, after the great time of trouble, the kingdoms 
of this world will have become the Kingdoms 
of our Lord and of his Christ (Rev. 1 1 : 15), 
—when the "Times of the Gentiles" will 



have been fulfilled, and "he whose right it is" 
will have taken unto him his great power and 
begun his glorious reign. Those who have 
studied the plan of the ages and its times and 
seasons know that this is due to be accomplished 
by the year 1915,— only twenty years future 
from the present time. Then will the words 
of this prophecy be fulfilled— "The earth is the 
Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world, and 
they that dwell therein; for he hath founded it 
upon [instead of] the seas, and established it 
upon [in place of] the floods."— Verses 1,2. 

The earth, the world, the seas and the floods, 
the hills and the mountains are all used here, 
as in numerous other instances, in a symbolic, 
and not in a literal sense, which would be absurd 
in this connection. The earth and the 
world represent the present social order of things, 
or human society as at present organized. The 
seas and the floods represent an increasingly 
large class of mankind which restlessly recoils 
against the restraints of the present social order 
and at times grows turbulent and threatening. 
The hills and mountains represent governments. 

When the earth is the Lord's and the fulness 
thereof, it will not be because all the kingdoms 
of this world will have been converted to God 
and purified, and their kings permitted to reign 
by the grace of God, as they now claim to do, 
and because all the now restless masses of men 
will have become docile and submissive to the 
present governing powers; but it will be as the 
prophet declares, because God will have "founded 
it upon the seas and established it upon the 
floods." That is, the present earth, or social 
organization, and the present heavens, or ruling 
powers, will have passed away, and the new earth 
will be established upon the ruins of the old. 
When the waves of the restless sea-element of 
society shall have arisen in their might and 
overwhelmed the whole present social order, so 
that the wild and stormy sea of anarchy shall 
prevail everywhere, then, amidst the wreck and 
ruin, the desolation and universal despondency 
and despair, the voice of Jehovah will be heard, 
saying, "Be still, and know that I am God: I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted 
in the earth." (Psa. 46: 10.) And out of 
the wild commotion of that stormy sea God will 
bring order and peace. 

Instead of this restless sea of humanity he will 
found the new earth, the new order of things; 
yea, and he will firmly establish it upon [in place 
of] the floods: there he will establish his Kingdom 
"which cannot be moved." (Heb. 12:28.) 
And he will set his King upon his holy hill of 



Zion, and give to him the nations for his inheritance, 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for 

R1744: page 388 

his possession. (Psa. 2:6,8.) Then indeed shall 

the King, the Lord's anointed, reign in righteousness; 

and princes shall decree justice (Isa. 32:1); 

and, in consequence, there shall be 

abundance of peace so long as the moon endureth. 

--Psa. 72:7. 

There will then be but one Kingdom (mountain 
or hill) in all the world— the Kingdom of 
God; and his Anointed will be King in all the 
earth in that day. (Zech. 14:9.) This hill or 
kingdom of the Lord is that to which the Psalmist 
refers when he raises the question, "Who 
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who 
shall stand in his holy place?" To ascend into 
the hill of the Lord is to come into his 
Kingdom as loyal and obedient subjects, as true 
citizens, worthy of all its blessings and privileges, 
and not as aliens and foreigners, having 
no part or lot in the common interests and inheritance 
of all the true and loyal people of 
God, viz., eternal life and all its blessings of 
righteousness, peace and everlasting joy. Who 
indeed shall be counted worthy thus to ascend 
into the mountain of the Lord? "And who 
shall stand in his holy place?" The reference 
here is to the antitype of the typical temple of 
God, which, standing upon the top of Mount 
Zion, prefigured the glorious true temple, the 
Church of the living God, in Kingdom power 
and glory. Who shall stand in that holy place 
in that age of glory and blessing now so near 
at hand?— who shall be counted worthy to reign 
with Christ in his Kingdom? 

The answer to both inquiries is the same- 
He that hath clean hands and a pure heart; 
who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor 
sworn deceitfully." These will be the required 
qualifications for citizenship in the Kingdom, 
when the Kingdom is established; and they are 
also the qualifications required now of all those 
who would be heirs of that coming Kingdom. 
It will be observed that the qualifications mentioned 
are not those of faith (for faith in the 
gospel of the Kingdom, which includes faith in 
Christ the King and Redeemer, is implied in 
the desire to be in the Kingdom in any capacity); 
but the qualifications mentioned here are 
those of character. The Scriptures elsewhere 
make more specific mention of the necessary 
faith, but always implying a character consistent 
with the faith. (Acts 16:31; John 3:16,36.) 



The prophet does not ignore faith, but points 

to that character which is the legitimate consequence 

of a true faith exercised unto godliness. 

A faith which does not produce character is 

null and void. (Jas. 2:17.) Therefore it is 

plain that both the heirs and the subjects of the 

Kingdom of God must have that character 

which is both begotten and developed by the 

faith of the gospel; for if the faith of the gospel 

be held in unrighteousness there is no place 

in the Kingdom for any such. (Rom. 1:18.) 

Let us consider the character-requirements here 

mentioned. 

"Clean hands."— That means clean actions, 
clean conduct. If bad habits of any kind have 
been cultivated, they must be promptly forsaken. 
The hands must not be defiled with the holding 
of bribes, nor with the gain of oppression, 
and every evil thing must be resolutely put 
away. (Isa. 33:15.) It is in vain that any profess 
loyalty to God and to his anointed King 
and Kingdom while they continue in a sinful 
course of action. Loyalty to the Kingdom signifies 
determined opposition to sin in all its 
forms, and a firm resistance of it. 

"A pure heart."— That signifies purity of will, 
intention or purpose, which, like the needle to 
the pole, always turns toward righteousness. 
Though some sudden or strong temptation may 
for an instant, through the weakness of the 
flesh, draw it to the right or to the left, yet 
quickly it recovers its normal position which is 
true to righteousness and truth. A pure heart 
loves righteousness and truth, and hates iniquity. 
It loves purity, and despises all that is impure 
and unholy. It loves cleanliness of person, of 
clothing, of language and of habits. It delights 
only in the society of the pure, and shuns all 
others, knowing that "evil communications corrupt 
good manners." 

"Who hath not lifted up his soul unto vanity." 
Pride is an abomination to the Lord 
and to all those who partake of his spirit. It 
is a weed which, if once permitted to take root 
in the heart, will soon crowd out every grace. 
The Psalmist says, "I hate vain thoughts;" and 
such should be our sentiments. The grace of 

R1744: page 389 

humility, meekness, is one of the most beautiful 
that can adorn the character. It takes a sober 
estimate of personal qualifications, is not puffed 
up, does not behave unbecomingly, and seeks 
to exercise its talents, not for pride and vain 
glory, but for the joy of doing good. It is 



modest, candid and sincere, both in consideration 
of its own qualifications and those of others. 
What comfort and pleasure are found in the society 
of those possessed of such a spirit. 

"Nor sworn deceitfully."— Those who make 
a solemn covenant with the Lord, and who thereafter 
wilfully despise or ignore it, have sworn 
deceitfully; and surely no such disloyal subjects 
can be admitted either to citizenship or heirship 
in the Kingdom of God. But those who, 
in this age, have made a solemn covenant with 
God and who are true to their covenant, even 
unto death, they shall ascend into the holy 
place, the temple of God— they shall be the heirs 
of the Kingdom, joint-heirs with Jesus Christ; 
while all such, in the age to come, shall be recognized 
and privileged citizens of the Kingdom. 
These shall receive the blessings of the Lord 
promised in his Word. After first receiving the 
imputed righteousness of Christ through faith, 
they may, under divine grace, be made perfect 
in righteousness and worthy of eternal life. 

This is the generation of them that seek the 
face of the God of Jacob. Men do not obtain 
these blessings without seeking them, nor without 
seeking them in God's appointed way- 
through Christ, by humble reliance upon his 
finished work of redemption, and by the full consecration 
of all their ransomed powers of mind 
and body to his holy will, which is only our 
reasonable service. 

Beloved, ye who are called by his grace to 
stand in his holy place, let us ponder these 
things. Are our hands clean and our hearts 
pure? are we humble and faithful to our covenant? 
Let us see that we meet these conditions, 
and let us run with patience the race set before 
us, looking unto Jesus. 



R1744: page 389 

"THINK IT NOT STRANGE." 



"Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial 
which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened 
unto you: but rejoice, inasmuch as ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that, when his glory 
shall be revealed, ye may be glad also 
with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 4:12,13. 

PERHAPS few have learned to value the discipline 
of the Lord as did the faithful 



Apostle who wrote these words. While he as 
well as others realized that no affliction for the 
present seemeth joyous, but rather grievous, yet 
knowing the ministry of such discipline, and 
recognizing it as an additional evidence of 
sonship to God, he rejoiced in being a partaker 
of it. 

But why is it that fiery trials must come to 
us? Is there no way of gaining the crown 
without these crosses? No, there is not; for if 
ye receive not the discipline of trial whereof all 
are partakers, then are ye bastards and not sons; 
for what son is he whom the Father chasteneth 
not? Trials of faith and patience and love and 
endurance are as necessary to our development 
and our fitting for the high position to which 
we are called, as are the instructions of the divine 
Word and the special manifestations of divine 
grace. The blessed sunshine and shower 
have their benign influence, but none the less 
the cloud and the storm; but we need ever to 
bear in mind that the cloud has its silver lining, 
and that God is in the whirlwind and in the 
storm. 

Like water upon the parched earth, and like 
sunshine to vegetation after winter snows, so 
the message of divine truth comes to us and 
with it the blessed realization of divine favor. 
In the joy of our new-found treasure we are apt 
to think at first that we have actually entered 
the Beulah land of joy and peace where sorrow 
and trial can never more come to us. But no; 
there are sorrows ahead and trials beyond, and 
you will need all the strength which the truth 
can give and all the blessed influences that divine 
grace can impart to enable you to endure 
faithfully to the end. 

But do not stop to worry about the trials until 
they come; only remember the Apostle's 
words— "Think it not strange," when they do 

R1744: page 390 

come. They come to prove you and to strengthen 
your character and to cause the principles of 
truth and righteousness to take deep root in 
your heart. They come like fiery darts from our 
great enemy, Satan, whose wrath against the 
children of light is permitted to manifest itself 
in various ways; but his darts cannot injure 
those who securely buckle on the divinely provided 
armor of truth and righteousness. "Wherefore," 
says the Apostle, "take unto you the 
whole armor of God,. ..above all, taking 
the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked."— 



Eph. 6:13-17. 

The Christian life is thus set forth as a warfare 
—a warfare, "not against flesh and blood, 
but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against 
spiritual wickedness in high places." (Eph. 6:12.) 
In other words, as Christians imbued with 
the spirit of our Master, we find the principles 
of truth and righteousness which we have espoused 
to be at variance with the whole present 
order of things, which is to a very large extent 
under the control of "the prince of this world" 
—Satan. And when sin is thus so inwrought 
throughout the whole social fabric of the present 
age; and not only so, but when we also 
find the flesh, our own old nature, in harmony 
with it, we see into what close quarters we must 
come with the enemy, and what a hand to hand 
and life- long struggle it must needs be. Yet 
our weapons are not carnal, but spiritual, and 
the Apostle says they are mighty for the pulling 
down of the strongholds of error and iniquity. 
~2 Cor. 10:4,5. 

When, therefore, the fiery trials and darts 
from the enemy come upon you, be ready as an 
armed soldier of the cross to meet and withstand 
them. If you run away from them, you 
are a coward, and not worthy to be called a 
soldier. 



R1744: page 390 

"A THORN IN THE FLESH." 



"And lest I should be exalted above measure through the 

abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a 

thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet me, 

lest I should be exalted above measure. For this 

thing I besought the Lord thrice, that it might 

depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is 

sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect 

in weakness. Most gladly, therefore, will I 

rather glory in my infirmities, that the 

power of Christ may rest upon me. 

"Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, 

in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's 

sake; for when I am weak, then am I strong."— 2 Cor. 12:7-10. 

THIS was the language of an overcoming 
saint, meekly bowing to the divine will. 
Noble and loyal and true and strong in character 
as the Apostle Paul was, he yet realized that he 



was a member of the fallen race, and, in common 
with all humanity, subject to frailties. 
God had called him to a most important and 
glorious work— that of bearing the gospel to 
the Gentiles; and, for the benefit of the whole 
Church, to him were granted special and wonderful 
revelations, even above all the other 
honored and beloved apostles. He was caught 
away in mental vision to the third heaven— 
the new dispensation, the Millennial reign of 
Christ, and shown things (doubtless the plan 
and purpose of God, as now made manifest to 
us, largely through his writings, in the light of 
this harvest period, but) not lawful to be uttered 
then, because not then due to the Church. 
(2 Cor. 12:4.) Upon him devolved the care 
of all the Churches of the Gentiles, and great 
were the responsibilities of his office. Though 
the position was a most laborious and trying 
one, requiring great fortitude, zeal, energy and 
self-denial to fill it, it was also one of great honor. 
And Paul appreciated the honor of such intimate 
fellowship of service with the Lord, and 
manifested his appreciation by untiring zeal and 
enthusiasm. But even in this the Lord recognized 
a personal danger to his beloved and 
faithful Apostle— a danger of pride and self-exaltation, 
which, if it should develop, would 
soon unfit him for further service and rob him 
of his future reward. So the thorn in the flesh 
was permitted to come. It came, not from the 
hand of the Lord, though by his permission; 
but, as the Apostle affirms, it was "the messenger 
of Satan to buffet" him. 

R1744: page 391 

A thorn in the flesh is always a painful thing; 
and whatever this may have been, it was something 
severely trying to Paul. At first he 
thought only of the pain and annoyance it 
caused him, and of its hindrance to him in the 
Lord's work: it was a messenger of Satan that 
he was anxious to get rid of. Three times he 
besought the Lord for its removal. But no, it 
had come to stay, and the Lord mercifully 
made him to realize that though it was very 
undesirable to the flesh, it was nevertheless 
profitable to him spiritually; for otherwise he 
might become exalted overmuch. 

The implication of weakness the Apostle 
humbly accepted. He did not resent it and 
begin to boast of his strength and to reproach 
the Lord for not exerting his power for its removal; 
but, on the contrary, with grace and 
gladness he accepted the Lord's judgment of 



his heart, and his estimate of his strength, and 
appreciated the love that thus cared for him 
personally, while through him he was ministering 
to the whole Church. Yes, praise the Lord ! 
he chooses his own instruments, and whets and 
grinds and polishes them for the more effectual 
service, and wields them with force and power 
in the service of his people; but in all the painful 
and laborious service he has special care also 
for the willing and faithful instrument. He 
will not suffer it to be tried beyond that which 
it is able to endure; nor will he suffer it to be 
exalted without some counterbalancing thorn in 
the flesh to preserve its equilibrium. 

R1745: page 391 

The answer to the Apostle's prayer, although 
not in accordance with his request, was a blessed 
consolation— "My grace [my favor] is sufficient 
for thee; for my strength is made perfect [made 
manifest] in [your] weakness." 

This is also the blessed consolation of every 
truly submissive heart. How many of the Lord's 
people are tempest-tossed and sorely tried in 
these days; and doubtless many of them have 
earnestly besought the Lord to remove this or 
that trial or affliction; but the piercing thorn 
still remains for their discipline and perfecting. 
Let all such, like Paul, give ear to the Master's 
voice— "My favor is sufficient for thee." What 
if other friends forsake thee, and hosts of foes 
seek to overwhelm thee, if thou hast my favor, 
my love: is not that sufficient? And what 
though the flesh be weak and the heart sometimes 
faint, my strength shall supply your lack; 
and while you walk in the way of my appointment, 
your weakness shall only the more manifest 
the power of God working in and through you. 

What sincere child of God has not realized, 
in times of greatest need and felt weakness, the 
power of God on his behalf supplementing his 
weakness with strength from above? And when 
the task was accomplished to which the Lord 
had called him and for which he felt so incompetent 
of himself, has he not realized in the 
outcome the wonder-working power of God? 

In view of such a gracious provision to supplement 
his weakness with divine strength, the 
faithful Apostle meekly responded, "Most gladly, 
therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmities, 
that the power of Christ may rest upon me." 
Having put forth all his own energies and faithfully 
used his own ability to its fullest extent as 
a wise steward, it was his joy to recognize the 
hand of the Lord working with him— by miracles 



and signs and with demonstrations of the 
spirit and of power. (Heb. 2:4; Acts 19:11; 
1 Cor. 2:4.) These demonstrations of divine 
power supplementing Paul's faithful use of his 
natural abilities were the Lord's endorsement 
of all he did— the manifestations of divine approval 
both to himself and to others, and consequently 
cause for great rejoicing. 

With the Apostle it is also the privilege of all 
God's children to have their weakness supplemented 
by divine grace, while they meekly and 
faithfully use their talents in the Lord's service. 
And so all the faithful may rejoice in tribulations 
and infirmities, while God overrules the 
former and supplements the latter to his praise. 

But to rejoice in tribulations, to endure meekly 
and patiently a sore thorn in the flesh, and 
even to glory in such personal infirmities as 
make the power of Christ the more manifest, 
is not possible except to those whose hearts are 
in fullest accord with the loving purposes of 
God. If the heart be influenced by pride or 
ambition or love of fame or wealth or any 
worldly ambition, joy in tribulation is impossible. 
But if the old ambitions and desires of 
the flesh are kept under, and faith, love, hope 
and zeal are all alive and active, we shall have 
the consciousness of the divine favor, and then 
we can rejoice in every experience. 



R1745 : page 392 

"THE LORD IS MY SHEPHERD." 



"The Lord is my Shepherd: I shall not want."— Psa. 23:1. 

IN comparing himself to a shepherd, the Lord 
made a very apt illustration of his care for 
his people— a care which is always solicitous for 
their welfare, watchful for their interests, patient 
with their youth and inexperience and untiring 
in its ministry of love. 

But it is only when the individual can say in 
his heart, The Lord is my Shepherd, that this 
blessed ministry of the good Shepherd can be 
realized. It is when we become his sheep that 
we learn the value of the Shepherd's care; and 
the man who has had experience under the care 
of the good Shepherd can truly say with the 
Psalmist, "I shall not want." He shall not 
want for the temporal necessities of the present 
life— "Bread shall be given him; his waters 



shall be sure." (Isa. 33:16; Matt. 6:33,34.) 
He shall not want for light and be left to walk 
in the darkness of this world, but unto him shall 
be given the light of life. (John 8: 12.) He 
shall not want the necessary care and discipline 
to fit him for the future life; "for whom the 
Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every 
son whom he receiveth." (Heb. 12:6.) He 
shall not lack the consolations of divine grace 
in times of trial and affliction; for it is written, 
"My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength 
is made perfect in weakness." (2 Cor. 12:9.) 
He shall not want for fellowship and sympathy; 
for the Lord himself hath said, "I will never 
leave thee nor forsake thee" (Heb. 13:5); and 
again, "Lo, I am with you alway."— Matt. 28:20. 

Surely no good thing will he withhold from 
them that walk uprightly— as true sheep. He 
will protect them in every danger, and guard 
them with a shepherd's care. 



R1745 : page 392 

Z.W.T. TRACT SOCIETY'S ANNUAL REPORT. 



IT is with great pleasure, deep gratitude and 
profound recognition of the great Master's 
providential leadings, that we summarize and 
lay before our readers the results of their labors 
and ours with and under the great Chief Reaper 
in the present harvest work, for the past year— 
from Dec. 1, 1893 to Dec. 1, 1894. 

We congratulate our readers that although the 
year has been marked by Satan's fiercest assaults 
upon the Lord's work and upon us of the 
WATCH TOWER as his and your representatives 
in the supervision of that work,— and notwithstanding, 
too, the fact that the year has been 
one of unprecedented pinch in financial affairs, 
nevertheless it has been the most successful year 
of the Tract Society's experience in the amount 
of money received and expended, and in the tract 
pages circulated, as you will see from the reports 
of the Secretary and Treasurer subjoined. True, 
the work is small:— very small is the sum at our 
disposal for the spread of the Truth compared 
with the immense sums donated to other tract 
societies for the promulgation of what we believe 
to be chiefly error. The Lord in his wisdom 
has seen fit to limit the means at our disposal, 
and no doubt for good reasons;— quite probably 
to draw out to greater activity and self-denial 



each one who has the cause at heart. 

"It is required of a steward that he be found 
faithful." We at the WATCH TOWER office are 
in several respects stewards of the Lord's goods, 
"stewards of the manifold grace of God," 
and it is his approval which we crave. We trust 
that as he reviews the efforts and results of the 
year— your efforts and ours— that he can approve 
both you and us, saying, "Well done, 
good, faithful servants." But we of the TOWER 
office are not only the Lord's stewards, of goods 
both temporal and spiritual, but we are also 
your stewards,— stewards of those monies which 
you have contributed to the Tract Fund— and 
as your stewards this report is due to you, and 
submitted accordingly. 

If we cannot congratulate you that the sum 
is a large one, we can congratulate you that it 
has accomplished more than double as much 
as the same amount generally accomplishes 
in the hands of other Tract Societies, where 

R1745: page 393 

salaries and office rent consume a large proportion 

of the receipts. Twenty-three millions 

of pages of tracts is a good showing; and if 

the DAWN pages circulated were added, it would 

represent over thirty millions of pages more. 

Thank God for the privilege of having a share 

in this, his work of gathering together his elect 

unto him, preparatory to the setting up of his 

Kingdom in power and great glory. Compare 

Psa. 50:4,5; Matt. 13:30, and Matt. 24:31. 

The colporteur work has been considerably 
interfered with by reason of the financial depression. 
Tens of thousands of people who 
have the time to read, and whose minds are 
more than ever open to the message of God's 
Kingdom coming, have been obliged by necessity 
to refuse to purchase DAWNS, and have 
been supplied with free tracts instead. This in 
turn has worked unfavorably to the colporteurs, 
many of whom have been obliged to receive credits 
and some assistance from the Tract Fund while 
others have been forced to quit the work entirely 
until times improve, which we expect will not be 
before next Spring. These dear co-laborers have 
many trials and discouragements by the way, 
and need our prayers. Let all who feel an interest 
in the cause remember in their devotions 
these whose labor of love has been God's instrumentality 
for carrying the good tidings of 
great joy to so many of you, and this branch of 
the service, which has been specially attacked by 
the Adversary during the year just closed. 



Impressed with the fact that a number of 
school teachers, ministers and business men who 
had tried the colporteur work had failed to make 
it a success, we have devised a new method of 
work specially suitable for them. A few are 
already using it with success, and we hope that 
it will enable many to engage in the harvest 
work in a self-supporting way during the coming 
year. The new method is not at all adapted 
to the use of the average colporteur, who 
succeeds best with the usual methods: indeed 
the new method is suited only to those who by 
the grace of God can respond that they possess 
the eight qualifications for public ministry, 

R1746: page 393 

mentioned in our issue of Sept. 1; and it is consequently 
explained only to such as can and do 
thus respond. 

The "New Branch of Service," started some 
time ago, but mentioned and enlarged recently, 
—viz., the arrangement for the holding of 
meetings, by traveling representatives of the 
Tract Society— is proving spiritually profitable 
to the Church, as indicated by letters received 
from various quarters, which tell of spiritual 
good derived, and truth more clearly 
discerned. 

This work is carried on economically, too, 
that the means supplied by the Lord may reach 
as far and accomplish as much as possible. A 
reference to the Treasurer's report will show that 
only $403.88 has been expended in this way; 
and this was nearly all spent during the past three 
months. Brother M. L. McPhail only has been 
giving all of his time to this work, and he alone 
has all of his expenses paid out of the Tract 
Society's fund, the other laborers in this branch 
of the service, Brothers Antoszewski, Austin, 
Bell, Blundin, Bohnet, Draper, Merrill, Murphy, 
Owen, Page, Ransom, Richards, Thorn, 
Webb, Weber, Weimar, West, Williams, Wise 
and Witter, being traveling salesmen, colporteurs 
or business men whose expenses are met by their 
business or otherwise and who delight to give 
an evening or a Sunday, as they can arrange it, 
in serving the Lord's flock— pointing to the 
green pastures and the still waters and feeding 
and rejoicing with the "sheep." 

During the past five months Brother McPhail 
has visited groups of WATCH TOWER readers 
in fifty-three cities, and has held about one 
hundred and fifteen meetings in the states 
of Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, 
West Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky, Delaware, 



Indiana, Illinois and Michigan. The other 

brethren, all together, have probably held as 

many more meetings— some in New York, Pennsylvania, 

Ohio, Massachusetts, Iowa, Wisconsin, 

Indiana, Canada, Illinois, Texas, California, 

Oregon and Florida. Several others expect to 

engage in this branch of the work early next 

year. This branch of the service also deserves 

our sympathies, co-operation and prayers. 

The blessings attending these meetings will 

depend largely upon the sympathy and cooperation 

of those visited; and the Lord will 

not be unmindful of your labor of love and 

R1746: page 394 

service in such co-operation, in however humble 
the capacity; and he will reward with grace 
now and with glory hereafter. All who desire 
such meetings, and who would co-operate in 
making them a blessing to themselves and others, 
are invited to let us know of their desires. And 
any who make use of the "Good Hopes" blanks 
which accompany this issue may, if they so prefer, 
designate what proportion of their donations 
they wish to have applied to the forwarding 
of this special branch of the service. 

In view of the activity of our great Adversary, 
and his endeavor to counterfeit not only the 
light of truth, but also the ministers of the light, 
it is well that the Lord's people should be on 
guard against the agents of another gospel, which 
denies that our Lord bought them (2 Pet. 2: 1) 
and claims that he was merely an example and 
teacher. No such error need be feared from 
any of the Brethren who bear our Letter of Introduction 
and Commendation. 

Concerning the spiritual condition of the 
Church in general, we have exceptionally good 
opportunities forjudging, being in communication 
with many of the household of faith the 
world over; yet only the Lord can read the 
hearts;— "the Lord knoweth them that are 
his." However, we are glad to be able to report 
that while the love of many waxes cold, 
we have many cheering evidences that the 
spiritual warmth of others is constantly increasing; 
and although Satan is permitted to 
sift out some, as we were forewarned, others are 
by the same trial only the more firmly rooted 
and grounded and built up in the most holy 
faith. And for every one who leaves the ransom 
and the light of present truth, another, more 
earnest and zealous, comes forward— reminding 
us of our Lord's words, "Hold that fast which 
thou hast, that no man take thy crown."— 



Rev. 3:11. 

Not only do the letters received, and the reports 
from the traveling brethren and the colporteurs, 
testify to much earnestness and love 
for the truth, but the Treasurer's Report, which 
follows, testifies to the same in no uncertain 
tones; for where the poor give their hard-earned 
dollars their hearts must be also— especially in 
the recent close times. While the sum contributed 
would be small indeed for wealthy 
people to spend in forwarding the grandest tidings 
that ever reached the ears of man, yet we 
know that the donations of some have not been 
without considerable self-denial; for among our 
readers are not many great or rich in this 
world's greatness and riches. 

SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT. 



During the year from Dec. 1, '93 to Dec. 1, 
'94 there have been circulated, free, the 
following: 

Copies OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 1,159,091 
" ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 125,892 

Since tracts vary as to the number of pages, 
it is customary to reckon their circulation by 
pages. The foregoing, so stated, represent 
23,321,900 pages. 

TREASURER'S ACCOUNT. 



RECEIPTS: 

From "Good Hopes," $5,664.56 

" other sources, 4,076.00 



Total, $9,740.56 



EXPENDITURES: 

For Balance due from last year, $ 478.60 

" Tracts, TOWERS, etc., sent out free,. 5,738.97 
" Postage, freight, wrappers, 

etc., for same, 658.55 

" Labor, mailing same, 572.00 

" Foreign translations, plates, 

etc., Tracts and DAWNS, 1,025.26 

Assistance to colporteurs, DAWNS 

to the poor, etc., 553.30 

Interest on colporteurs indebtedness 

toT.P. Co., 310.00 

Expenses of traveling Evangelists, 403.88 



Total, $9,740.56 



Thus, by the grace of God, we start upon the 
new year free from all debts and hopeful of 
great privileges and opportunities just before 
us. Let us each do with our might what our 
Master has placed within our reach; and let us 
do it promptly and zealously, remembering that 
nearer and nearer comes the night when no 
man can work.— John 9:4. 

It is but our duty to mention that the foregoing 
statement takes no account of some five 
thousand dollars of credits extended to colporteurs 

R1746: page 395 

by the Tower Pub. Co., for which our 
Tract Society is pledged;— and the most of 
which it is to be hoped the colporteurs will 
soon be able to settle for themselves. Those 
who can do so should have their accounts paid 
ahead or else send the money with their orders, 
as our Society is obliged to pay interest on these 
balances. In this connection it is proper to 
mention that the items of rent, light, heat 
and clerical work are not omitted by accident 
from our account of expenditures. These are 
donated by the Tower Publishing Co. 

While the colporteur work for the circulation 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN is under the supervision 
and patronage of this Society, it is self-supporting 
to a very large degree;— the only liabilities 
being the guarantee of their accounts above 
mentioned and in the preparation of foreign 
translations. An item on this last account appears 
in the Treasurer's report, above. 



R1746: page 395 

THE PRINCE OF PEACE. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XII., DEC. 23, ISA. 9:2-7. 

Golden Text— "Of the increase of his government 
and peace there shall be no end."— Isa. 9:7. 

The standpoint of the Prophet here is that of 
the dawn of the Millennial age, immediately 
after the setting up of the Kingdom of God in 
the earth— both its earthly and its heavenly 
phases. 

Verse 2. "The people that walked in darkness 
have seen a great light." The reference here 



is to the world of mankind, all of whom will at 
that time recognize the presence of the Lord 
and his Kingdom established; for it is written 
that "every eye shall see him." (Rev. 1:7.) 
The world that has walked in the darkness of 
ignorance and superstition for six thousand years 
will then begin to see the glorious light of truth 
and righteousness, and in the earthly phase of 
the Kingdom they will see the grand illustrations 
and rewards of righteousness. 

"They that dwell in the land of the shadow 
of death [i.e., fleshly Israel under the condemnation 
of their law covenant*], a light 
shineth brightly over them." Yes, the light 
will shine with special brilliancy upon fleshly 
Israel: then their blindness will be turned away 
and the favors of the new dispensation will 
again be— "to the Jew first, and also [afterward] 
to the Gentile;" and through the secondary 
instrumentality of the fleshly seed of Abraham 
shall all the nations of the world be blessed. 
The ancient worthies of that nation will be the 
visible rulers of the world, and their new work 
will begin at Jerusalem, bringing order out of 
confusion, peace out of discord and making 
Jerusalem a praise in the whole world. It was 
with reference to this that the Prophet wrote 
again, saying, "Arise, give light, for thy light 
is come, and the glory of the Lord is shining forth 



*See our issue of November 1 & 15, '94. 

R1747: page 395 

over thee. For behold, the darkness shall cover 

the earth, and a gross darkness the people; but 

over thee the Lord will shine forth, and his 

glory will be seen over thee. And nations 

shall walk by thy light, and kings by thy brightness 

of thy shining.. ..And the sons of the 

stranger shall build up thy walls, and their kings 

shall minister unto thee; for in my wrath did 

I smite thee, but in my favor have I had mercy 

on thee."-Isa. 60:1-3,10. 

Verse 3. "Thou hast multiplied the nation 
[Israel— a reference to their gathering 
together again as a nation after the long dispersion 
of nearly two thousand years as fugitives 
among all the nations;— and also to their reinforcement 
by the resurrection of their ancient 
worthies and heroes], made great their joy: 
they rejoice before thee as with the joy in harvest, 
as men are glad when they divide the spoil." 
Such indeed will be the joy of Israel when 



the blessings of their restoration to divine favor 
begin to be realized. 

Verses 4,5. "For the yoke of their burden, 
and the staff on their shoulder, the rod of their 
oppressor [the heavy burdens of oppression 
imposed upon them and the persecutions inflicted 
by their Gentile enemies during the long 
period of their blindness and exile], hast thou 
broken, as on the day of Midian"— when a 
great victory was won for them by Gideon's 
small band of 300 under the Lord's direction, 
without bloodshed and without strife. (Judges 7:1-23.) 
Even so shall it be when the Lord 
shall again fight for Israel: it will not be by 
their own power that the victory of the final 
battle will be secured. —See Ezek. 38:11,15-23. 
Also compare verse 4 with Ezek. 39:8-15. 

R1747: page 396 

Verse 6. Why is all this return of divine 
favor to Israel? is it because of worthiness in 
them? Surely not; for to this day they are a 
stiff-necked people, and their blindness and hardness 
of heart continue although we are within 
only a score of years of the time when all these 
things shall be fulfilled. The reason for it is 
that the Lord hath remembered his covenant 
with their fathers (Lev. 26:42,45; Jer. 31:34), 
and that in fulfilment of that covenant a child 
has been born unto them who was destined to 
be a light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory 
of Israel; and now (at the time indicated in 
the prophecy) "the government is placed upon 
his shoulders." Dimly this light of the world 
shone upon Israel at the first advent of Messiah; 
but when "the light shined in the darkness, the 
darkness comprehended it not." "He came unto 
his own, and his own received him not." It is 
only at the second advent that they recognize 
him as the promised seed of Abraham and their 
long-looked-for Messiah. They shall look upon 
him whom they have pierced, and shall 
mourn for him.—Zech. 12:10. 

"And his name is called Wonderful [What 
a wonder indeed to Israel specially, that the 
despised Nazarene, the man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief, whom they hated and 
crucified and reviled, even to this day, was indeed 
their Messiah, and they knew him not. 
What a wonder, too, to them specially, will be 
the forgiving love that so meekly bore their reproaches 
and sacrificed even unto death to redeem 
them from the curse of the law, and that 
now returns to restore and bless them ! Wonderful, 
wonderful love, wonderful condescension 



and grace, and wonderful exaltation and glory 
and power!], Counsellor [not counsellor 
of the mighty God, as some translators have 
rendered it; for Paul significantly inquires concerning 
Jehovah, "Who hath been his counsellor?" 
(Rom. 1 1:34.) He needed no counsellor, 
but poor fallen humanity does need such 
a wise counsellor, and he will teach them and 
they shall walk in his ways.— Isa. 2:3], The 
Mighty God ["a Savior and a great one"— 
Isa. 19:20], The Everlasting Father [the new 
life-giver to our dead race— the second Adam 
— 1 Cor. 15:45], The Prince of Peace [whose 
glorious reign shall be one of righteousness, 
bringing with it all the blessed fruits of righteousness 
—peace and joy and satisfaction and 
everlasting rest]." 

Verse 7. His dominion shall increase until 
all things are subdued under him. It shall extend, 
not only to the ends of the earth, but 
eventually all things in heaven and in earth are 
to be united under his headship as the representative 
of Jehovah, who would have all men 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. 
-Psa. 72:7; Eph. 1:10; John 5:23. 

"The zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform 
this." Such is Jehovah's purpose, and thus he 
declares that it shall be accomplished; and our 
hearts leap for joy as we realize, not only the 
glorious import of this prophecy, but also the 
fact that the time is at hand, and that a score 
of years future will see the Kingdom established 
and its blessings beginning to be experienced. 

The common interpretation of this prophecy 
regards it as fulfilled upon Israel at the first advent, 
and the Kingdom of God as established 
then in the Gospel Church; and the great increase 
in the numbers and power of the nominal 
Church of all denominations, Papal and Protestant, 
as the predicted increase of Christ's government. 
—Verse 7. 

Such a fulfilment would not be worthy of the 
record. Christ does not reign in Christendom: 
its general character is antichristian. The 
only sense in which Christ's kingdom was begun 
at the first advent was in its embryo condition; 
and this, the only true Kingdom of 
Christ in the world, has, like the Lord, been 
unrecognized in the world, except, like him, to 
be despised and forsaken and to suffer violence. 
Its numbers have always been small and its circumstances 
humble; for not many rich and great, 
etc., are called.- 1 Cor. 1:26-29; Jas. 2:5. 

Nor did the nation of Israel at the first advent 
see or comprehend the light of Christ, 
nor did he at that time break their yoke or deliver 



them from the rod of their oppressor; for 

in consequence of their failure to recognize the 

light when it began to shine upon them, they 

were blinded, the rod of the oppressor came upon 

them with increased force and they have 

never yet been relieved, nor will they be until 

their Messiah is recognized as having come 

again, a second time; this time without a sin-offering 

unto salvation.— Heb. 9:28. 

Let us rejoice for them and for all mankind 
that the blessed day is nigh, even at the doors. 
Rightly viewed, this prophecy is full of rapturous 
inspiration. 

page 396 

REVIEW. 



IV. QUAR., LESSON XIII., DEC. 30. 

Golden Text— "Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and 
to-day, and forever."— Heb. 13:8. 

As we endeavor to review the life of Jesus 
how blessed is this assurance of the Apostle, 
that he is, and ever shall be, the same unchangeable 
friend and lover of humanity! The review 
of his life and teaching should be our 
constant meditation. He was the living example 
of God's law of Love; and in him all the graces 
of the spirit focused. 



R1747: page 397 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Of the books 
I brought with me to Denmark, there are now 
none left, and several Christian friends are 
anxiously waiting with me for the new lot 
to arrive. The lady class leader of a large 
Methodist church, to whom I sold a copy 
of DAWN soon after coming here, has read 
a good part of it and has liked it so much 
that she is recommending it to S.S. teachers 
and pupils, and has sold several copies. 
People are not so prejudiced against it here, 
as some seemed to be in the United States. 

This is a very lively place, and everybody 
looks happy and contented. There are many 



churches. The state church is Lutheran, a 
dead, formal thing, which, as intelligence 
increases, is losing more and more of its influence 
over the people. 

There has been much talk lately among 
the dissenters, Baptists, Methodists and 
others, concerning a church union. A Mr. 
Edwards of England, one of the members 
of the S.S. committee in London, has been 
here several times, speaking in various 
churches upon the subject of joining all the 
Sunday Schools into one large body and 
using the "International S.S. Lessons." 

I have attended three of these meetings, 
the last one being held in the Baptist 
church; and for the first time here ministers 
of various denominations were seen and 
heard from the same platform. They seemed 
united to work their own scheme of "saving 
the whole world" before the Lord's 
Kingdom is set up. Oh, how blind the 
guides! and the people are in gross darkness 
concerning the Lord's real, glorious plan. 
May his Kingdom soon come! 

I would like very much to have a companion 
in the canvass, and am in hopes 
soon to get a young man, a clerk in a large 
book store, who is reading the DAWNS and 
likes them, to start out with me in the harvest 
work. I have not regretted that I left 
America, but am well pleased here in every 
way. I delight in doing some good work 
for the Lord, in finding and sealing his dear 
people, and feeding the truth-hungry with 
good meat from his table. Truly it is a 
glorious work, when rightly understood 
and appreciated, and I thank the dear Lord 
for the opportunity of being used in it. 

I remain, Your brother in Christ, 
JOSEPH WINTER. 

page 397 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I wish to 
ask a few questions in regard to some of 
the teachings in the WATCH TOWER and 
the Tracts. Should not we who come out 
of Babylon have some organization? [See 
TOWER, Sept. '93.] What is the form of 
worship followed in your Allegheny Church? 

We have started a Bible class at our house. 
We meet with a few interested neighbors 
every Thursday evening. Any suggestions 
as to what plan would be most conducive 
to our spiritual growth will be gladly considered. 
I do not want to take much of 



your valuable time. If the questions within 
are of enough general interest to be treated 
in the TOWER, I shall not expect a personal 
answer to this letter. 

I am in sympathy with the experiment of 
the TOWER Society in sending out teachers. 
May God be with the movement. With 
Christian love from Sister Heston and myself, 
I am yours in his name, 

E. H. HESTON. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-You will be glad 
to know that we are continuing our weekly 
class at Mr. Sheward's house. We are 
now two-thirds through VOL. II. of the 
DAWN. It took us a whole year to master 
VOL. I., there being so many points that 
required close and careful thought; but I 
think we were amply repaid for the course 
we adopted.... 

Believe me, Yours sincerely, 

T. W. TOWNSEND. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I enclose 
$ 1 .00 for which I would like you to send 
me copies of the October number of Z.W.T., 
which I will take great pleasure in circulating 
among my Methodist acquaintances 
—some ministers, who dare not express their 
sentiments for fear of the bishops. The 
"New Gospel" expressed in Bishop Foster's 
sermon, however, may loosen their bonds 
somewhat, and they may follow their leader, 
even though they have heretofore resisted 
the plain truth. The separating continues. 
"Forsake her, and let us go every one into 
his own country," is being fulfilled in Babylon. 
The "clouds of heaven" are growing 
thicker, and must soon burst into the final 
great storm. 

Yours in the patient waiting for the Kingdom, 
EDWIN C. MOTT. 

page 398 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I noticed in 
a recent TOWER the article on "The New 
Branch of the Work," but had not thought of 
myself as having a clear enough knowledge 
of divine truth, or as being otherwise competent 
to fulfil the requirements. However, 
I find that in some attempts to help others 



the Spirit of truth has greatly assisted me in 
bringing to my remembrance many truths of 
Scripture which I was not aware I had in my 
storehouse of memory. I have also found 
that all such efforts to help others have always 
been of great benefit to myself; and 
now, after prayer and consultation with the 
Lord, I feel that perhaps I can be used by 
Him to some extent at least in strengthening 
some of the "babes in Christ," by endeavoring 
to help them to a clearer understanding 
of God's wonderful plan. It is 
only by the grace of God that I can say that 
the eight qualifications are applicable to me; 
but by his grace I hope to be able to meet 
these requirements, and so am glad to offer 
all the time at present at my disposal. 

A recent Sunday I spend very pleasantly and 
profitably with a brother and his wife whom 
it was my privilege to interest in the truth. 
We spent the afternoon with relatives who 
have greatly opposed them in the new light, 
and with whom he has had long controversies, 
which, he now sees, have only hindered 
them instead of assisting them as he 
was anxious to do. After considering the 
matter, I thought best to avoid all controversy, 
and seek to talk only on subjects on 
which we could agree, not missing opportunities 
to show forth the love of Christ and to 
impress them with the fact that we had 
been with Him. The result was a very 
pleasant afternoon, and a cordial invitation 
to come again. 

May the dear Lord bless you and Sister 
Russell, and all of the laborers, and help 
each one of us in these trying times to stand 
firmly on the rock, Christ Jesus our Ransom. 

Your brother in Christ, A. L. WITTER. 



R1747: page 398 

DEAR BROTHER:-Christian love and 
greetings from me and mine to you and 
yours. The "transforming" influence of the 
"renewing of our minds" draws us nearer 
in love to all who are probationary members 
of the Church, as well as to Jesus and those 
with him who have been changed. 

The work of preparing the Bride is wonderful, 
and the new plan of sending out 
Brethren to strengthen and help those who 
are striving seems very wise, though the risk 
is apparent. From a little experience of our 



own it seems timely. We have found that 
the lack of many is systematic Bible study. 

As a confirmation which you did not 
mention [See TOWER, Aug. 1, "Is Death a 
Penalty or a Consequence?], as to Satan's 
power being exerted through various kinds 
of insect and other life, see Luke 10:17-20 
(Diaglott). Verse 19 reads, "Behold, I have 
given you authority to tread on serpents and 
scorpions, and on all that power which is 
of the enemy"— showing that those injurious 
creatures are counted part of his power. 

In our reading my wife and I came across 
the best proof we have yet found that the 
"remnants" of the so-called "ten lost tribes" 
were really in Palestine. Paul, in his speech 
before Agrippa, says, "And now I stand and 
am judged for the hope of the promise made 
of God to our fathers; unto which promise 
our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day 
and night, hope to come."— Acts 26:6. 

Our daily prayer is for you and Sister 
Russell and those associated with you, that 
you may indeed be led of the holy Spirit. 

Yours in the love of Christ, 

CHARLES C. BELL. 



page 398 

GENTLEMEN:— I have recently received 
two or three tracts from you, one of which, 
entitled "Do You Know," is of a character 
to command my attention and enlist my confidence. 
Your liberal attitude and anti-sectarian 
spirit, with your advanced Scriptural 
declarations, commend your publications 
sufficiently to induce me to seek a more intimate 
acquaintance with your Society and 
from what you assert in relation to the 
book, MILLENNIAL DAWN, I am induced to 
send for it; and, as the price is not given, I 
enclose one dollar, and you can send me 
anything that you consider "meat in due 
season." 

I am poor in spirit and purse, but rich in 
faith— looking for the coming of Jesus 
Christ, the King of kings, and loving his 
appearing. I belong to no sectarian organization: 
if a member of the Church, it is 
the one that fled into the wilderness from 
the face of the serpent, the only door to 
which is Christ. 

If your Society publishes a serial, send me 
a number. I will endeavor to help sustain 



every means of grace that seems to accord 
with Bible truth and "the faith once delivered 
to the saints." C. D. M 



page 399 

INDEX FOR ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

VOL. XV., 1894. 



JANUARY 1. 

Special Items: A New Leaf, etc 2 

View from the Tower 3 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 8 

The Book of Genesis (I.) 9 

Bible Study: The First Adam 12 

" " Adam's Sin and God's Grace 13 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 15 

He Calleth for Thee (Poem) 16 

JANUARY 15. 

Special Items: Good Shepherd Calendars, etc 18 

Are there Few that be Saved? 19 

The Future— Social and Religious 22 

A Savior and a Great One (Poem) 25 

Echoes from the Parliament of Religions 25 

Bible Study: The Murder of Abel 28 

" " God's Covenant with Noah 29 

" " Beginning of the Hebrew Nation 30 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 31 

FEBRUARY 1. 

Special Items: Senator Peffer's Foreview, etc 34 

"Hallelujah! What a Savior!" 35 

The Book of Genesis (II.) 43 

Bible Study: God's Covenant with Abraham 44 

" " God's Judgment on Sodom 45 

Keep Orders Separate 48 

FEBRUARY 15. 

Special Items: The European Outlook, etc 50 

Keep Your Eyes Open 51 

A Serious Question 56 

Faithful over Few (Poem) 57 

The Work for a Converted Will 57 

The Book of Genesis (III.) 59 

Bible Study: Trial of Abraham's Faith 61 

" " Selling the Birthright 62 



Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 64 

MARCH 1. 

Special Items: The Pope and the Bible, etc 66 

The Annual Memorial Supper 67 

The Unjust Steward 69 

Applying Truth to One's Self. 70 

Personal Liberty,— Its Responsibility 73 

Bible Study: Jacob at Bethel 76 

" " Wine a Mocker 77 

" " The Resurrection of Christ 78 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 79 

MARCH 15. 

Special Items: Binding the Bundles Tighter, etc 82 

Touched with the Feeling of our Infirmities 83 

The Financial Strain World-wide 85 

Striving Lawfully 86 

Behold the Bridegroom! (Poem) 88 

Our Sufficiency is of God 89 

Bible Study: Jacob's Prevailing Prayer 91 

" " Envy and Discord 93 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 94 

APRIL 1. 

Special Items: The Memorial Supper, etc 98 

The Import of the Emblems 99 

Feet Washing 101 

Bear Up the Feet 103 

Lest Ye Enter into Temptation 104 

The Work in England 105 

Bible Study: Joseph Sold into Egypt 109 

" " Joseph Ruler in Egypt Ill 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 1 12 

APRIL 15. 

Special Items: Watch with me One Hour! etc 114 

Immortality 115 

Jonathan Edwards Much Blinded 123 

Bible Study: Joseph Forgiving his Brethren 124 

" " Joseph's Last Days 126 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 127 

APRIL 25. (Extra.) 

A Conspiracy Exposed and Harvest Siftings. 

MAY 1-15. 

Special Items: Your Letter Received, etc 130 

The Shepherd and the Sheep 131 

Who hath Heard such a Thins? 134 



Vessels unto Honor 137 

The Memorial Celebrated 139 

Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord 140 

Bible Study: Israel in Egypt 141 

" " The Childhood of Moses 142 

" " Moses Sent as a Deliverer 143 

JUNE 1. 

Special Items: Letters of Congratulation, etc 146 

Cast Not Away Your Confidence 147 

The Retributive Character of Divine Law 149 

In My Name (Poem) 154 

The Test of Endurance 155 

Buying and Selling 156 

The Truth Shall Make you Free 158 

Bible Study: The Passover Instituted 159 

" " Passage of the Red Sea 160 

" " The Woes of the Drunkard 160 

" " Review 160 

To bring the Greek Church under Vatican Control 160 

page 400 

JUNE 11. 

Special Items: Earth's Labor Pangs, etc 162 

Oh! Give Thanks unto the Lord; for He is Good 163 

The Voice of the Church 175 

JULY 1. 

Special Items: The Assassination of Carnot, etc 210 

The Prize Set Before Us 21 1 

With a Pure Heart Fervently 214 

Retrospection (Poem) 215 

The Concision and the Circumcision 217 

What Shall I Render? 218 

In the Days of thy Youth 218 

Pleasing in His Sight 220 

Bible Study: The Birth of Jesus 221 

" " Presentation in the Temple 223 

" " Visit of the Wise Men 223 

JULY 15. 

Special Items: Can it be Delayed until 1914? etc 226 

View from the Tower: Labor Pangs of this Kosmos 227 

Angels which Kept not their First Estate 231 

Bible Study: The Flight into Egypt 239 

" " The Youth of Jesus 240 

AUGUST 1. 

Special Items: Go Labor On: Spend and be Spent 242 

Is Death a Penalty or a Consequence? 243 



The Prince of this World 249 

Bible Study: The Baptism of Jesus 252 

" " The Temptation of Jesus 253 

AUGUST 15. 

Special Items: A Remarkable Narrative, etc 258 

Bringing Back the King 259 

Forgiveness versus Malice 267 

Bible Study: The First Disciples of Jesus 269 

" " Our Lord's first Miracle 270 

" " Jesus Cleansing the Temple 271 

" " Jesus and Nicodemus 272 

SEPTEMBER 1. 

Special Items: The "Do You Know?" Tract, etc 274 

If Ye be Christ's 275 

Once in Grace Always in Grace 277 

Disintegration in the Church of Rome 282 

Religion in America: A Japanese View 285 

Upon this Generation 285 

Missionary Life 287 

Another Branch of the Work 287 

Bible Study: Jesus at Jacob's Well 288 

SEPTEMBER 15. 

Special Items: Why hast Thou Forsaken Me? etc 290 

Think on These Things 291 

These Many Years (Poem) 293 

The Pope's Encyclical 293 

Sunday Evening Revery 296 

Introducing T.T. Society Representatives 297 

Palestinian Colonization 300 

Honorable Service 301 

Bible Study: Daniel and his Companions 302 

" " Review 303 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 303 

OCTOBER 1. 

Special Items: Church and State in Italy, etc 306 

Bishop Foster's New Gospel, No. 1 307 

Thou hast the Words of Eternal Life 309 

Judgment— Its Use and Abuse 311 

If Thou Knewest the Gift of God 313 

Agree with thine Adversary Quickly 314 

Alexander Campbell's Views 316 

A New Branch of Service (Further Explained) 317 

Bible Study: Our Lord's Visit to Nazareth 317 

" " The Draught of Fishes 320 

OCTOBER 15. 

Special Items: Jewish Nationalization Movement, etc 322 



Bishop Foster's New Gospel, No. 2 323 

The Power of Faith 328 

Letters of Introduction 330 

Let Patience Have her Perfect Work 332 

A Sabbath in Capernaum 334 

A Paralytic Healed 334 

Out of Darkness into His Marvelous Light (Letters) 335 

NOVEMBER l-15.-Double Number. 

Special Items: To New Subscribers, etc 338 

The Divine Law— Universal and Eternal; the Law 
Given at Sinai; the Fourth Commandment; the 
Law of the New Covenant; Romans VII.; Objections 

of Seventh Day Adventists Answered 339 

Bible Study: The Twelve Chosen 364 

" " The Sermon on the Mount 365 

" " Opposition to Christ 366 

" " Christ's Testimony of John 368 

DECEMBER 1. 

Special Items: Change of Address, Spread of Ritualism 370 

The Freedom of Christ's Bond-Servants 371 

Perfecting Holiness 374 

That I may Know Him (Poem) 376 

The Progress of Religious Union 376 

Bible Study: Christ Teaching by Parables 380 

" " The Twelve Sent Forth 384 

DECEMBER 15. 

Items: Good Hopes for '95; Jerusalem to be Probed 386 

Who Shall Ascend? 387 

Think it Not Strange 389 

A Thorn in the Flesh 390 

The Lord is my Shepherd 392 

Z.W.T. Tract Society's Annual Report 392 

Bible Study: The Prince of Peace 395 

" " Review 396 

Encouraging Words from Faithful Workers (Letters) 397 


