A Time to Choose
“God proceeded to create the man in his image, in God’s image he created him; male and female he created them.”—Genesis 1:27.
THOSE familiar words in the opening pages of the Bible set out one of the grandest things that God “has made pretty in its time”—bringing into existence a perfect human couple, Adam and Eve. (Ecclesiastes 3:11) As their Creator, Jehovah God said to them: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.”—Genesis 1:28.
In that statement to the first human pair, God made known his purpose to them. They were to multiply and to care for the earth, turning it into a global paradise home for themselves and their offspring. There was no predetermined time for them to live and to die. Instead, God placed before them a marvelous prospect. By making the right choice and remaining in harmony with God, they could live in perfect peace and happiness forever.
They chose badly, and as a result, old age and death have been the lot of all humans. In fact, the patriarch Job acknowledged: “Man, born of woman, is short-lived and glutted with agitation.” (Job 14:1) What went wrong?
“Through one man sin entered into the world and death through sin, and thus death spread to all men because they had all sinned,” explains the Bible. (Romans 5:12) That “one man,” of course, was Adam, who deliberately chose to violate God’s simple yet clear command. (Genesis 2:17) By his choice, Adam forfeited his opportunity to live forever on a paradise earth. He also forfeited for his offspring a precious inheritance and passed on to them the curse of sin and death. It appeared that everything was lost—or was it?
A Time for Renewal
Millenniums later, the psalmist was inspired to write: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29) As assurance that his Edenic promise will be fulfilled, God’s Word beautifully describes what he will soon do: “He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more, neither will mourning nor outcry nor pain be anymore. The former things have passed away.” Then God himself says: “Look! I am making all things new.”—Revelation 21:4, 5.
Since there is an appointed time for everything, the question that logically arises is, When will that time of renewal come, so that the wonderful promises by God will come true? The publishers of this magazine, Jehovah’s Witnesses, have been endeavoring to call to people’s attention that we are living in what the Bible calls “the last days” and that the time for God to take action to ‘make all things new’ is at hand. (2 Timothy 3:1) We urge you to examine the Bible and learn about the wonderful prospects that can be yours. We also urge you to accept this invitation: “Search for Jehovah, you people, while he may be found. Call to him while he proves to be near.” (Isaiah 55:6) Rather than being decided by fate, your life and eternal prospects are in your own hands!
[Blurb on page 8]
“Look! I am making all things new”

