Why Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Take an Interest in You?
YOU may have had many calls from Jehovah’s witnesses and may have obtained several copies of the Watch Tower publications. So you perhaps wonder why the Witnesses keep calling.
Their interest is not in your money. Strange as it may sound in these days, Jehovah’s witnesses love you. They sincerely believe that your life is in real, imminent danger. They are trying hard to get that point across to you, because they also believe there is something very simple that you can do to protect yourself as well as your family.
You probably know that Jehovah’s witnesses are not trying to take some advantage of you. If you have them as neighbors you know that they are in most respects like yourself. They work to support themselves. But they are different from you in that they spend much time in talking to people about God’s purposes.
It is not that Jehovah’s witnesses would not enjoy spending more time in sitting at home near a warm fire, reading, or watching TV, or sitting in the shade with a cool drink. They could be at a park or resort, at the ocean or in the mountains. But they spend hours in calling on people like you, whom they may not know personally. Why?
They know, as you do, that this world has no love, and very few friendly or cheerful words. But they know the reason and the remedy. They know that this world is coming to a finish very soon. This knowledge is not due to superior wisdom on their part; it is because they read the only book that really makes sense in answering today’s problems and in showing what is ahead.
That book is the Bible. Jehovah’s witnesses fully believe the Bible and know that it is the only source that gives hope​—of good government, of health, life, peace on earth, and of freedom from fear and death. Not even a promise of all these things comes from anywhere else. Why not at least hear what the Witnesses have to say?
Most people who have an acquaintance with Jehovah’s witnesses say they are good people, orderly, having children that are usually well behaved. Their large conventions have been called models of peacefulness and order. Remarks have been made, even in the newspapers, to the effect that the Witnesses are courteous, clean, an example to the community, though (they often add) what the Witnesses believe is farfetched.
But, think. Is it not what a person believes and follows that makes him what he is? Jehovah’s witnesses are from all walks of life, and many of them formerly were not so courteous and peaceable. But what they have learned from God’s Word has changed their lives. One of Christ’s apostles expressed this truth to early Christians when he wrote:
“Deaden, therefore, your body members that are upon the earth as respects fornication, uncleanness, sexual appetite, hurtful desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry. On account of those things the wrath of God is coming. In those very things you, too, once walked when you used to live in them. But now really put them all away from you.”​—Col. 3:5-8.
This is what Jehovah’s witnesses have done by studying the Bible and endeavoring to apply it in their lives.
When Jehovah’s witnesses leave literature with you, have they accomplished their objective? Do you take literature to encourage them or to “help” them? The Witnesses appreciate your kindness. But they are not seeking help. It is what is in the literature that they want you to get. They know it can help you to see what to do in these dangerous times. It is to save your life. If you do not see that this present world system is going to pass off the scene, you and your family need to know it.
But this is not all. Without a good side to the picture, without a hope, you would not gain much. It is good news that the Bible gives​—news that this system of things will be replaced by God’s government over earth. This change will occur in this generation, when man is at his extremity, as he is now. (Matt. 24:34) Jehovah’s witnesses are not establishing that government. God is. They want to survive and live under it. Do you? Those who do must take a course different from what people in general are taking now.
Jehovah’s witnesses do not want you to join some sort of “movement.” They are not just a passing religious oddity. They are true Christians. They bring information so that you can act to protect yourself, altogether on your own decision, intelligently.
This kind of activity is nothing really new. Not only have the Witnesses been active for a century now, but earlier witnesses of Jehovah did the same thing at certain times of crisis. This is because God gives warning of what he is going to do.
God gave intensive warning, through Noah, to the preflood world for fifty years or more.​—2 Pet. 2:5.
Jesus Christ and his followers appealed to the Jewish people to save themselves from destruction with that generation. (Matt. 23:33-39; Acts 2:40) Why did Jesus do this? Because he loved the honesthearted people among them. Many heard, fled from Jerusalem and survived that city’s destruction by the Roman armies. More than a million persons died in that very small area encompassed by Jerusalem’s wall, and 97,000 were taken captives.
Now the clearing out of this world’s corrupt, ungodly system of things is at hand, in a severe time of trouble. But what will follow will be righteous living conditions under the heavenly Kingdom. During its rule God will resurrect the dead and set before them the opportunity to live forever. God’s blessing will result in perfect health and eternal life for obedient mankind.​—Rev. 21:3-5.
Do you want to live in such an earth? Jehovah’s witnesses want you to survive to enjoy it. They will do anything they can to help you. They will gladly spend their own time and money to call on you and study the Bible with you, free. Act now to “get a firm hold on the real life” for yourself and your family.​—1 Tim. 6:19.

