Effectively Using Brochures in July
1 To speed up the disciple-​making work, the organization has generously supplied many different publications. Among these are brochures that deal with specific themes, such as God’s purpose for the earth, the Trinity, God’s name, the Kingdom government, and God’s permission of wickedness. How can we use brochures effectively to help people in our territory?
2 The brochure Does God Really Care About Us? explains logically that a new world free from suffering is near. How might we introduce it? Suggestions can be found in the Reasoning book under the main heading “Suffering,” starting on page 393, or you may prefer the introduction on page 12 under the heading “Injustice/​Suffering.”
3 You might say:
▪ “Have you ever wondered: ‘Does God really care that humans experience injustice and suffering?’” Allow for response. Read Psalm 72:12-14. Then turn to page 22 of the brochure Does God Really Care About Us? and discuss the bold headings in part 10, as well as the meaning of the illustration on page 23. If the brochure is refused, why not offer a tract, such as Comfort for the Depressed or Life in a Peaceful New World?
4 Good government is a topic of concern today. Many wonder if man’s rule will unite the world. Helpful information is found under “Government,” beginning on page 152 of the Reasoning book.
5 You could ask:
▪ “Is it possible for humans to establish a government that will really bring lasting happiness?” Allow for reply, then ask: “What does the record of human history show?” Turn to Jeremiah 10:23, or turn to page 152 of the Reasoning book and read appropriate texts and comments. Thereafter, turn to pages 24 and 25 in the Government brochure and consider illustrations and scriptures. Explain how God’s government will unite people globally. If the householder does not accept the brochure, you may offer the tract Will this World Survive?
6 If there is fear of crime in your neighborhood, the following introduction may be appealing.
7 You could say:
▪ “Many people wonder, ‘If God is love, why does he permit wickedness?’ Have you wondered about this too?” Allow for comment, then say: “Notice that Proverbs 19:3 cautions against blaming God for the bad things people do.” After reading the text, direct attention to page 15 of the brochure “Look! I Am Making All Things New” and read paragraph 27. This could lead into a discussion of the succeeding paragraphs.
8 Using brochures to teach sheeplike people about the good news is something that all of us can do. We can help people from all walks of life to associate with God’s organization. It is our privilege to share in the preaching activity as we effectively use our timely brochures.

