Returning to Stimulate Interest in the Bible
1 Sometimes we meet people in field service who show some interest in the good news but are too busy to talk with us at the moment we call. Do we try to call back at another time to share the Kingdom message with them? Or perhaps we have an interesting conversation with a householder, but he does not accept any literature. Do we return to speak further with him about the truth?
2 It is important to cover our territory thoroughly and to follow up on all interest we may find. Do we make return visits only on those who accept a book or the magazines? If so, we could be overlooking some interested people. We certainly would not want to judge someone as being unworthy of further spiritual encouragement just because he did not accept literature. (Compare Romans 14:4.) Perhaps after our visit, a householder may think about what we said or may come to appreciate the effort we made to visit him. He may be more favorably disposed when we return.
3 When calling back on a person who was busy, you might say:
▪ “I’m glad to see you once again. The last time I was here, we couldn’t talk because you didn’t have time. I can see that you are a busy person, and I’ll be brief. Likely you are concerned about good health for yourself and for those you love. Well, did you know that God has promised to put an end to all sickness? Wouldn’t that be wonderful? [Allow for response.] Notice the point in paragraph 4 of this brochure entitled ‘Look! I Am Making All Things New.’” If time permits, read the paragraph and then consider one of the scriptures at the bottom of page 4 that depicts conditions in the new world. If the householder is receptive, you may be able to start a home Bible study.
4 When revisiting someone who accepted a tract, you could say something like this:
▪ “The last time I saw you, you accepted a copy of this tract entitled Who Really Rules the World? Do you find it hard to accept that Satan rules this world? [Allow for response.] Notice the first paragraph on page 6.” Read the paragraph, then ask: “Why would Satan want to deceive us?” After the householder replies, consider together the fourth paragraph on page 3. You may continue with a thorough consideration of the tract, or you may want to introduce the brochure Does God Really Care About Us? and consider paragraph 8 on page 13.
5 There is good reason to be positive and to follow up on the interest we find in our preaching work even if it is expressed in a limited way. It is important to care about others, to be motivated to help them learn the truth. Jehovah’s organization provides literature and suggested presentations that can aid us in making others conscious of their spiritual need.​—Matt. 5:3.
6 If you have had a pleasant conversation with someone who may be even slightly interested, do not neglect calling back to cultivate the interest. It may result in starting a home Bible study and putting someone on the way to life. We encourage all to continue sharing conscientiously in this lifesaving work.​—1 Tim. 4:16.

