Service Meetings for July
Week Starting July 5
Song 133
10 min: Local announcements and pertinent Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Have two or three publishers prepared to comment on how they make good use of older issues of magazines.
15 min: “Featuring Brochures to Search Out Interested Ones.” Question-​and-​answer coverage. Brochures referred to in paragraph 5 are: Should You Believe in the Trinity?, Does God Really Care About Us?, and The Government That Will Bring Paradise. Inform congregation about stock of brochures available, and ask for comments on which brochures would especially be appropriate for local territory. Enthusiastically encourage brothers to have full share in offering brochures during July. Also point out that many times people who accept a brochure would like to have magazines also.
20 min: “Effectively Using Brochures in July.” Discuss points with congregation, and demonstrate presentations in paragraphs 3, 5, and 7. Encourage good preparation.
Song 30 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 12
Song 25
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and any donation acknowledgments. Remind congregation of arrangements for field service, and discuss various talking points from magazines.
20 min: “Returning to Stimulate Interest in the Bible.” After brief introduction, demonstrate return visit on someone who showed interest but did not accept literature. Also, demonstrate how to call back on person who was too busy to talk but who accepted tract Who Really Rules the World? In each case, show how publisher initiates conversation and stimulates interest.
15 min: Local needs, or interview two or three publishers on how they learned the truth. Such experiences should be selected ahead of time and should show effectiveness of the ministry.
Song 191 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 19
Song 136
15 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Also, discuss with audience “New Circuit Assembly Program.”
15 min: “Can You Do It?” Discuss with audience. Interview one or two regular pioneers or one or two publishers who serve as auxiliary pioneers from time to time. Have them relate how they made decision to do more and how they organize their activities.
15 min: Talk by elder on personal cleanliness, based on The Watchtower of June 1, 1989, pages 15-20. Talk should be presented in a kind manner and with good judgment.
Song 165 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 26
Song 170
10 min: Local announcements. Elder considers congregation’s June field service report, giving commendation and encouragement. Also, discuss two or three appropriate talking points from magazines for use in field service this weekend.
15 min: “Cross,” Reasoning book, pages 89-93. To be handled as return visit on householder who accepted the “Look!” brochure. Householder points to page 17 of brochure and asks why it depicts Jesus on a stake instead of on a cross. Brother uses Reasoning book to help householder acquire Bible viewpoint.
20 min: “Making Good Use of The Watchtower and Awake!” Question-​and-​answer consideration. Help all to appreciate the many opportunities we may have daily to place magazines, current as well as older issues.
Song 192 and concluding prayer.

