The 1980 “Divine Love” District Conventions
HOW little love there is in the world today! Selfishness, the very opposite of love, has gone to seed. No wonder that there are confusion, unhappiness, friction and strife on every hand. It is as if, for generations, men have been sowing to the wind by all manner of self-interest and are now reaping a whirlwind harvest of immorality, suffering, crime, wars and death.
In the world but no part of it are Jesus Christ’s true followers, the Christian witnesses of Jehovah. They have the mark that Jesus said would identify his true followers: “I am giving you a new commandment, that you love one another; just as I have loved you, that you also love one another. By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—John 13:34, 35.
One of the finest ways in which we can manifest this love is by coming together regularly at our congregation meetings. Surely those who love one another want to be with one another. Such being together can be not only enjoyable but also profitable. As the apostle Paul said: “I am longing to see you . . . in order for you to be made firm; or, rather, that there may be an interchange of encouragement among you, by each one through the other’s faith, both yours and mine.”​—Rom. 1:11, 12.
There is no question that the “Divine Love” District Conventions beginning this summer will furnish many fine opportunities for individual Christians to associate with fellow believers and to have an interchange of encouragement. Especially will the program presented from the platform​—the talks, the dramas, the demonstrations and the experiences—​serve to upbuild all those present. Nor should we overlook the spiritual stimulation that we receive from the fine prayers and the singing of Kingdom songs together. Of course, the degree to which each one will be edified will largely depend upon his appreciation and spirituality.
In view of the way Jehovah God has bestowed his love upon us, should we not be concerned about growing in love for Jehovah God, loving him with all our heart and soul, with all our mind and strength? And should we not concern ourselves with loving our fellow Christians, and not only as ourselves, but even more than ourselves, having the self-sacrificing love that Jesus and his apostles expressed?
To the extent that we are spiritual persons, to the extent that we are conscious of our spiritual needs, to the extent that we appreciate sacred things and that we do not live by bread alone, but by every word coming forth from Jehovah’s mouth, to that extent we will be putting forth efforts to attend one or more of these conventions. It will take time, effort and expense to attend, but it will be worth it, yes, more than worth it. We can look forward to Jehovah God’s opening the windows of heaven and pouring out upon us copious showers of spiritual blessings. (Mal. 3:10) Make certain to be there for the very opening program on Thursday morning. You will be amply repaid if you are present.
The conventions are scheduled for the times and places announced in The Watchtower of February 1, 1980, but with the following adjustments:
Convention Relocated
July 17-20: FREMONT, CALIF. (Korean only), Jehovah’s Witnesses Assembly Hall, 43400 Osgood Rd. (Moved to Long Beach, Calif., as shown below)
Conventions Adjusted or Confirmed
June 12-15: PONTIAC, MICH., Silverdome, 1200 Featherstone.
June 18-21 (Note: Wednesday through Saturday): PROVIDENCE, R.I., Civic Center, One LaSalle Sq.
July 17-20: EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., Giants Stadium, New Jersey Sports Complex. LONG BEACH, CALIF. (Korean language added), Convention Center Arena, 300 E. Ocean Blvd.
July 23-26 (Note: Wednesday through Saturday): SEATTLE, WASH., Seattle Center Coliseum, 305 Harrison.

