Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Witnessing in Brazil
BRAZIL is included in Jesus’ commission to his followers: “Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations.” (Matthew 28:19) The good news being preached in that country by more than 158,000 Jehovah’s Witnesses has resulted in some heartwarming experiences.
For example, a Witness in Sobradinho desired to help her family learn the truth of the Bible. She first helped two brothers and one sister-in-law in Brasília to learn the truth and be baptized. Then she visited her relatives in Teresina, Piauí, 1,100 miles (1,800 km) distant, who were practicing Catholics and did not like the Bible message proclaimed by Jehovah’s Witnesses. Praying for Jehovah’s guidance, she explained to her mother why it was wrong Biblically to eat blood. Impressed, her mother asked: “Why have not the priests taught us this?”
The mother asked for more information from the Bible, and a meeting was arranged for that evening. Her mother invited neighbors and relatives to hear the discussion, and they were all impressed. During the 15 days that this sister was with her relatives, she had Bible discussions every evening with 17 persons present. The result? Twelve Bible studies were arranged for the local Witnesses to conduct. Three students have already been baptized in symbol of their dedication to Jehovah, two others are planning to be baptized at the next circuit assembly and two more are making progress.
An elderly sister in Rio de Janeiro takes advantage of early-morning witnessing on Copacabana Beach and other beaches, as well as in the public squares. She meets housemaids, baby-sitters, bank clerks and rich ladies who take their morning stroll on the boardwalks, and she conducts Bible studies sitting on benches at these places. Several people have learned the truth from her and are now Jehovah’s Witnesses.​—Proverbs 1:20.
As Jehovah’s Witnesses, we want to take advantage of every opportunity to help others learn about the good news. This includes informal witnessing, which one brother did in Macapá, a city in the Amazon region.
Returning from his regular witnessing work, he saw a man sitting in the doorway of a grocery store reading a book on the Bible. The brother approached and asked him if he liked to read the Bible, and the man said he did. “Would you like to have a Bible course?” the brother asked him. “Yes, but how much does it cost?” On being informed that it was free, the man accepted. Soon he and his family began to attend meetings at the Kingdom Hall. He made adjustments in his life to conform to Bible principles, enrolled in the Theocratic Ministry School and began sharing in field service. One year later he was baptized in symbol of his dedication. All of this happened because a brother took advantage of informal witnessing.
Truly, Jehovah is gathering in the “other sheep.” (John 10:16) And happy are we if we have a share in this work.

