VOL. XXIX MAY 1 No. 9 
A.D. 1908-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 131 

Capitalists Warned by Miners 131 

Ministers of Christ Hypnotists 131 

The Egotism of Higher Critics 132 

Will Episcopalians and Greek Catholics Unite?. 132 
"In My Father's House" 132 

The New Way of Life 133 

"Greater Works Shall Ye Do" 134 

Yearly Requests for Pilgrim Visits 135 

The Holy Spirit Promised 136 

"He will Reprove the World" 137 

Our Lord Betrayed and Denied 139 

"The Hour of Temptation that Shall Try" 140 

Berean Studies on the Atonement 143 

page 130 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



R4164 : page 130 

NEW POSTAL REGULATIONS 



A new postoffice ruling should be known to all our readers. 
Hereafter newspapers and magazines will not be allowed 
to keep on their lists the addresses of expired subscriptions 
—except for a few months: semi-monthlies, such as the 
WATCH TOWER, three months; quarterlies, such as the Old 
Theology, six months. If your papers stop coming you will 
know the reason why. 

Subscription lists hereafter must contain the addresses 
of only those who (1) have paid their money, or (2) have 
definitely asked for credit, or (3) whose subscriptions have 
been paid for them at their request. The majority of our subscriptions 
come under either the first or second of these rules, 
and we here remark that the publishers are at liberty to extend 
a credit for another and another year, if the subscriber so 
requests, but not otherwise. As for the third class; these subscriptions 
of the Lord's poor are paid for them gladly by 
Tract Fund donations of those more favored financially. But 
do not forget that these also under the new regulations must 
write us yearly requesting this. Look at the address label on 
your paper and note thereon the time of expiration of your 
subscription and act accordingly. We prefer to have the "Lord's 
poor" write us in May each year. As paid subscriptions come 
at the close of the year this helps to divide the office labors. 
Remember that we like to have on our List the names of all 
the interested. Those who donate to the Fund which pays your 
subscription are delighted to have the privilege of thus serving 
the fellow-members of the Body of Christ. Therefore let 
no feeling of false modesty hinder you from making request 
under these terms if you need so to do. You can no 
more afford to do without the spiritual food than to starve 
naturally. 



R4163 :page 131 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CAPITALISTS WARNED BY MINERS 



THE United Mine Workers' Journal, of February 
25th last, under the caption, "A Portentous 
Outlook," says:— 

"No one who is able to read the signs of the times can 
fail to be impressed with the portentous features that loom up 



from all sides of the industrial horizon. It does seem that 
the 'captains of industry' are determined to force a crisis in 
the affairs of this nation. 

"Those who look behind the superficial, see in all this an 
attempt to punish the laboring classes, thus striking President 
Roosevelt over their heads, in order to discredit his policy. 
If in order that industry shall go on unchecked the food poisoner, 
the bank and railroad wreckers must be permitted to 
carry on their schemes unchecked and unopposed that fact cannot 
be too quickly known. The ruthless reduction in wages, 
the provocative methods employed to exasperate the working-men 
into strikes seem to point, as true as a needle to the pole, 
to the fact that we are facing an industrial and political crisis. 

"They are making the mistakes of their lives. They are 
but a drop in the bucket, as they will learn to their sorrow, 
should they press this matter to a head. It is well for these 
men to remember that the creature is never greater than the 
creator. If they knew what was fermenting under the surface 
they would come to their senses at once, a thing they should 
do before it is too late. 



In publishing this item, the WATCH TOWER is not 
to be understood to endorse all of its statements. Much 
can be said on both sides of every controversy, and not 
infrequently both sides are extreme and wide of the 
truth, which lies between their extremes. The rabid, 
bitter utterances of many laboring men are much to be 
deplored. Calmer words and arguments and votes at 
the poles would be the more sensible course. Likewise, 
capitalists are sometimes credited with very unwise 
and provocative language, calculated to stir up 
strife. But what can we expect? These people, rich 
and poor, are listed on the world's census reports as 
"Christians" of various denominations; yet but few of 
them know even the first principles of the doctrines of 
Christ. How can we expect of them the fruits of 
God's holy Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, 
brotherly kindness, love? 

A brother, a railroad engineer, who is in close 
touch with fellow-laborers, tells us that the spirit of 
unrest and of bitterness toward the wealthy is growing. 
He cited as an illustration the fact that while one 
department of the railroad business was closed recently 
to curtail expenses, and although the employees 
were given work at another place, nevertheless, the official 
in charge of the transfer so realized the spirit of 
animosity prevalent that he took two trusted men as a 
guard each visit while superintending the transfer. 

MINISTERS OF CHRIST HYPNOTISTS 



"Faith and hypnotism will be used by the Rev. Dr. Robert 



MacDonald, pastor of the Washington Avenue Baptist Church, 
Brooklyn, to cure hysteria, insomnia, neurasthenia, drunkenness, 
religious melancholia and suicidal mania. 

"Dr. MacDonald announced his intention to his congregation 
and will begin his work today. 

"The faith-in-God-hypnotic-suggestion idea was given to 
Dr. MacDonald by the Rev. Dr. Worcester, of Boston. Dr. 
Worcester has accomplished some almost miraculous cures by 
this method, and he explained it to Dr. MacDonald, who spent 
ten days with him."— N.Y. Journal. 



We cannot prove our fears that hypnotism is a 
demoniacal power, but as previously set forth in these 
columns, such is our belief. All so-called "psychic 
powers" by which wonders can be worked associate 
themselves more or less distinctly with Spiritism, respecting 
the source of which we have no room for 
doubt. 

This does not signify that the ministers above 
named (and all others who practice hypnotism), are 
intelligently serving satanic interests. God forbid! Our 
thought is that "the god of this world has blinded their 
(mental) eyes." We are, as our readers well know, expecting 
wonderful developments along all "occult" and 
"black art" and spiritist lines during the next few years, 
as a part of the great "hour of temptation that shall try 
them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth."— 
Rev. 3:10. 

To be forewarned is to be forearmed. Too great 
carefulness respecting every word and act and plan is 
not possible. Temptations may come along the line of 

R4163 : page 132 

our natural weaknesses, but may be even more effective 

against us along the lines of our greatest 

strength of character, because less carefully guarded. 

The Apostle says, "When I am weak, then I am 

strong"— because more carefully leaning on the everlasting 

arms in the face of such besetments. Let us 

consider it the reverse way— when I am strong, then 

am I weak, because less likely to be on guard and to 

be relying on our Lord's assistance. "Without me ye 

can do nothing." 

THE EGOTISM OF HIGHER CRITICS 



The editor of a local journal, without pretending 
any special skill as a theologian, sees clearly one 
thing at least, that the Higher Critics are quite conceited 
when, although unable to agree among themselves, 
they invite the world to allow them to make a 



new Bible out of the old one. They claim that what 
others do not possess in the way of spiritual intuition, 
they each do possess: not only enough for their own 
needs, but a supply, also, for the whole world. He says: 

"Either Higher Criticism is a good thing or it is not— 
either desirable or undesirable. At any rate it has become the 
great issue of the day in theology. Disturbing or otherwise 
it is too prominent in the thoughts of the world for a paper 
that pretends to reflect public opinion to ignore it. Our exchanges 
almost without exception contain letters and editorials 
upon this most important subject. In the meantime, what 
are we to do with it? It is being said more and more by 
clergymen that only the technically proficient are at all qualified 

R4164 : page 132 

to express an opinion upon the correctness or otherwise 
of criticism high or low. 

"With the Higher Critics and their followers the development 
of man is still proceeding. What it may result in is not 
yet foreseen. So far, however, it has resulted in a critical attitude 
toward a book called the Bible, out of which by dint of 
paring and padding they propose to make the real Word of 
God. They feel themselves inspired so to do by the inward 
unfolding to them of the Divine purpose. The lower critics 
regard all this as presumption, as an extra-biblical attempt to 
give to the world a true revelation. 

"There is no one to say, however, where it should at any 
time end. The reason of the individual reader, these critics 
maintain, is necessarily that reader's final court of appeal. Yet, 
as we remarked before, even this does not seem to be permitted 
by them, since they also maintain that the individual reader 
may not be qualified. We have then in the last analysis a 
constituted hierarchy of Higher Critics who do not agree 
among themselves and cannot agree farther than to say that 
their theory in manner of interpreting is identical, even if their 
interpretations prove contradictory." 

WILL EPISCOPALIANS AND GREEK CATHOLICS 
UNITE? 



The Toronto Mail and Empire prints the following 
report and sees in it a prospect of a great church 
union: 

"The first organization of the Anglican and Eastern Orthodox 
Union in this country was perfected at an enthusiastic 
meeting held this afternoon at the parish-house of the Transfiguration 
and attended by many well-known Episcopalian 
churchmen and laymen, and has, it is understood, the entire 
sympathy of Bishop Potter and other high Church officials, 
and is said to be the culmination of a movement which originated 
in the house of the bishops of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church. It follows closely upon the return to this country 
of the Rev. Dr. Charles C. Grafton, Bishop of Fond du Lac, 



Wis., who made an extended trip through Russia and the 
East, carrying the greetings and kindly expressions of the 
Protestant Episcopal Church of America. 

"The Church at large, which is not advised of the deliberations 
of the House of Bishops, has always understood that 
Bishop Grafton was sent abroad to learn the attitude of the 
Eastern Orthodox Churches toward closer union with the 
Protestant Episcopal or Anglican Church. Since Bishop 
Grafton's return he had made it plain that his reception from 
the high officials of the Russian and Greek Catholic Churches 
was most cordial, and that their sentiment was strong in 
favor of closer union." 



R4164 : page 132 

"IN MY FATHER'S HOUSE" 

-JOHN 14: 1-14. -MAY 3- 

Golden Text:— "In my Father's house are many mansions." 

AFTER the Lord had washed the disciples' feet, 
and had given the sop to Judas, who then 
went out, and he had told the disciples that 
they all would be offended that night because of him, 
and had answered Peter that he would deny his Lord 
thrice before the cock crew, we may well suppose that 
the hearts of the eleven were heavy, disturbed, troubled 
with fearful forebodings. Had they indeed been deluded 
or had they misunderstood the Master when he told them 
that he was the Messiah, the heir of the Kingdom, and 
that they should sit with him in his throne? How could 
they interpret his language, seeing that only five days 
before he had received the hosannas of the multitude 
as the Son of David, the King of Israel, when riding on 
the ass? What could it mean that the Master was now 
"exceeding sorrowful" and spoke of betrayal, and of 
their dispersion and of his own death? 

It was in answer to these their troubled thoughts 
that our Lord spoke to them the beautiful words of 
comfort and consolation recorded in the 14th, 15th, 16th 
and 17th chapters of John's Gospel, beginning— "Let 
not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God, believe 
also in me." 

The apostles were already consecrated to God as 
his servants, before they came in contact with Jesus; 
they already believed in God, trusted in him, were Israelites 
indeed without guile. This is testified to further 
by our Lord's prayer, in which he says, "Thine 
they were and thou gavest them me." The trouble in 
their hearts was not in respect to the foundations of 
their hopes, for these were all established. They not 
only knew and trusted God, but knew and trusted also 
the promises of God respecting the Kingdom and the 



blessing that should come to all the families of the 
earth through it. The whole question before their 
minds was respecting Jesus: Was he indeed the Messiah, 
or had they built some false expectations upon 
his wonderful words and deeds? How should they 
understand it if now, after three and a half years of 
ministry, he should die at the hands of his enemies, instead 

R4164 : page 133 

of establishing his Kingdom and subduing all 
things to himself, as they had expected? He had said 
that he was going away, and that whither he would go 
they could not come. How could they understand these 
matters and harmonize them? 

"YE MUST BE BORN AGAIN" 

They had not yet learned the meaning of the words 
which, early in his ministry, our Lord had addressed to 
Nicodemus— "Except a man be born again, he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God"; "Except a man be born of 
water and of spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of 
God." (John 3:3,5.) But these were spiritual truths, 
and could not be appreciated until Pentecost would 
bring them the anointing of the holy Spirit, and permit 
them to "comprehend with all saints the lengths and 
breadths and heights and depths" of the divine plan. 
But they did need some comfort, and the Master proceeded 
to give them the best and the strongest spiritual 
food, instruction, that they were able to receive. He 
had many things to tell them, but they could not bear 
them then, could not understand them, until the anointing 
of the holy Spirit should prepare their hearts. 

Our Lord began by reviving in them their faith in 
the Father and in his plan, saying, Ye believe in God, 
—believe also in me: recognize the fact that all of the 
Father's plan will be accomplished, and inasmuch as 
you have seen my loyalty to the Father in word and in 
deed, and inasmuch as you have seen the Father's 
power unto good works manifested in me, let faith's 
anchor hold; continue to trust me, continue to have 
confidence, and you shall have a blessing; wait for the 
development of the divine plan, and it will more than 
satisfy your highest expectations. You are perplexed 
because I said that I am going away— going to the 
Father, but let me explain to you that my going is in 
your interest: I go to prepare a place for you in my 
Father's house of many apartments; and as surely as 
I do this I will come again and receive you unto myself, 
that we may henceforth be together forever. 

Thus, in a few words, the Master declared the 
work of the Gospel Age, pointing to his second advent 
and the glorification of the Church at the end of the 
age. He did not here stop to give them detailed explanations 
of the trials of faith and of patience through 



which they must pass; this he had done on other occasions, 
warning and cautioning them (Matt. 24); now 
their hearts were troubled, and he would merely console 
them with the assurance that his going away was 
necessary, that his second coming would be certain, 
and that the gathering of all to everlasting fellowship 
with him in the mansions prepared was assured. 

THE FATHER'S HOUSE IS REALLY THE UNIVERSE 

Figuratively speaking, heaven is God's throne, the 
earth his footstool. Divine providence has made abundant 
arrangement for the everlasting blessedness of all 
the sons of God. In the divine arrangement a provision 
had been made for man when in harmony with 
God, before the fall, but by reason of sin all of man's 
rights to a place in the everlasting abode of the just 
had been forfeited, and at the time of our dear Redeemer's 
discourse he was in the world for the very purpose 
of redeeming man and all his forfeited rights and possessions. 
(Luke 19:10; Eph. 1:14.) The purchase had 
not yet been completed— our Lord intended to finish 
the arrangements therefor at Calvary within a few 
hours. But this would cost the sacrifice of himself— the 
full surrender of the man Christ Jesus as a man, and 
he could be with them no longer as a man. The hope 
was that by his obedience to the divine will he should 
not only redeem Adam and his race by the sacrifice of 
himself, the man Christ Jesus, but that he should be 
raised from death to a new nature on a higher plane— 
the divine nature. Thus it was necessary that he should 
go away from them as the man Christ Jesus, and that 
they should see him no more as a man, but that in 
due time, at his second coming, they also should be 
"changed" from human conditions to spirit conditions, 
and "be like him and see him as he is."— I John 3:2. 

It was necessary also that, after laying down his 
life, he should ascend to the Father and present his 
sacrifice on man's behalf— as man's ransom— and 
this he did: the Pentecostal blessing was the divine 
attestation that the sacrifice for sins was accepted of 
the Father on man's behalf, and that the blessings 
which came forth upon all who accepted Jesus as their 
Redeemer were the result. 

The interim between our Lord's death and his 
second advent is not long from any standpoint of faith. 
(1) It is not long from God's standpoint, for, as the 
Apostle Peter declares, "A thousand years are as one 
day" with the Lord. (2 Pet. 3:8.) (2) It is not long 
from the standpoint of true believers, for to none of 
them is the average of life and waiting above fifty 
years. We are not to take the longest and most incongruous 
view of this period— not to feel as though we had 
been living for eighteen hundred years in expectancy: 
"Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof," 
and sufficient to each individual is his own share in the 



trials, polishings and preparations for the coming of the 
Bridegroom to receive him unto himself. While it is 
an affair of the Church as a whole in one sense of the 
word, it is an individual affair in the most important 
sense of the word to each of the Lord's followers. 

THE NEW WAY OF LIFE 

"And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know." 
For three years our Lord had been making himself 
known to his disciples, and also making them acquainted 
with the Father's character; and hence, when he 
now informed them that he was going home to the 
Father, they were to feel that they knew the Father 
better than ever, and could better than ever appreciate 
such a home of righteousness and true happiness as he 
would provide and maintain. Moreover, their experience 
with the Lord, including his instructions and 
leading, had made them acquainted with the way to 
God, even though they did not recognize it as such. 
Hence our Lord's declaration, "I am the Way, the 
Truth and the Life— no man cometh to the Father but 
by me." 

Our Lord was the "Way" in that only through his 

R4164 : page 134 

sacrifice, the "ransom," imputing his merit to sinners, 

could they be made acceptable to the Father or be received 

back again into fellowship with him. He was 

the "Truth" in the sense that only through his words, 

his instructions, his guidance, could there be any hope 

of coming into harmony with the Spirit of God, the 

Spirit of truth. He was the "Life" in that all the race 

was dead, under divine sentence— had forfeited the 

rights of life— and none could come again into life conditions 

except through him, through the life which he 

gave for ours. Thus he is our Ransom or Way; our 

Teacher or Instructor in righteousness, in the truth, 

and our Life-giver— "Neither is there salvation in any 

other." "No man cometh unto the Father but by me" 

—no man need hope for any place in any of the mansions 

of the Father's house by any other way, by any 

other truth, by any other life.— Acts 4:12; John 14:6. 

And so also Christ will be the Way, the Truth and 
the Life to the world of mankind in the Millennial Age. 
And as the Lord, by his sacrifice and offering, opened 
for the Gospel Church, his Bride, an abode in the heavenly 
division of God's mansion or house, so by the 
same sacrifice he redeemed and will restore and give to 
mankind (to as many as obey him— Acts 3:23) a home 
in the earthly divisions of the Father's house, which 
will then again become a Paradise of God. 

Much as the apostles esteemed the Master, it was 
difficult for them to grasp the thought of his perfection 
—that he was the very image of God in the flesh. (I Tim. 3:16.) 



They had heard him tell, and indeed knew also 

from the Law, that "God is a spirit"— not flesh, and 

hence not visible. They had heard him declare previously, 

also, "No man hath seen God at any time; the 

only begotten Son,. ..he hath revealed him." (John 1:18.) 

But they had never grasped the thought that in 

seeing Jesus they saw the most that was possible to be 

seen of the divine character— its likeness, its perfect 

image in flesh. It was therefore necessary that the 

Master should call their attention to this fact, saying, 

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father." He did 

not mean them to understand that he was the Father, 

for this he had distinctly disclaimed repeatedly, telling 

them that the Father was greater, and that the works 

which he did were done by the Father's power. (John 14:28,10.) 

Nor did he mean them to understand that 

in seeing him they had seen an invisible being, as God 

is invisible. He did mean them to understand that 

in seeing his character, his motives, his love, they had 

seen a true expression that most faithfully represented 

the Father in all these particulars. 

He would have them understand the unity subsisting 
between the Father and himself; his will was buried 
into the Father's will, he would have no other: "Not 
my will but thine be done." He would have them understand 
that the Father, by his power, by his Spirit, 
dwelt in him also, so that his words and works fully 
and completely represented the Father. He declared 
to them that the works which they had witnessed during 
his ministry fully attested this power of the Highest 
resting upon him and operating through him. And 
this seems to have fully satisfied the apostles, and to 
have brought rest to their hearts. 

"GREATER WORKS SHALL YE DO" 

As a further explanation of the necessity for his going 
to the Father, our Lord declares that as a result 
of his going his followers should do greater works than 
he had done. It may perhaps be proper to think that 
some of these "greater works" will occur after the 
Kingdom has been established— the great work of awakening 
the world of mankind from the sleep of death 
and restoring the willing and obedient to the full perfection 
of human life. That, truly, will be a greater 
work than our Lord Jesus accomplished at his first advent, 
for then his greatest work was the awakening of 
some sleeping ones without bringing them to the full 
perfection of human nature. 

But in our opinion this is not the only sense in 
which the Lord's followers are to understand that their 
works shall be greater than those of the Master. The 
Lord's works were on a fleshly plane as a matter of 
necessity. The holy Spirit had not yet come— could 
not come until after he had given the ransom price and 
had presented it to the Father, and it had been accepted. 



Consequently, those to whom he ministered 
(even his disciples, not being begotten of the Spirit) 
could not be instructed from that standpoint. Their 
ears were heavy as respected earthly things, but in regard 
to heavenly things they could understand nothing; 
for, "The natural man receiveth not the things of the 
Spirit of God, neither can he know them, because they 
are spiritually discerned." It is since Pentecost that 
"God hath revealed them [spiritual things] unto us by 
his Spirit," which "searcheth all things, yea the deep 
things of God."-I Cor. 2:10,14; John 3:12. 

In the midst of the house of servants— none yet begotten 
of the Spirit, none yet granted the privilege of 
sonship (John 1:12)— our Lord could do and teach on 
no higher plane than the earthly, except as he "spoke 
unto the people in parables and dark sayings," which 
in due time the Church should understand, under the 
leading of the holy Spirit. It was in consequence of 
this that our Lord's miracles were all physical, and 
that his plain, understandable teachings were all on a 
plane appreciable by the natural man. 

But when the holy Spirit was come, after Pentecost, 
the Lord's people, in his name and as his representatives, 
began to do greater, more wonderful works than 
those which he himself had performed. Did the Lord 
open the eyes of the blind? His followers were privileged 
to open the eyes of men's understanding! Did 
the Lord heal the physically sick? His disciples were 
permitted to heal the spiritually diseased! Did the 
Lord cure physical leprosy? It was the privilege of 
his followers to heal spiritual leprosy, sin. Did our 
Lord revive the dead? It was the privilege of his followers 
to preach a Gospel by which many "passed from 
death unto life" in a much higher sense. And the 
privileges of these still greater works are yet with the 

R4164 : page 135 

Lord's people. Blessed are those who appreciate their 
great privileges, and are about the Father's business 
with energy, with zeal! But those who, having received 
a talent of the Lord, bury it in the earth— in business, 
in pleasure, in society— cannot expect to be received of 
the Master at his second coming, nor to hear him say, 
"Well done, good and faithful servant, enter thou into 
the joys of thy Lord." 

As indicating how fully he would still continue to 
be the active agent of the Father in all things relating 
to the Church, our Lord assures us that such things as 
we ask of the Father he (Jesus) will do for us, that the 
Father may be glorified in the Son. The Father hath 
committed all things into the hands of the Son; nevertheless, 
in everything the Son acknowledges the Father 
and gives glory to his name. 



page 135 

YEARLY REQUESTS FOR PILGRIM VISITS 

WE request a careful consideration of the following 
suggestions by all who are desirous of 
securing the services of our "Pilgrim" brethren 
during the ensuing year. The "Pilgrim" branch of 
the work is increasing in importance each year, and 
we find it necessary to husband carefully our resources 
and use the best information obtainable in order that 
we may secure the best results. 

The brethren chosen for this service are not sent 
forth as perfect, though the Society considers them 
worthy brethren in every way— ensamples to the flock 
in doctrine and practice. They travel continuously, as 
per announcement on last page of TOWER, all their expenses 
being met by the Society. They do not solicit 
money or anything else, either for themselves or for the 
Society. The service is free, the expenses being borne 
by the contributors to the Tract Fund. We seek divine 
guidance as to who shall be engaged in this service 
and where it shall be rendered. 

The routine of the "Pilgrims" is in circuits arranged 
in harmony with the interest shown and requests received, 
and, since many changes occur during a year, 
we desire that requests for "Pilgrim" visits be made 
yearly in May. Please answer the following questions, 
or as many of them as apply in your case. These responses 
are filed for our information for twelve months. 
If you have already written us this year requesting 
"Pilgrim" visits, we should be pleased to have you repeat 
your request in harmony with the following questions. 
As new conditions arise we find it advisable to 
alter slightly the questions in order that we may be 
properly advised as to the condition of each locality as 
far as possible. You need not repeat the questions, 
but merely indicate them thus, (a), (b), etc. A postal-card 
will serve our every purpose and can be readily 
filed for reference. Please attend to this matter at 
once, in order that there may be no disappointment 
should a "Pilgrim" be coming your way. All letters referring 
to "Pilgrim" work should be noted on envelope, 
thus, "Pilgrim Department." 

(a) How many Bible students reside in your vicinity? 

(b) Are weekly meetings held? 

(c) How many are usually in attendance? 

(d) Where do you now meet? (Give full street 
address.) 

(e) At what hours are the Sunday meetings held? 

(f) Was a vote taken on the "Pilgrim" invitation? 

(g) How many voted for the invitation to be sent? 
(h) How many, if any, voted against the invitation? 
(i) Would a suitable place be found for a public 
meeting? 



(j) What attendance do you think could be secured 

for the public session by such notification and 

advertising as your class would give? 

(k) Would a suitable place be found for semi-private 

meetings for the interested? 

(1) Have the members of your class chosen leaders in 

accordance with DAWN, VOL. VI., chaps. 5 and 6? 

If so, give names and full addresses of each. 

(m) Give full names and full addresses of the two (2) 

to whom notices of a coming "Pilgrim" should be 

sent, and notify us as to any change or removal. 

(n) If your town is not on a railroad give the name of 

proper railroad station at which to stop. 

(o) How many miles from station is meeting place, 

and which direction from station? 

(p) Would "Pilgrim" be met at station? 

(q) If not, how could "Pilgrim" get from said station? 

(r) Give writer's full name and address. 

(s) Any additional remarks. 



R4164 : page 135 

THE HOLY SPIRIT PROMISED 

-JOHN 16:4-15. -MAY 10- 

Golden Text:— "I will pray the Father, and he will send 
you another comforter, that he may abide with you forever. 
-John 14:16. 

OUR Lord, on the way to Gethsemane on the night 
of his betrayal, gave the discourse of this lesson 
to his disciples. He had been telling them 
what they must expect as his followers; that they 
would be misunderstood, persecuted, reviled, because 
of their faithfulness to him and to the brethren whom 
he represented— "But these things have I told you that 
when the time shall come ye may remember that I told 
you of them." (v. 4.) He had not told them of all that 
they might expect, intimating this when he said, "I have 
many things to tell you, but ye cannot bear them now." 
The same may be said to be true of all that ever become 
the Lord's disciples. They see a sufficiency of light 
for one step at a time, but the trials and difficulties 
future are graciously held from them that they 
may not be overwhelmed by them. "Sufficient unto the 
day is the evil thereof." This was not deception, not 
the alluring of his disciples into doing something contrary 
to their wills. At the very outstart the Master 
assures us that unless we take up our cross and follow 

R4164 : page 136 

him we cannot be his disciples. If we take this step 



honestly and sincerely we see plenty of difficulty in 
connection therewith, without knowing particulars of 
the troubles to come. Indeed, if we knew of our future 
trials we should be unjustly overwhelmed thereby, since 
at first we could but imperfectly appreciate the meaning 
of our Lord's words, "My grace is sufficient for 
thee; my strength is made perfect in your weakness," 
and the assurance that he will not suffer us to be 
tempted above that which we are able, but will with 
every temptation provide a way of escape. (2 Cor. 12:9; 
I Cor. 10:13.) Hence, as the Lord's people take 
one step after another they find these promises quite 
true; they find themselves sustained, they find they 
have no more than they can bear, and that although 
their trials are indeed severer than at the beginning of 
the way, yet these can be overcome, because of growth 
in grace and knowledge. 

The power by which the Lord would grant his 
aid to his persecuted followers during his personal absence 
was something difficult for them to understand. 
In our lesson the Master makes the matter as plain as 
possible, calling the power, the influence which he 
would exert on their behalf the holy Spirit, the Spirit 
of God, the Spirit of Christ, the Spirit of the truth. As 
the influence thus to be exerted upon them would be 
sustaining and comforting, the Lord denominated this 
Spirit or power a comforter, a sustainer, a helper. He 
did not say that he would send another person to deal 
with them; no other person could deal with them better 
than himself. It was a spirit, an influence, a power 
which he would send, and this would fully represent the 
Father and fully represent himself, so that in having 
the holy Spirit they would be having the fellowship of 
the Father and the fellowship of the Son. This holy 
Spirit is properly enough spoken of in the masculine, 
even as the Father and the Son are represented in the 
masculine. As it stands the propriety is obvious. 

THE HOLY TRINITY 

During the "dark ages" a great deal of confusion 
of thought prevailed and the clear teachings of the 
Scriptures were lost sight of. Indeed, the Bible for a 
time was little in use. The Bishops were credited with 
being the equals of the apostles in inspiration, under the 
doctrine of the Apostolic Succession. Hence, when 
these met in councils their vote or decision on a doctrine 
was accepted as apostolic, authoritative. Seemingly 

R4165 : page 136 

it was overlooked that the Lord chose but twelve 
apostles and said nothing about any successors to them, 
and that in Revelation he intimated there would be no 
successors when he pointed out the New Jerusalem 
with twelve foundations only, and in those twelve 



foundations the names of the twelve apostles of the 
Lamb. --Rev. 21:14. 

Quite early in the second century the influence of 
the Grecian philosophy upon the Church is quite noticeable, 
and various errors became prominent. One of 
these especially related to our Lord, practically putting 
him on a par with the Grecian philosophers, Socrates 
and Plato, and denying his special birth and his pre-human 
existence. In combating those errors some, 
loyal to the Lord, went to the other extreme and declared 
him, contrary to his own words, equal to the 
Father. (John 10:29; 14:28.) Next came disputation 
respecting the holy Spirit, and these same extremists 
took the ground that there are three gods, the Father, 
the Son and the holy Spirit, "equal in power and glory." 

Peculiarly enough, after claiming that they were 
equal, which implies that they are not the same in person, 
but different persons, the claim was made that they 
are really one in person. Of course, such unscriptural, 
illogical reasoning cannot support itself, and hence 
those taking this position were driven to various expedients 
and subterfuges of argument. At times some 
of them claimed that there are really three Gods in 
one person, while others claimed that there are really 
three persons in one God, and not being able to explain 
either of the nonsensical statements, they have resorted 
to that word so useful to error and superstition, 
namely, "Mystery," "Mystery." They tell us that the 
matter of the Trinity is so mysterious that neither they 
nor anyone need to understand it. If they do not understand 
it they, indeed, should not discuss it; but this 
should not hinder others who can understand it, and 
who see most clearly that the entire mystery is of their 
own making; that the Bible teaching on the subject is 
most clear, simple, harmonious and satisfactory. 

When the Apostle discusses the question of God 
he says to us, There is one living and true God, not 
three! He proceeds to say that this one living and true 
God is the Father; then he adds that there is one Lord 
Jesus Christ. (I Cor. 8:6.) As we have already seen 
this same Apostle declares that the Father highly exalted 
the Lord Jesus and gave him a name which is 
above every name; that all men should honor the Son 
even as they honor the Father. (Phil. 2:9,10; John 5:23.) 
This means that there are two persons, for 
in no other way could one exalt and honor another; and 
if the Son is to be honored as is the Father it follows, 
as other Scriptures show, that he is now partaker of 
the divine nature and that he was exalted to this high 
honor and dignity— "far above angels, principalities 
and powers"— as a reward for his obedience to the 
Father's will, in having come into the world and redeemed 
mankind at the cost of his own life in pursuance 
of the divine purposes. This we have already 
seen from John 1:1— that our Lord, before he came 
into the world, before the world was made by him as 



the Father's agent, was the Logos, the Word, the Messenger 

of the God, Jehovah, and that he was a God, 

a mighty one, superior to angels, the one "by whom all 

things were made that were made; and without him 

was not anything made that was made." 

It will be noticed that the Apostle, in speaking of 
the Father and the Son, refers to them as separate persons, 
and that he does not refer to the holy Spirit as 
another God, nor as the third part of God. Not that the 
Apostle ignores the holy Spirit however, for throughout 
all of his epistles it is recognized as the Spirit of 
the Father and the Spirit of the Son, representing both 
Father and Son in the Church. Nor are we to understand 
that the holy Spirit is a spirit being— as when 
we read, "God is a spirit"— but that the word used signifies 
the spirit of a being, the power, influence, will, 
purpose, strength or whatever proceeds from the person. 
The holy Spirit is said to proceed from the 
Father and from the Son as an influence or power, and 
this influence or power in the Church of consecrated 
believers operates in turn upon those with whom they 
mingle. It is always a good and holy spirit or influence, 
and is thus clearly distinct from the spirit of the world, 

R4165 : page 137 

the disposition of the world, the influence of the world, 
the spirit of sin, the spirit of anti -Christ, etc. 

"THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS NOT YET GIVEN" 

Our Lord gently broke to his sorrowing, bewildered 
disciples the news of his prospective departure 
to the Father who sent him. They did not 
ask where, for they believed his word, that he had 
come forth from the Father and that he would return 
to the Father who sent him. But sorrow had 
filled their hearts. What would they do without the 
Lord! How could the promise of the Kingdom ever 
be fulfilled if he went away! Had they been following 
a delusion for three years? They would not doubt the 
Lord, but they were perplexed. Our Lord, therefore, 
explained that if they understood matters properly, it 
would relieve them of much of their distress, as it 
really was to their advantage, in their interest, that he 
should go away. Had he not gone away it would have 
been impossible for the Father to beget them of the 
Spirit and recognize them as sons of God; hence it 
would not have been possible for them ever to be 
more than human beings, ever to become spirit 
beings or partakers of the divine nature, together with 
its glories and honors. Indeed, without the departure 
of our Lord it would have been impossible for them 
to attain even to human restitution, for the entire 
work of salvation, both as respects the Church and 
the world, was dependent upon our Lord's fulfilling the 



demands of justice. On the following day, as the Lamb 

of God, he died for the sin of Adam, which rested 

upon the entire race, and on the third day the Father 

raised him up by his own power. In this great transaction 

on our behalf a most important work was accomplished; 

but the benefits of that work, under the 

divine arrangement, could not come either to the 

Church or to the world, until first our Lord would ascend 

on high and appear in the presence of the Father 

and present the merit of his sacrifice as an oblation on 

behalf of his people. Had Jesus remained with his followers 

all through this age, even as a spirit being (as 

he was with them during the forty days), no one could 

have been begotten of the holy Spirit. It was necessary 

for Christ to ascend and present the merit of his 

sacrifice before we could be accepted and adopted, before 

we could receive the holy Spirit. 

When the apostles received the holy Spirit at 
Pentecost, they said, "This is that which was spoken of 
by the Prophet Joel"— not, This is he who was spoken 
of by the Prophet Joel. They called it a baptism with 
the holy Spirit! A baptism with a person is not a 
conceivable or proper thought; nor could it be a proper 
thought that the holy Spirit as a person is personally 
present in each believer's heart! Whenever we attach 
the thought of personality it implies place. Thus we 
see that God is a spirit, not that God is spirit; but we 
do not speak of the holy Spirit as being separate, as 
though it were a person separate and distinct from the 
Father and from the Son; it is referred to in the 
Scriptures as the Spirit of God, belonging to God, 
emanating from God; a Spirit of Christ, emanating 
from Christ; a Spirit or influence or power 
which is all pervasive, which can exercise itself in any 
place or in any number of places at any time and perform 
any kind of work or mission. How much 
more satisfactory is the true thought respecting the 
holy Spirit than the absurd and unscriptural ones! 
We might remark in this connection that the word 
"him" of verse 7 in the Greek could, with equal 
propriety, be translated "it"— "I will send it unto you" 
—nevertheless, we have no objection whatever to urge 
against the use of the word Him, since this holy Spirit 
or influence is of or from him, the Father. Similarly 
the word "he" in verse 8 could, with equal propriety, 
according to the Greek, be translated "it." 

NOT THE SPIRIT OF THE WORLD 

Among the various false ideas of the operations of 
the holy Spirit is one which claims that the holy 
Spirit as a person has been busy going hither and 
thither all through this Gospel Age convincing people 
of sin and converting them to righteousness. Some go 
so far in the erroneous thought as to tell us that no 
one could be converted from sin unless God's holy 



Spirit miraculously operated upon him. If these 
thoughts approximated the truth in any degree they 
would imply that God alone is responsible for the fact 
that the world is not converted today, because the holy 
Spirit has failed to do its part in converting and 
reproving and convicting. But all this is a serious 
mistake. 

The holy Spirit does not operate at all in the 
hearts of the world; but, as our Lord declares, It shall 
be in you, his disciples, the Spirit of the Father, the 
Spirit or disposition of the Son, the spirit of the truth, 
the spirit of a sane mind, the spirit of holiness to the 
Lord. None of these qualities of the holy Spirit is 
found in the sinful world; they belong to and are intended 
only for the "sanctified in Christ Jesus." The 
power of God operates upon the hearts that are fully 
consecrated to him, energizing them, cleansing them, 
separating them from the spirit of the world and using 
them in the divine service. The spirit of the world is 
the spirit of sin and selfishness; the Spirit of the 
Lord is the spirit of holiness and consecration to the 
divine will. 

"HE WILL REPROVE THE WORLD" 

How, then, will the holy Spirit in you reprove 
them? We answer that all of the Church, begotten of 
the holy Spirit and thus enlightened, are to let their 
light so shine before men that it will reprove the 
world. That which reproves the world is the holiness 

R4166 : page 137 

of the Church. The Spirit of the Lord, the disposition 
of the Lord in his people, brings reproof to those who 
are living in sin. It was so in our Lord's case, as he 
declared. The Father's Spirit was imparted to him in 
this special sense at the time of his baptism; as John 
testified, "I beheld the holy Spirit descending and resting 
upon him and abiding." He received the Father's 
Spirit without measure, without limitation, for, as the 
perfect one, in the image and likeness of God, he could 
receive the Spirit of God in full measure. We, on the 
contrary, imperfect, defective through the fall, can receive 
the Spirit only in limited measure because of our 
defects— some more and some less; but, thank God, it 
is the privilege of each to be more and more filled with 
the holy Spirit and sanctified by it as the days go by. 
Our Lord's light, which he let shine before men, was a 
great one. Our lights are feeble in comparison; but 
we are to emulate our Lord's example, and be more 
and more filled with the spirit of the truth, the light of 

R4166 : page 138 

the truth, and let it shine forth with wisdom upon all 



those who are in range of our influence. 

The effect of this will be three-fold, as stated in 
verses 8-11. 

(1) "It will reprove the world of sin"— that is to 

say, it will make the world conscious of its sinful condition; 

it will show to the world more and more the 

exceeding sinfulness of sin. Many of the world have 

so lost the image of God and are so devoid of conscience 

that they cannot with great distinctness discriminate 

between honesty and dishonesty, between truth 

and falsity, between righteousness and sin. The world 

has been in the habit of measuring itself with itself; 

but now in Christ and his Church the Lord has established 

a new standard for the world; and the Church, 

not only by its words, but also by its actions, is to uphold 

the glorious standards of the Lord's words along 

the lines of justice and love. 

(2) It is not enough that the world be convicted 

of sin; it needs to understand something about righteousness, 

the opposite of sin; that a considerable measure 

of righteousness is possible and that the difficulty 

in attaining it is due to the fallen nature. The world is 

to be convinced that righteousness is the proper standard, 

the only one which God could recognize, and that 

in his wonderful plan he has arranged for eternal life 

to be granted only to the righteous. In this connection 

it is unavoidable that those who give the instruction, 

the spirit-enlightened ones, will find it necessary to 

make clear that no one can come into accord with the 

Father through any works of righteousness of his 

own, but that the forgiveness, the covering for sins 

provided through the merit of Christ's sacrifice is 

necessary. 

(3) The Spirit of the Lord in his people will 
convince their neighbors, all who come within the 
range of their light and their message, that the present 
life is not all that there is, that there is a trial purposed 
in God's arrangement for the whole world of mankind, 
a judgment, a test. Whoever hears this message must 
concede its reasonableness, and it becomes a basis for 
joy and hope to all those who desire eternal life. Such 
as are rightly and deeply exercised by these convictions 
will seek the Lord and his various means of grace in 
the present life that they may also have their 
judgment and trial as part of the Church. But 

such as are not thus exercised or influenced 
are to be instructed through the Church; in 
proportion, however, as they have light or knowledge 
they have responsibility. In God's plan he 
has provided a day of judgment in the future for the 
world, in which all shall have full opportunity of being 
judged, of being tested along the lines of their loyalty 
to the Lord. Nevertheless their conduct in the present 
life has to do with that future judgment or trial. In 
proportion as they may disobey their conscience and 
fail to follow the leadings of the truth in the present 



time, they will have stripes, difficulties to overcome in 
the future, and to whatever extent they now seek to 
live in accord with righteousness they will lay up for 
themselves a blessing which shall assist them in that 
day of judgment. 

"BECAUSE THEY BELIEVED NOT" 

The holy Spirit of truth in the Church will make 
known to the world that their continuance in the attitude 
of sinners, "children of wrath," is because they do 
not believe in and accept of Christ and his meritorious 
sacrifice for sin. The holy Spirit in the Church 
will make known to the world that there is such a 
thing as righteousness, an imputed righteousness which 
has been secured by our Lord Jesus through his sacrifice, 
which he presented before the Father. The 
holy Spirit in the Church will instruct the world that 
the present order of things cannot continue, that a new 
order of things will be ushered in at the second advent 
of our Lord, as he has already redeemed the world, 
thus securing the legal right to dispossess Satan, the 
prince of the present order of evil. 

"HE WILL SHOW YOU THINGS TO COME" 

Our Lord prepared his followers for a still larger 
amount of instruction after his ascension than they 
had received from him during his presence. He explains 
that the necessity for this was their unpreparedness 
until they should be endued with power from on 
high. Until this they would be natural men, and, as 
the Apostle points out, "The natural man receiveth not 
the things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know 
them, because they are spiritually discerned." This is 
the explanation, then, of why our Lord Jesus did not 
present as deep teachings along spiritual lines as did 
some of the apostles. It was not inability on his part 
to present them, but those truths would have been 
meat out of season to his disciples, which might have 
choked them, injured them. Hence the deeper things 
of our Lord's teachings were stated considerably in 
parabolic form, which would not hurt them at the time 
and which later they would come to appreciate and 
understand. Thus he said again, "I have told you 
earthly things and ye believed not [are unable to receive 
them], how would you believe if I told you of 
heavenly things?"— John 3:12. 

But the spirit of truth, when it shall come, will 
guide you into all truth, yet it will be only a channel 
and not an authority, for it will make known to you 
various features of the divine plan and these will include 
things not yet made manifest to you, but which 
in due time will be brought to your attention through 
the Word and through the influence of the holy 
Spirit. I shall be glorified by this holy Spirit, for it 



will be my things that will be shown unto you, for all 
things that the Father hath are mine; therefore, said 
I, that he [it] shall take of mine and shall show them 
unto you. Note in this statement the prominence of the 
Father. All things are of the Father, but the Father 
hath made the Son joint-heir with him, his associate, 
and nothing is said to belong to the holy Spirit, because 
it is merely the divine channel or agency through 
which communications, blessings, instructions, etc., will 
be communicated. The holy Spirit is not a person, but 
the spirit or influence or power of the Almighty God 
and his everlasting Son, our Lord. For a full discussion 
of this subject see SCRIPTURE STUDIES, Vol. V., 
Chap. VIII. 

"GIVE YOU ANOTHER COMFORTER" 

Our Golden Text is beautiful, helpful. Indeed, 
our Lord explains that the holy Spirit as a comforting 
influence, as a guide, as an instructor and helper to the 
Lord's people in the narrow way would be a gift from 
the Father. This agrees with the Apostle's statement 
in the record of the Pentecostal blessing. Explaining 

R4166 : page 139 

the matter, the Apostle Peter said that our Lord, having 
been exalted to the right hand of divine power, received 
this holy Spirit, power, from the Father and 
shed it forth or sprayed it forth upon his followers at 
Pentecost. These descriptions fit well to the right view 
of the holy Spirit, but are very much out of line with 
the wrong view, that the holy Spirit is a person. How 
could a person be sprayed or shed forth! How could 
one equal in authority pray to another that a 
third one equal to either of them should be shed 
forth as a gift! The inconsistency of the error is very 
manifest as soon as our eyes open to its falsity. But 
how beautiful is the true thought; that as soon as our 
Lord Jesus had appeared before the Father as our Advocate 
and had presented at the Mercy Seat the merit 
of his sacrifice on our behalf, the Father was well 
pleased to grant his holy Spirit, his holy influence and 
power upon us, and adopt us into his family and treat 
us as sons! 

How precious is the thought that the Pentecostal 
blessing was not merely for those who received it, but 
for the entire Church, as shown in the type! The kings, 
as well as the priests, in the olden times were anointed, 
set apart to special service, and Christ and his Church 
are the true kings and the true priests of the Melchizedec 
order, through whose ministries as kings and 
priests all the families of the earth will be blessed. Our 
Lord is the Head, we are his members in particular. 
The coming of the holy Spirit upon him to fit and 
prepare him to be the King, to fit and prepare him to 



be the Priest of the Melchizedec order, was symbolized 
in the type by the anointing of oil. Thus the 
Prophet speaks of this anointing as being poured upon 
Aaron's head and running down his beard even unto 
the skirts of his garments. This, as we see, represents 
the adoption of the holy Spirit, which 
came upon our Lord Jesus the Head at his baptism, 
and which was shed forth at Pentecost upon all 
those who were ready and waiting to be accepted as 
his members, and we who since have believed on him 
through their word have come into membership in the 
same Body and have received of the same anointing; 
and "this anointing which ye received of him abideth 
in you," and shall be in you. This anointing did not 
represent a person, but an influence and blessing. 
What a satisfaction, what a comfort has come to 
the Lord's people through their privilege of being used 
by him and adopted into his family by the begetting of 
the holy Spirit, the adoption of the holy Spirit, the 
anointing of the holy Spirit, the holy influence, the 

R4167 : page 139 

blessing of the Father and of the Son, guiding our 
judgments, guiding our hearts, opening to us the 
Scriptures, causing our hearts to burn within us as we 
are brought to a still greater appreciation of the 
lengths and breadths and heights and depths of our 
Father's glorious plan of salvation for ourselves and 
all the families of the earth! 

This abiding was not to be a temporary matter, 
for a day, a month, a year, but to the end of the age, 
age-lasting, for the entire period. How glad we are 
that this is so, and how blessed are the instructions 
and guidance which we have enjoyed! Truly, 
as our Lord said, the holy Spirit shows us things 
to come, and explains to us things that are past. How 
many of our blessings are along the line of appreciation 
of coming things— the Millennial Kingdom, the 
times of restitution, the uplifting and strengthening 
of all the families of the earth! 



R4167 : page 139 

OUR LORD BETRAYED AND DENIED 

-JOHN 18:l-27.-MAY 17.- 

Golden Text:— "Jesus said unto them, The Son of man 
shall be betrayed into the hands of men."— Matt. 17:22. 

TODAY'S lesson constitutes one of the saddest 
chapters in history. It reveals to us the depths 
of human ingratitude, selfishness, weakness, 



and fear to a remarkable degree. Nevertheless, it is a 

most helpful lesson to those who are in the right attitude 

of heart to receive it, because it warns against 

weaknesses more or less common to all and against 

dangers to which all are exposed. It emphasizes our 

Lord's words to the twelve apostles, words which are applicable 

also to all of his followers— "Watch and pray, 

lest ye enter into temptation." And in respect to the 

Apostle Peter's experience and our Lord's magnanimity 

in dealing with him, the lesson gives encouragement 

to others who, like Peter, have strayed from the 

right path unwisely. 

To get the proper bearings of this lesson we go 
back to the early hours of the same evening when Jesus 
and his chosen twelve met to eat the Passover Supper. 
For three years our Lord had been training those 
twelve men, preparing them to be his representatives 
in the world, his mouthpieces to the Church. 
They had seen his power, known his teachings and 
themselves had exercised the power of healing and 
casting out devils, his power operating through them. 
He had been on the alert to instruct them as to the need 
of humility; that they must become as little children, 
simple, earnest and obedient in order to be fitted for 
the Kingdom which they were called to share with him. 
On several occasions he had been obliged to call to 
their attention the necessity for meekness and humility, 
as he perceived the spirit of ambition and rivalry 
amongst them. On this last evening which he would 
spend with them in the flesh he had noted with regret 
that when assembling for the Passover Supper they 
had neglected the usual hospitalities of the time not 
only toward each other but also toward him, their 
Leader, their Master whom they professed to believe 
was the special Son of God, the Messiah. They had 
neglected to wash one another's feet and his feet, a 
custom, almost a necessity to comfort in that dusty 
land, where sandals are worn instead of shoes. 

"I, YOUR LORD-SERVANT OF ALL" 

Forgetful of his own weight of care and sorrow, and 
anxious for the welfare of his followers, Jesus improved 
the opportunity to teach them all a great lesson in humility. 
He took water in a basin and a towel and did 
the feet-washing, while the disciples, ashamed, confused, 

R4167 : page 140 

knew not what to say or do under the circumstances, 
except Peter, who protested that he could not 
thus have the Master act as his servant; but when Jesus 
explained that there was a symbolical meaning to the 
matter, Peter also was anxious for the washing. Lest 
they should fail to get the lesson, our Lord, after he had 
finished, explained it, saying, If I, your Lord and Master, 



have washed your feet, have displayed humility and willingness 

to serve any of you in the most menial capacity, 

you surely ought to be willing to follow the same example 

with one another, and to perform the most menial 

service for one another, even to the extent of washing 

one another's feet, as opportunity may offer. 

It was not long before this that Jesus, talking to 
the apostles, told them plainly that he would be delivered 
up to the authorities and that the disciples would all 
forsake him. This seemed a hard statement to the apostles; 
an intimation that Jesus lacked confidence in 
them, and it was the impulsive Peter who spoke up 
and declared that although all should deny the Lord 
and forsake him he would never do so. It was then 
that our Lord prophetically told him that before the 
second cock crowing at night he would deny his Master, 
and assured him that Satan desired to capture 
him, but that he was praying for him that his faith 
would not fail. Surely these statements were of value 
to the Apostle in his hour of temptation; surely they 
helped to put all the apostles on guard against what 
was to be expected. 

"LORD, IS IT I? LORD, IS IT I?" 

Proceeding further in his cautioning our Lord 
declared, "Verily I say unto you, one of you shall betray 
me!" What consternation must have prevailed! 
Could it be that amongst those who were so highly favored 
of the Lord and so long associated with him 
there could be one so base as to deny his Lord? 

Let us not lose the force of this lesson; let us remember 
that the Lord's disciples down through the 
Gospel Age have been as the Apostle here declares of 
the twelve, "Men of like passions with you," men from 
the common walks of life, neither above nor below the 
average standard of human imperfection! Let us remember 
that the same Lord who cautioned those 
twelve respecting the trials coming upon them is still 
mindful of his Church, his flock, and we may suppose 
especially mindful of all who are in any prominent 
place of responsibility amongst the brethren. He still 
guards us, warns us, seeks to keep us from falling under 
the power of the Adversary. He still prays for his 
faithful, those who at heart are loyal to him, but who 
have weaknesses of the flesh which are liable to make 
their temptations more severe. As our Lord's interest 
in and efforts for the apostles increased as they neared 
the special hour of their temptation, so we may be sure 
that it is also with respect to his Church in general 
today, when the last members of his Body, the "feet of 
him," are approaching the crucial hour, "The hour of 
temptation that cometh upon the whole world to try 
them. "--Rev. 3:10. 

The Master does not speak to us in audible tones, 
as he did to those twelve, but has he not spoken to us 



with equal force and earnestness? Do not the words 
and actions of the Lord to those disciples come to us 
today with the same lesson and with as much force as 
they bore to them? Have we not, in addition to these 
examples and warnings, special declarations of the 
Scriptures respecting the end of the age? Did not our 
Lord, in the parable of the suitable and unsuitable fish, 
explain to us that in the end of this Gospel Age there 
would be a separation of those in the Gospel net? 
Does he not again in the parable of the wheat and tares 
tell us of the separation due to take place in the harvest 
time of this Gospel Age, when only the true and the 
ripe wheat will be gathered into the barn? Does he 
not through the Apostle forewarn us that in the 
end of the age perilous times shall come because men 
will be lovers of their own selves— selfish, ambitious- 
lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God? (2 Tim. 3:1,2.) 
Does he not tell us that it would be at the time 
in the divine plan when God would send [permit] strong 
delusions, so that all might believe a lie who shall not 
have received the truth in the love of it and with zeal? 
—2 Thess. 2:11. 

"THE HOUR OF TEMPTATION THAT SHALL TRY" 

Does he not also tell us that the temptations of 
this hour will be such as would, if it were possible, deceive 
the "very Elect," but that in their case it will not 
be possible because of their love, their zeal and the 
consequent blessings and privileges that divine favor 
will provide for them ! And if to Peter special encouragement 
was given— "I have prayed for thee that thy 
faith fail not"— have we not a full equivalent of this in 
the Scriptural assurance, "Lo, I am with you alway," 
"My grace is sufficient for thee; my strength is 
made perfect in your weakness"? (Matt. 28:30; 2 Cor. 12:9.) 
Surely we have much advantage every way over 
the apostles in their trial, and this advantage is emphasized 
in the fact that their trial came upon them 
before their anointing with the holy Spirit, whereas 
our testings come to us at the time we are of the anointed 
Body. When we now look out into the future 
and hear the message, "The morning cometh, but a 
night also" (Isa. 21:12), we may well be forewarned as 
to what to expect in that short night of trouble which 
will affect the consecrated followers before it reaches 
the world in general. We must expect in this hour of 
trial that "a thousand shall fall at thy side and ten 
thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh 
thee"; yet we must remember that this promise is limited 
to the class specified, to those who have made the 
Lord, even the Most High, their refuge and habitation; 
for no evil can come nigh their dwelling place. (Psa. 91:7,9.) 
Therefore, dearly beloved, putting on the 
whole armor of God that we may be able to stand in 
this evil day, we will need to watch unto prayer for 



ourselves and for those over whom the holy Spirit hath 
made us overseers, that we may feed the flock of God, 
which he hath purchased with the blood of his own 
Son. --Acts 20:28, Diaglott. 
As the eating of a meal together was a pledge of 

R4168 :page 141 

faithfulness, so for the Master to dip a special sop was 
a special mark of favor, and this was given to Judas 
at the supper to indicate the one who would betray the 
Lord. We can better imagine than describe how the 
apostles, in various tones, asked the Lord, "Is it I?" 
and how Judas likewise asked the same question! We 
can imagine the look of our Lord's eye as he gave him 
the sop, saying in action and look, Judas, why do you 
resist the loving kindnesses which I have bestowed 
upon you? You have professed to be my friend and 
disciple; I surely have done the part of a friend toward 
you. That glance and that sop should have overwhelmed 
the selfish Judas, but as the mercy of the Lord, 
in the taking away of the plagues from Pharaoh had 
so much the more hardened Pharaoh's heart, so every 
additional manifestation of our Lord's humility and 
kindness seems to have had the effect of hardening the 
heart of Judas. In answer to our Lord's glance and 
sop Judas, so far from repenting, was more embittered, 
more determined to carry out his program. It shone 
in his eye; our Lord read his thoughts and answered 
in the words, "What thou doest, do quickly." 

Let us not lose the lesson in its application and 
bearing upon the Lord's people of today. If any 
amongst the consecrated are cultivating selfishness 
and personal ambition, they are preparing themselves 
for such a termination as that of Judas. The influence 
of the spirit they are cultivating will lead them further 
and further from sympathy with the Lord's cause and 
the faithful brethren until, like Judas, they shall be 
ready to sell the truth for a little personal advantage. 
And when such a condition of heart has been reached 
by those who were once enlightened and have tasted of 
the good Word of God and the powers of the age to 
come, no power will hinder them from going to the 
limit of their evil course. Their minds become so poisoned 
against the truth that the very sops of favor animate 
them the more toward evil. As in Judas' case we 
read that then Satan entered into him, so with a similar 
class here; we may expect the Adversary to get fuller 
power and control over them. 

THE LESSONS OF GETHSEMANE 

One would think that the impressive lessons 
of that night would have so filled the minds of the 
apostles and made them so alert that sleep would have 
been far from their eyes. But not so; they scarcely 



understood how to take the Master's words; he had 

said so many remarkable things which they did not comprehend; 

it seemed so incomprehensible that he who 

had come to be the Messiah and reign should be betrayed 

and crucified, and that they whom he had promised 

should sit with him in his throne should all forsake 

him and flee. Hence the repeated instruction 

that they should watch and pray made little impression. 

Even the three special friends of Jesus, the ones whom 

he made his special confidants and took with him to 

the Mount of Transfiguration on another special occasion 

without the others— even these three slumbered, 

except as from time to time the Lord visited them and 

awakened them and they noted certain incidents which 

they recorded for us. 

"LEST ANY ROOT OF BITTERNESS SPRING UP" 

How is it now? The night of trouble nearing, the 
hour of trial that shall try all that dwell upon the face of 
the whole earth coming close, and with the many warnings 
of the Master through the Word that we should watch 
and pray lest we enter into temptation!— how is it with 
us? Alas! many of those who, like Peter, James and 
John, have been specially favored of the Lord, especially 
near to him, fail to realize the importance of the time 
in which we are living, fail to realize that the foretold 
temptations are about to come upon them and that, like 
Peter, they will be in great danger of being swept away, 
sifted out from amongst the Lord's faithful. 

We can imagine our Lord's condition to some extent. 
His great hour of trial was upon him; he realized 
it to the full; it meant not only that his own faithfulness, 
past and present and on the day following, 
would decide respecting his loyalty to the Father and 
his right to obtain the high reward of glory, honor and 
immortality, but it meant additionally that the interests 
of the whole world of mankind were in the balance! 
Victory would mean eventually the deliverance of 
all the prisoners in bondage to sin and death; failure 
would mean the loss of everything! Can we 
wonder that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, and 
that in his intensity of feeling bloody perspiration 
oozed from his pores? Ah, dear Master! Well was it 
written of him, "Of the people there was none with me." 
Even his most intimate and most beloved disciples 
failed to appreciate the conditions and to render him 
the sympathetic aid which he craved. What would 
those disciples afterward not have given to have had 
back the opportunity of ministering to their Lord in 
his hour of trial! What a privilege they let slip ! There 
is a lesson here for us also, for although the Master is 
not in the flesh and will suffer no more, some of his 
members are still in the flesh, some who must suffer 
with him if they would reign with him. Our sufferings 
are not all just like those of the Master, nor are they 



just the same with each of us; each has his own experiences 
to prove, to test, to fit, to polish him that he may 
be made meet for the Master's use. Have we, each for 
the other, that sympathy, that yearning love which 
would lead us to help one another and to bear one 
another's burdens and thus to fulfil the Law of Christ, 
the Law of Love? or have we the Judas spirit to injure? 
or have we the spirit of slothful indifference and 
lack of appreciation which would lead us to slumber 
while the interests of others of the Body are at stake, 
while the brethren are suffering and are in trial? Our 
practical answer to these questions the Lord is looking 
for, and his love and his favor will be upon those who 
manifest most of his Spirit. To us much has been 
given, in that the hour of testing along these lines 
comes to us after we have received the anointing of the 
holy Spirit. Of us correspondingly more will be expected 

R4168 : page 142 

—"We ought also to lay down our lives for the 
brethren." 

AN ANGEL MINISTERED UNTO HIM 

When our Lord in his agony prayed the Father, "If 
it be possible let this cup pass from me," we are not to 
suppose that he meant the cup of death, for he had already 
explained to his disciples that this death was 
necessary, and that he had come into the world for this 
very purpose. What, then, was the cup which he asked 
might pass from him? We reply that quite probably 
he referred to the particular ignominy which would be 
associated with his crucifixion; which would attach to 
his execution as a blasphemer against God and between 
two thieves. Another Scripture gives us to understand 
that the severity of our Lord's anguish was 
in respect to his own faithfulness, upon which depended 
his resurrection. If he failed in even one little item, 
one jot or tittle of the Law, his own life would have 
been condemned and forfeited as much as was Adam's 
and as a result he would have had no resurrection and no 
future life, and the whole work, for which he had come 
into the world, would have been a failure. The Scripture 
we refer to says, "Who in the days of his flesh offered 
up strong crying and tears unto him who was 
able to save him from [out of] death. And he was 
heard in respect to the thing which he feared." Although 
none of his disciples gathered around him to assure 
him that he had been without spot and blemish and 
that every act of his life had been in full conformity to 
the divine will, God more than made up to him such 
encouragement by sending specially an angel, who 
ministered unto him, who served him in respect to the 
thing which he feared, who therefore must have given 
him assurance from the Father that he had been faithful, 



that he was approved. 

On the strength of that assurance our Lord arose firm, 
calm, strong for all the coming events of that night and 
the next day up to the moment of his death. And so 
it should be with us: Properly there should be some 
anxiety in respect to the future; the Lord will not be 
pleased if we are careless as respects the matter of 
making our calling and election sure. We are to appreciate 
life, and particularly the life more abundant which 
has been promised to us if we prove faithful. We are 
so to appreciate this that our eyes will be toward the 
Lord for such ministrations of his love and favor as 
will give us assurance that we are still his and that the 
glorious hopes and promises are still ours. And his 
assurances or comfort may not come through earthly 
ministrations; the Lord himself will see to it that 
every member of his Body who is deeply earnest and 
anxious on the subject will have the proper witness of 
the Spirit, the proper testimony to his heart of his continued 
acceptance and faithfulness. 

JESUS BETRAYED WITH A KISS 

Treachery is universally despised and properly 
so, hence Satan, the traitor to God, and Judas, the 
traitor to our Lord Jesus, stand out prominently as representatives 
of that condition of mind and heart which 
should be shunned by all, the condition of heart which 
the Lord declares merits and shall have the Second 
Death, everlasting destruction. From the various 
Gospel records we find that Judas, leaving the company 
of the Lord and the eleven apostles, went again to the 
Chief Priests, with whom he had already been in conference. 
He finished the bargain and became the guide 
of a band of temple guards or temple policemen and 
their followers. These, armed with their clubs or maces, 
took with them lights needed for the searching of the 
foliage, although the moon was at its full. From the 

R4169 : page 142 

standpoint of the rulers the midnight hour was the 
most favorable because a large concourse of people 
then in Jerusalem for the Feast of Passover included 
many who knew Jesus and had been witnesses of his 
miracles and his arrest in day time might have led to a 
tumult. Our Lord probably went to the Garden because 
it belonged to a friend and because in the open his disciples 
would have a better opportunity for escape from 
arrest; though it does not appear that there was any 
special endeavor to make an arrest, except that mentioned 
by Mark of a young man who followed with the 
crowd as they led Jesus away and who had on a long, 
loose garment, and when they laid hold upon it he fled 
from them naked. This is supposed to have been John 
Mark, the writer of the Gospel of Mark, and that he 



lived on the premises of which the Gethsemane Garden 
was a part. 

Our Lord's agony, prayer and comforting at an 
end, he returned to the apostles, saying, "Sleep on now, 
and take your rest." Your opportunity for watching 
with me or speaking a word of comfort has passed; 
your opportunity for waking your own hearts and 
minds to prayer as a safeguard against coming trials 
and testings is past. Behold the band of those who 
will arrest me! A little ahead of the band came Judas, 
who indicated the Master by the traitorous kiss, which 
John, for very shame, did not record. Judas, finding his 
deception recognized as the Master said, "Betrayest thou 
the Son of man with a kiss?" left him and joined the 
band who had come for his arrest, while Jesus, coming 
out of the cover into the open, said, "Whom seek ye?" 
After he had answered their reply, saying, "I am he, 
let these my friends go their way," we read that the 
men went backward and fell on the ground. This was 
doubtless the result of a power our Lord exercised 
upon them, the power by which he might have resisted 
them entirely had he so desired. What he did was sufficient 
to show them and his apostles that his surrender 
was not one of necessity, but that the Father's will 
might be done. 

Awhile before Jesus had said that they should 
have some swords, and, finding that there were two, he 
said they were enough. The Apostle Peter was evidently 
the bearer of one of these and as the armed men 
approached the Lord, Peter used the sword and smote 
off the ear of Malchus, the servant of the High Priest. 
This incident was evidently of the Lord's intention to 
show that his surrender was not because of cowardice 
on the part of the disciples or himself. It also furnished 
the opportunity of healing an enemy by our 
Lord's touch and the opportunity of saying to Peter, 

R4169 :page 143 

"Put up thy sword; they that take to the sword shall 
perish by the sword"; in other words, My followers are 
not to fight with carnal weapons, my Kingdom is not 
to be established in this manner. 

Annas had been the High Priest for a number of 
years and had been followed in the office by several of 
his sons and now his son-in-law, Caiaphas, filled the 
position. Nevertheless, Annas in a certain sense was 
recognized and hence our Lord was first taken before 
him. Annas questioned him but did not attempt a 
judicial investigation. This was had before Caiaphas 
and apparently in another part of the palace of the 
High Priest. 

It was apparently while our Lord was being examined 
by Annas that Peter, who warmed himself at the 
fire, was questioned three times respecting his identity 
with our Lord as one of his followers, and three times 



he denied and directly the cock crowing began. Peter 
heard it, and our Lord, while being led from the presence 
of Annas to the judgment seat of Caiaphas, looked 
upon Peter. What a sermon there was in the glance 
toward Peter! He who had boasted of his courage that 
he never would deny the Lord had failed. How much 
weaker he was than he had supposed! How the Lord's 
prophecy had come true, Before the second cock crowing 
thou shalt deny me thrice! He went out and wept 
bitterly, sick at heart and thoroughly ashamed of himself, 
resolving, no doubt, that he would be less boastful 
in the future and do more of the watching and 
praying which the Master had enjoined. 

We know not how close parallels to some of these 
experiences may lie before some of the Lord's dear 
people now. But let us hope that if any of us should 
come so sadly short of our own hopes and privileges 
that the Master would not only pray for us, as he did for 
Peter, but that he would turn upon us also his glances 
of reproof, of chiding, and also such glances as would 
remind us of his sympathy and love that we might not 
be overwhelmed with our own sense of weakness and 
shame, but that our repentance, unlike that of Judas, 
should be like that of Peter, sincere and acceptable to 
the Lord. 



page 143 

BEREAN STUDIES ON THE ATONEMENT 

THE TEXT BOOK USED FOR THIS COURSE 
IS SCRIPTURE STUDIES, SERIES V. (E) 

Questions on Study II.— The Author of the Atonement. 

JUNE 7 

(29) Examine the tenth proof-text— Isa. 6:1— and 
demonstrate what is and what is not its true signification. 
P.47, last two pars., and P. 48. 

(30) How should we view Isa. 8:13,14? P. 49, par. 1. 

(31) Proof-text number 12 is Psalm 110. Examine 
it and demonstrate the truth respecting its teachings. 
P.49, pars. 2,3,4. 

(32) Since our Lord Jesus is styled the "Great 
Teacher" and since it is written, "All thy children shall 
be taught of Jehovah" (Isa. 54:13), is or is not this a 
proof that our Lord Jesus is there referred to as Jehovah 
by name? Pp. 50-54. 

JUNE 14 

(33) Find and read one or more Scripture texts containing 
the word Trinity. 



(34) Is it supposable that the doctrine of Trinity is 
taught in the Bible and yet no such word can be found 
in it? 

(35) Quote the strongest text in the Bible which 
seemingly implies that there are three Gods instead of 
one. Compare I John 5:7 with Deuteronomy 5:6-11. 

(36) What is the teaching of Trinitarianism— that 
there is one God who sometimes assumes three distinct 
manifestations, or three Gods equal in glory and honor? 
Did you ever know anybody able or willing to give a 
positive answer to this question? P. 54, par. 1. 

(37) Explain the force of the Trinity doctrine in 
the passage, "The head of the woman is the man, the 
head of the man is Christ and the head of Christ is 
God." (I Cor. 1 1:3.) P.55, par. 1. 

(38) What objection can be urged against I John 5:7? 
Does it teach three Gods in one person, or three 
distinct Gods? 

JUNE 21 

(39) Were the translators of our Common Version 
Bible to blame for the insertion of the spurious text? 
Why not? P. 56, par. 1. 

(40) Do scholars of all denominations acknowledge 
that the greater part of I John 5:7 is not a part of the 
original Bible, but a spurious addition without right 
or authority? P. 56, par. 1. 

(41) Which words in that text are spurious? 

(42) Would the passage make as good sense or 
better if the interpolation were omitted? Read the 
passage corrected. P. 56, par. 2. 

(43) Mention some of the versions of the New Testament 
that omit these words and cite the comment by 

the "Improved Version," also Lang's comment. P.57. 

(44) Name some prominent Bible scholars who 
have pronounced the passage a spurious interpolation. 
P.57, last par. 

(45) Quote Dean Alford's words. P. 58, par. 1. 

(46) Quote Dr. C. Tischendorf on the subject. P. 58, 
par. 2. 

(47) Quote Prof. T. B. Wolsey. P.58, par. 3. 

(48) Quote Dr. Adam Clarke on this passage. 
P.58, par. 4. 

(49) Quote John Wesley on this subject. P.58, last par. 

(50) Why was there more excuse for misunderstanding 
on this matter a century or two ago than now? 

P.58, last par. 

JUNE 28 

(51) In what sense is there a unity or oneness between 
the Father and the Son? P. 59, par. 1. 

(52) Are the Father and the Son spoken of in the 
Scriptures as equal, in the sense that neither has nor 
ever had a superiority over the other? P. 59, par. 1. 



(53) What is implied in the terms Father and Son? 
P.60, par. 1. 

(54) Are all things of the Son and all things by 

the Father, or vice versa, and what does this statement 
imply? P.60, par. 1. 

(55) The doctrine of the Trinity is called a mystery. 
Why? In what sense is it mysterious? P.60, par. 2. 

(56) Would Satan over-honor Christ? Why, then, 
would he propagate this error? and what has he effected? 
P.61,pars. 1,2. 

(57) How old is the error on this subject, and how 
did it get so firm a footing in Christendom? Pp.62, 63. 



page 145 



SEMI-MONTHLY 