They Let Their Light Shine
JESUS CHRIST told his followers: “You are the light of the world.” (Matt. 5:14) Serving as such a light meant displaying fine Christian works, helping others by word and example to become servants of Jehovah God as disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. Said Jesus: “Let your light shine before men, that they may see your fine works and give glory to your Father who is in the heavens.” (Matt. 5:16) It is for this reason that Jehovah’s witnesses endeavor to make good use of their opportunities to share the Bible’s message with others. This has moved many to study the Holy Scriptures with the witnesses.
● At his place of employment one of Jehovah’s witnesses in Canada talked about an assembly he had attended. A young man overheard the conversation and was moved to approach the Witness to ask questions. Almost immediately the young man began attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses, eagerly reading at the same time many of the publications of the Watch Tower Society. For two successive Sundays this young man was with the Witness and his family from nine o’clock in the morning till nearly midnight, attending meetings as well as studying and discussing the truths of God’s Word. Just three weeks from the time of his first Bible study he was baptized.
His wife was away during much of this time and upon returning was overwhelmed by what had happened in her absence. But she, too, agreed to have a Bible study and is now a dedicated, baptized witness of Jehovah.
Only one year from the time of his own baptism, this young man saw one with whom he himself studied the Bible take his stand for true worship and get baptized.
● A Witness from Finland relates: “Some time ago a man and his two sisters moved next door to us. One day we happened to walk home together and I got the opportunity to tell him that we were Jehovah’s witnesses and also to speak to him about God’s kingdom. The man said that he was an atheist and also a Communist. So he felt that it would be ‘a waste of time’ to talk about the Bible and God.”
The Witness then invited this man to his home, saying: “If either one of us can give sufficient grounds to show that he is right, then the other would be forced to change his viewpoint and beliefs.” That same evening the man did come to the home of the Witness. The discussion lasted from 8:00 p.m. to 1:30 a.m. The man agreed that God existed after all and expressed his desire to know more about Jehovah and his purposes.
A Bible study was started. But one evening a week did not satisfy him. So a study was held every free evening. In just a few months he became a dedicated, baptized Witness.
He started a Bible study with one of his sisters. Soon his other sister joined in and both became witnesses of Jehovah. He also interested his youngest brother and his brother’s wife in the Bible’s message. Both of them began attending the meetings of Jehovah’s witnesses regularly. Still other relatives were also given attention. This led to a Bible study’s being started with a cousin and his family. In just a few months the cousin, his wife and their two children began sharing in the house-to-house ministry of Jehovah’s witnesses.
● A traveling minister of Jehovah’s witnesses, a circuit overseer, was returning with his wife from a call in the wilds of the Andes in southern Peru. Walking down a dusty trail, they came upon a man watering his burro at a bubbling stream. The man pushed at the burro to get it to move so that the circuit overseer and his wife could get by. Doing so, the man said: “I’ll get this soul out of the way.” At that the circuit overseer asked him whether it was correct to call his burro a “soul.” The man looked puzzled, thought for a minute and then replied: “Well, I have always said that.” The circuit overseer got out his Bible and showed the man that it stated that animals indeed are souls. (Num. 31:28) He also discussed with him the true condition of the dead and the hope of the resurrection. The man gladly accepted the Bible study aid “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie.” As the man’s home was in an area where Jehovah’s witnesses had never visited, the circuit overseer’s use of his opportunity resulted in reaching a remote section of Peru with the “good news” of God’s kingdom.
What a fine incentive such experiences are for God’s people not to overlook opportunities to let others hear Bible truth!

