A Time Both “to Rejoice and to Do Good”
1 Solomon’s words at Ecclesiastes 3:12 are part of his inspired comments on “a time for every affair under the heavens.” (Eccl. 3:1) He points out that our Creator wants us to work hard and enjoy to the full the good results of our labors. But in today’s world where many have become obsessed with recreation and pleasure seeking, it is vital for Christians to guard against becoming involved in the kind of rejoicing that is promoted by the spirit of the world. Balance and reasonableness are necessary if we are to keep clearly in focus our theocratic activities, while enjoying wholesome moments of relaxation and recreation. How may this be done during the spring and summer months?
2 For many people spring and summer mean vacation time. Pleasant weather and longer daylight hours are conducive to being outdoors and generally afford more recreational opportunities. There are various wholesome activities to delight us. But care needs to be exercised. We should not neglect, even temporarily, a regular schedule of meeting attendance and field service. Theocratic activities are fundamental to our happiness. (Matt. 5:3) During the spring and summer months we also want to take advantage of occasions to enjoy extra privileges of service that may not be open to us during the rest of the year. Many have found that auxiliary pioneering satisfies both spiritual and recreational needs.
3 One sister who spent an entire summer auxiliary pioneering in unassigned territory said: “It was an unforgettable experience. I will always remember the spiritual education I received, not to mention other benefits.” Entire families have found joy by taking advantage of opportunities to increase their service to Jehovah. One family of nine spent their vacation period in a small town that had seldom received a witness. Part of each day was spent in the preaching work and part in some form of recreation. They commented: “It was the most delightful vacation we have ever had!” Could you arrange to auxiliary pioneer at least once during the spring and summer? Young ones out of school for the summer may want to set this as a goal for one month or more. Parents, why not work right along with them in this fine avenue of sacred service?
4 This summer will not be complete without attending the “Kingdom Increase” District Convention, and thus many are planning their vacations in conjunction with this spiritual event. Good judgment is again needed. Time should not be spent in our enjoyment of recreational or other activities at the expense of even a part of the convention. We want to enjoy all four days, as this is a spiritual highlight of the year. Sharing in the field ministry following the session on Friday afternoon will be very rewarding.
5 Have relatives in the truth invited you to spend part of your vacation visiting them? This may be a good way to relax and share various experiences. For others, vacation time may include visiting unbelieving relatives. If circumstances permit, why not share our Bible-based hope with them? When vacationing away from home, if at all possible, attend the meetings of the local congregation. It is especially encouraging to share with them in the field ministry.
6 Certainly there are many things to look forward to this spring and summer. Remember to ‘seek first the Kingdom.’ (Matt. 6:33) As we continue to ‘rejoice and do good,’ our speech and conduct will reflect favorably upon our loving Creator. This will be to his praise and our great reward.​—Ps. 34:1; Eccl. 3:12, 13.

