Announcements
● Literature offer for May: One-year subscription for The Watchtower for a contribution of $3.50. Six-month subscriptions are $2.00 each. Awake! subscription may be offered on same basis. Both subscriptions may be offered for contribution of $7.00. June and July: “Kingdom Come,” for 75c. Otherwise any other 192-page book released prior to 1981 may be used. August and September: Live Forever or Bible Stories for $2.50.
● During the month of August the brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses will be studied in the Congregation Book Study. Then beginning the week of September 2, 1984, and continuing through the week of February 24, 1985, the book Making Your Family Life Happy will be studied.
● If the brother who receives shipments of distributors’ magazines will be away temporarily for any reason, he should notify the local post office and make arrangements for shipments to be handled properly in his absence. This will prevent delays in delivery or having shipments returned to the Society marked “Unclaimed.”
● No break is scheduled for Congregation Book Studies during the convention week. However, the material scheduled for that week may be split so that half of it is studied the week prior to the convention and the other half the week following, in addition to the material scheduled for those particular weeks. If necessary, the reading of the paragraphs may be omitted during these two studies.
● Selective service regulations require that all men register for the draft when reaching 18 years of age. All of those required to do so should take care of this matter promptly, viewing it as a Christian obligation to the superior authorities. Elders will want to have this in mind when young brothers are nearing the age of 18 and give them appropriate reminders. Questions as to the young Christian’s responsibilities in this regard may be answered by the elders.
● New Publications Available:
Sing Praises to Jehovah
Large size (congregation and public: $3.00; pioneers: $1.50)​—English
Small size (congregation and public: $1.50; pioneers: $.75)​—English
The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life​—Faroese
United in Worship of the Only True God​—Chinese, Korean
A Secure Future​—How You Can Find It—​Welsh
In Search of a Father​—Thai
● New Recordings Available (piano music only):
Sing Praises to Jehovah
Phonograph Records (set of 15 long-playing records; congregation and public: $15.00; pioneers: $11.50)
Cassette Tapes​—Single Album Set (set of eight cassettes in one album; congregation and public: $15.00; pioneers: $11.50)
Cassette Tapes​—Five Album Set (set of 113 cassettes in five albums; congregation, public and pioneers: $50.00)
● The songbook, Sing Praises to Jehovah, is now available in grade-two English Braille (lyrics only). It is bound in one volume in durable brown vinyl. The price is $10.00. Also the 1984 Theocratic Ministry School Schedule in grade-two English Braille will be sent free upon request. To obtain the above, please send a separate order, including the remittance and the name and address of the person that will use the publications. Mark your order: BRAILLE DESK.

