Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING APRIL 29
Song 200 (108) (Number in parentheses refers to 1966 songbook.)
 8 min: Welcome and local announcements. Outline field service arrangements for the week, highlighting house-to-house work with subscription offer on first Sunday. Mention importance of turning in field service reports promptly.
22 min: “Work What Is Good Toward All.” Question-and-answer discussion. When covering paragraphs 8-11, ask audience for additional suggestions regarding what can be done to help newly interested people, new publishers and inactive persons.
15 min: “Theocratic News.” Highlight the continuing expansion of the Kingdom work worldwide. NOTE: It would be good to announce beforehand that brothers should bring their 1984 Yearbook so that they can be helped to locate various countries on maps appearing in the front and back of the Yearbook. Tie in discussion of February Service Report on page 7, also consider local report of Kingdom activity and commend brothers for their fine support.
Song 106 (55) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 6
Song 133 (68)
 5 min: Local announcements. Remind brothers May 12 is second Saturday of month, and magazine offer should be highlighted. Ask all to pick up needed field service supplies.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines.” Paragraphs 1, 2, 7 and 8 should be considered with questions and answers. The material in paragraphs 3-6 should be demonstrated from the platform. Conclude by reminding brothers to pick up their magazine order.
20 min: Organized to Accomplish Our Ministry. (Pages 127-32) Talk by capable elder covering material from page 127 to subheading on page 130. Then consider sections “Physical Cleanness Honors Jehovah” and “Recreation” by questions and answers. Assign capable brother to read all paragraphs in these two sections. Give a brief concluding summary.
Song 220 (19) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 13
Song 59 (31)
 8 min: Announcements, local announcements and accounts report.
15 min: Organized To Accomplish Our Ministry. Elder considers material from subheading at bottom of page 132 to end of chapter. Discuss with audience first three paragraphs under subheading “School Activities.” Encourage youths to take advantage of Jehovah’s provisions for safeguarding them while in school. Get comments from exemplary youths on how they have successfully resisted involvement in extracurricular activities. Remainder of material should be presented as a talk. Build appreciation for Jehovah’s righteous standards.
12 min: “A Time Both ‘to Rejoice and to Do Good.’” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage balanced approach toward recreation during spring and summer. Discuss how the privilege of auxiliary pioneering can be enjoyed by making definite plans now.
10 min: Experiences of witnessing with the subscription offer. Feature practical points that can be used by others.
Song 129 (66) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 20
Song 165 (81)
 5 min: Local announcements. Remind all to obtain territory and magazines for Saturday magazine work.
15 min: “Regularity in Service Brings Blessings.” Talk and discussion to help all share in field service. Highlight the Scriptural obligation all servants of Jehovah have to participate regularly in the ministry. Get comments from audience on why they consider it important to have a share in the field service on a regular basis, and what positive steps they take to ensure that they do.
25 min: “1984 ‘Kingdom Increase’ District Convention.” Question-and-answer discussion of insert from beginning to section on “Fine Conduct” on page 4, column 2.
Song 212 (110) and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING MAY 27
Song 127 (64)
10 min: Local announcements. Outline field service arrangements for the week, encouraging house-to-house witnessing on the first Sunday. Suggest appropriate talking points in “Kingdom Come” book and encourage publishers to pick up supply of book tonight if they have not done so already. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports promptly.
25 min: “1984 ‘Kingdom Increase’ District Convention.” Discuss with audience the balance of insert from “Fine Conduct” on page 4 to end. Read paragraphs as time permits. Stress importance of finalizing arrangements to attend so as to enjoy spiritual benefits fully. Encourage all to set good example by following recommendations on conduct and listening intently to the entire convention program.
10 min: Prepare locally according to needs or consider “When a Christian is in Business,” (w71, pp. 764-7). Show how Bible principles discussed can be applied by both young and old.
Song 65 (36) and concluding prayer.

