Presenting the Good News​—With Magazines
1 “As apples of gold in silver carvings is a word spoken at the right time for it.” (Prov. 25:11) These words of the wise man Solomon remind us of the value of timely information. Of particular value today is the precious and timely information published regularly in The Watchtower and Awake! No other magazines offer the reasonable Scriptural information or the Kingdom hope presented in these unique journals, and it is our privilege to share them with others.
WHAT CAN WE SAY?
2 To place more of these magazines, many are finding it effective to use brief presentations. Our few words need to be interesting and attention getting, as well as simple.
3 For those who would like a very simple and brief presentation, something like this may be effective: “Hello. My name is ‐‐‐‐‐. A lot of people today ask if we are going to see the end of the world in our lifetime. I would like to share something with you that gives the answer to that question. It is this article ‘1914​—The Generation That Will Not Pass Away,’ in the May 15 Watchtower. The Watchtower and Awake! are yours for a contribution of 30 cents.”
4 Other publishers might say: “I am glad I found you at home. Would you agree that most people are concerned about the increased tensions we all face? Jesus said there would be a time like this. Many sincere persons are saying there is no way to avoid a world war that will kill everyone. However, I found something very interesting on this subject in this article ‘1914​—The Generation That Will Not Pass Away.’ I believe that you too will find it interesting reading. You can have this Watchtower along with the current Awake! for 30 cents.”
5 When speaking to persons who may be religiously inclined, perhaps the following would be appropriate: “Hello. I am calling on persons who are interested in peace. Some religious people believe that the churches will unite all mankind. However, others wonder if the churches can accomplish this goal. Some interesting information is in the May 8 Awake! answering the question ‘Can the Churches Unite the World?’ I am sure you will enjoy the articles on this subject. This issue of Awake! and the latest Watchtower are yours for a contribution of 30 cents.”
6 Occasionally we may find people with specialized interests. We may be able to direct their attention to an article that would be of particular interest, if we are familiar with the current magazines. In the May 22 Awake! science is featured. We could highlight the subject of science by saying: “I have something for persons who are interested in science. In our generation scientific knowledge has taken great strides forward. However, not too long ago a series of scandals jolted the world of science and this has sincere persons concerned. Information on the subject is found in this issue of Awake! You will notice the cover title is ‘Fraud in Science​—Is the Halo Slipping?’ I believe you would greatly enjoy reading this issue. You can have it along with The Watchtower for a contribution of 30 cents.”
POINTS TO REMEMBER
7 Magazine presentations should be kept simple and brief. Being well acquainted with the magazines will enable you to be sincere and enthusiastic. While both magazines are offered, it is usually best to emphasize one theme and tie in the article you are featuring. When placements are made, endeavor to obtain the person’s name and arrange for a return visit, with a view to starting a magazine route. If the magazine offer is refused, be friendly and leave the person in a good frame of mind.
8 Remember, the magazines we offer have “sayings of everlasting life.” (John 6:68) We should not be hesitant in offering them. Present them with zeal and enthusiasm.

