Regularity in Service Brings Blessings
1 There are many things we must do regularly in order to care for our physical well-being. If these are neglected, there are consequences we will suffer. In like manner, if we fail to satisfy our spiritual needs regularly, our faith can become weak and we may become irregular in our theocratic activity. Do we attend meetings regularly and maintain a personal study schedule that keeps us spiritually strong and equipped to be effective ministers of the good news? (2 Tim. 3:16, 17; 2 Cor. 3:5, 6) Do we take positive steps to share in the field service on a regular basis?
2 The psalmist wrote: “From day to day tell the good news of salvation by him.” (Ps. 96:2) Many of us may not share in field service each day, but would it not be reasonable to schedule some time for the ministry each week if at all possible? Although Paul recognized that to “declare the good news” was a “necessity” for him, he also declared the good news of the Kingdom eagerly. (1 Cor. 9:16; Rom. 1:15) Do we not also view sharing in the ministry each week as both a necessity and a grand privilege? Do we feel as did Peter and John who emphatically declared, “We cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard”?​—Acts 4:20.
3 For various reasons some of our brothers have allowed entire months to pass without spending even one hour in field service. This is a cause for concern because only if we exercise faith by sharing the good news with others can we expect to maintain spiritual strength. (Rom. 10:9, 10) As a muscle requires regular use to stay strong, so likewise our faith needs to be exercised in order to remain firm. By continually talking to others about the Kingdom, we keep the truth firmly embedded in our hearts.
4 Another reason for making public expression of our faith on a regular basis is that it serves as a protection, a bulwark, against Satan’s unrelenting efforts to pierce our spiritual armor with his burning missiles. (Eph. 6:16) Through lack of use and care, armor can rust and cease to serve as a protection. After itemizing our protective armor, Paul urges: “Also, accept . . . the sword of the spirit, that is, God’s word.” (Eph. 6:17) This is without doubt an unbeatable combination​—spiritual protective armor and the sword of the spirit.
5 Each congregation lovingly endeavors to offer personal assistance to those who, for various reasons, do not participate in field service on a regular basis. (Eph. 4:11-15) Each month the congregation secretary should provide each book study conductor with a list of those in his group who have not reported field service activity. Study conductors will do their part by giving particular attention to the spiritual needs of these, offering personally to assist them in the ministry or arranging for someone else to do so. And, of course, the service overseer, working through the study conductors, will take the lead in helping to reduce irregularity in the congregation. Never forget that each of us has a personal responsibility before Jehovah to have a regular share in the work to which we have been assigned.​—Compare Psalm 61:8.
6 Many blessings come to us if we steadfastly hold to a schedule that allows us to participate in the field ministry regularly. We will enjoy better results because regularity in field service helps develop skill in presenting the message. The happiness this brings makes us want to reach out for additional privileges. You may be one who can make room for auxiliary pioneering and, in time, regular pioneer service. Brothers who have a good share in the field ministry each month may, in time, be invited to accept additional responsibility in the congregation. Truly, regularity in field service does bring blessings.
7 By unitedly working “from day to day” to finish the work Jehovah has assigned, we will experience the joy that comes from giving and we will develop the spiritual fortitude required to endure to the end.​—Acts 20:35; Matt. 24:13.

