“Work What Is Good Toward All”
1 The apostle Paul wrote: “Really, then, as long as we have time favorable for it, let us work what is good toward all, but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” (Gal. 6:10) Do you not agree that now is the favorable time for zealous Kingdom service? (Compare John 9:4.) These are the last days; theocratic expansion is taking place everywhere, and potential for further increase is no doubt indicated in your congregation’s recent Memorial attendance.​—Isa. 60:22; Mark 13:10.
2 But what specifically is the activity that will allow us to “work what is good toward all”? When and for whom should we do that work? How can we rejoice and work for the good of all?
A GOOD WORK
3 From the very beginning of his heavenly existence, God’s Son, a master worker, set the example for us, working hard for the benefit of others. He always took delight in doing Jehovah’s will. (Prov. 8:22-31; Ps. 40:8) Later, his own words expressed his appreciation for the Christian ministry: “My food is for me to do the will of him that sent me and to finish his work.” (John 4:34) The preaching work he started during his earthly ministry is a most worthwhile work for us to do.​—John 14:12.
4 There is much of that good work yet to be done. (Matt. 9:37, 38; 10:11-13; 28:19, 20) Millions of people need help to understand God’s Word and to do his will. Therefore, let us work hard at this ministry for the good of all, and rejoice because we are privileged to share in it.
5 The Topic for Conversation and literature offer for May are the same as for last month. People need hope, which means they need to know the significance of the distresses the world is experiencing. Therefore, it undoubtedly will be effective to initiate conversations on the thought “Hope Despite World Distress Since 1914.” Also, offering the subscription to The Watchtower for a contribution of $3.50 can be the first step in a chain of events in our working what is good for others. At times you may want to include Awake! and offer both subscriptions for $7.00.
6 Have you recently given thought to your schedule for field service? Are you making full use of your opportunities to share in the important work Jehovah God has given us to do? (Eph. 5:15-17) No doubt, with a little planning, most of us can share in field service every week this month. Can you serve as an auxiliary pioneer anytime soon? All of us should consider seriously what we are doing individually and as family groups to use this favorable time we now have to preach, working for the good of all and rejoicing in Jehovah’s service.
ASSIST OTHERS
7 As the apostle said, we desire to work what is good for all, “but especially toward those related to us in the faith.” Do you know someone you can encourage, perhaps a newly interested person, a new publisher or an inactive one?
8 Many newly interested people attended the Memorial celebration last month. The ones who attended at your congregation will need help. Have you continued to help them progress in the truth? These persons, especially, should be given an opportunity to subscribe to our magazines and to have a regular home Bible study.​—John 21:15-17.
9 Do you know someone who recently became a Kingdom publisher and who may need encouragement and assistance? All of us who can recall when we first began to publish and how we were helped should be able to think of many ways we can help new publishers to become well established in the truth.​—Rom. 15:1, 2.
10 Perhaps some inactive persons who formerly associated with us attended the Memorial. They may now be ready to take further steps toward returning to active association with the congregation. The elders will surely appreciate your offering to help some of these who need assistance.
11 Yes, as we think about rejoicing and doing good, let us remain active in preaching the Kingdom good news to all who will hear, while not overlooking the needs of those who are related to us in the faith.​—Phil. 2:1-4.

