Blood Case Makes Headlines in Japan
“KEEP abstaining from . . . blood.” This clear command is given in the Bible at Acts 15:29. It is part of a decision handed down by the governing body of the Christian congregation in the first century and is recorded in God’s inspired Word for instruction of Christians down to this time.
However, this divine requirement was nothing new to the first century. Abstinence from blood was commanded 3,500 years ago in the Law of Moses, as stated at Leviticus 17:10-16. Indeed, a similar command was given more than 4,300 years ago to Noah, the progenitor of all mankind on earth today. We read it at Genesis 9:4: “Only flesh with its soul​—its blood—​you must not eat.”
From these scriptures it is plain to those who live by the Bible that blood is precious in God’s sight. As the Creator of man and the Provider of this stream of life, he is the One who may properly direct how blood is to be used. If it is not to be eaten to sustain life, then logically it may not be used to sustain life through intravenous feeding or blood transfusion. Those who worship the God of the Bible are careful to observe his requirements. And from his point of view, it is just as important to abstain from blood as to abstain from idolatry and fornication, as the scripture at Acts 15:28 and 29 clearly shows.
A Case That Jolted Japan
On June 6, 1985, at 4:35 p.m., ten-year-old Dai Suzuki was riding his bicycle. He was on his way to practice his first talk to be presented in the Theocratic Ministry School in the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses. He stopped at a traffic light between a large dump truck and the guardrail. When the light turned green, Dai started up. He was caught by the big rear tires of the truck and thrown down, crushing his legs. The wounds bled profusely. Five hours after being taken to a nearby hospital, Dai died as a result of his injury.
This event became nationwide news. What made it newsworthy was the fact that the parents refused to allow blood transfusions. The father of Dai is studying the Bible with Jehovah’s Witnesses, and his mother is already a baptized Witness. On religious grounds, they firmly rejected appeals for permission to administer blood. They even sealed their written refusal with fingerprints, which are legally binding if a person does not have his official seal with him at the time. They considered it proper to follow the Scriptures in which God has so consistently commanded his servants to ‘abstain from blood.’
At the time, the parents were threatened with a charge of murder if the child should die because of their not giving permission for blood transfusions. However, a careful autopsy later revealed that death was not caused by any negligence on the part of either the parents or the hospital. Therefore, no police charges were brought.
Japan’s three leading national newspapers, together with influential local papers, ran lengthy articles on the case. It was also publicized on TV news and radio news. In this way the media made strong appeals to popular sentiment, and as is so common in such emotion-packed cases, they twisted the facts considerably. Many of the articles were plainly provocative.
However, one commentator conceded that the Japanese are not accustomed to being governed by such strong religious conviction as that shown by the Suzuki family. He stated that ‘if a transfusion had been forced on the patient and he had survived, both parents and patient would be in greater torment than if it had ended in death.’ On this basis, he felt that one cannot really judge another’s faith.
Japanese television networks made a big fuss about the case, stirring up emotional prejudices. But from the viewpoint of the Suzuki family, it had been important to obey the clear directives of the God of the Bible. So the loving, God-fearing parents obeyed the Bible command, “Abstain from . . . blood.” (Acts 15:20, 29; 21:25) The fact that abstinence from blood is stressed in three separate verses in the book of Acts, and that it is parceled in with avoiding idolatry and fornication, shows how seriously the Creator views the matter.
In the rare event that a faithful Christian should die because of refusing blood, that one will surely be resurrected in God’s due time, according to His promise. The parents of Dai can confidently say, as did Martha concerning her brother Lazarus, “I know he will rise in the resurrection on the last day.”​—John 11:24; 5:28, 29.
The issue with Jehovah’s Witnesses is entirely a religious one. True, it may also be argued that in many cases there is less risk in refusing a blood transfusion than there is in accepting one, for thus a person is protected against the serious illnesses that are conveyed through blood transfusion, such as AIDS and hepatitis. However, to the Christian, who follows God’s Word, this is a secondary matter. The main concern is to obey and remain in the favor of the Life-Giver, Jehovah God, who is able also to bestow everlasting life.​—Psalm 36:9; Romans 2:6, 7.
It may require some sacrifice on occasion for a loyal Christian to stand by the Bible injunction ‘to keep abstaining from blood.’ Yet, self-sacrifice is a virtue that is recognized in many societies, and self-sacrifice in obeying one’s Creator will certainly bring his smile of approval.​—Luke 9:23, 24.
The Suzuki family chose resolutely to follow the Bible’s directive in obedience to Almighty God, despite emotion-charged pressures from those who did not understand the principles involved. (Acts 5:29) May “the God of all comfort” continue to nurture this family in their integrity and grant them a grand blessing in the resurrection!​—2 Corinthians 1:3, 4.
[Picture on page 23]
Dai when he started first grade in 1981

