From Our Readers
Puberty  Never has an article been needed more by our family than “Young People Ask . . . What Is Happening to My Body?” (January 22, 1990) My daughter is experiencing changes in her body that I felt ill-​equipped to explain. This article enabled me to sit down comfortably with my daughter and read it with her. It opened the way for her to express her concerns freely. Thank you for making my job much easier.
J. K., United States
Poland Conventions  My family and I had the privilege of attending these conventions [of Jehovah’s Witnesses]. (December 22, 1989) To mix freely with brothers from the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia, many of whom had traveled at great personal sacrifice, was a thrill. To see Russian and American brothers embracing one another was a silent testimony as to where the spirit of God is operating today.
I. L., Federal Republic of Germany
Fraud in Science  Your article on scientific fraud (January 22, 1990) seems to slander almost all scientists. As a professional chemist, I am aware of and condemn fraud. But your articles could be considered to be in part what you so vehemently condemn. Your first article contained no original text (Is this plagiarism?) but combines “select” headlines. The second article makes no mention of the vast majority of scientists who do not commit fraud. Is this not propaganda? This type of reporting damages your credibility.
W. M., United States
We appreciate these frank expressions. It was not our intention to discredit scientists as a group. We stated at the outset that “flagrant fraud may be rare.” And we agree that the vast majority of scientists are honest. However, the damage done by a dishonest few is potentially so far-​reaching that a condemnation of scientific fraud in the very strongest of terms was deemed appropriate. We also believe that presenting the theory of evolution as fact constitutes a form of fraud of the highest degree​—one in which the majority of the scientific community has participated. At any rate, the headlined articles quoted therein were not plagiarized inasmuch as their sources were clearly indicated. The quotes came from reputable sources and served to illustrate the extent of the problem of scientific fraud.​—ED.
Glaucoma  After reading the article on glaucoma (May 8, 1988), my husband had his eyes examined, only to find that the symptoms he was experiencing were not of glaucoma but of something far more serious. Because of reading the article, we have been able to make plans for the future and work toward his imminent retirement.
E. D., United States
Seaweed  Thank you for the article on seaweed. (January 22, 1990) Before reading it, I would never have imagined all the properties of what has unjustly​—as I now realize—​been called a “slimy, troublesome nuisance.” I have been sharing this information with others.
G. S., France
In-​Laws  Thank you very much for your article on problems with in-​laws. (February 22, 1990) My husband and I lived with his mother for one year. The daily, subtle rivalry created great strains. When we lived on our own, the situation improved. I came to appreciate her advice more and more. But her urge to offer direction remains a cause of irritation. What understanding and deep feeling were expressed in this article! It is hoped that many husbands, wives, and in-​laws will benefit from its excellent counsel.
A. T. G., Netherlands

