
Reasons to Trust the Bible
5. Fulfilled Prophecy

Imagine a weather forecaster who has a long record of being right—every time. If he predicted rain, would you carry an umbrella?




THE Bible is filled with predictions, or prophecies.a Its record, as documented by history, is clear. Bible prophecy is always right.



Distinguishing features.
 Bible prophecies are often specific and have been fulfilled down to the smallest of details. They usually involve matters of great importance and predict the opposite of what those living at the time of the writing might have been expecting.



An outstanding example.
 Strategically built astride the Euphrates River, ancient Babylon has been called “the political, religious, and cultural centre of the ancient Orient.” About 732 B.C.E., the prophet Isaiah penned an ominous prophecy—Babylon would fall. Isaiah provided specifics: A leader named “Cyrus” would be the conqueror, the protective waters of the Euphrates would “dry up,” and the city’s gates would “not be shut.” (Isaiah 44:27–45:3) Some 200 years later, on October 5, 539 B.C.E., the prophecy was fulfilled in all its details. Greek historian Herodotus (fifth century B.C.E.) confirmed the manner of Babylon’s fall.b



A bold detail.
 Isaiah made a further startling prediction regarding Babylon: “She will never be inhabited.” (Isaiah 13:19, 20) To predict permanent desolation for a sprawling city occupying a strategic location was bold indeed. You would normally expect that such a city would be rebuilt if ruined. Although Babylon lingered on for a while after its conquest, Isaiah’s words eventually came true. Today the site of ancient Babylon “is flat, hot, deserted and dusty,” reports Smithsonian magazine.
It is awesome to contemplate the magnitude of Isaiah’s prophecy. What he foretold would be the equivalent of predicting the exact manner in which a modern city, such as New York or London, would be destroyed 200 years from now and then emphatically stating that it would never again be inhabited. Of course, most remarkable is the fact that Isaiah’s prophecy came true!c
The Bible accurately foretold that a leader named Cyrus would conquer mighty Babylon

In this series of articles, we have considered some of the evidence that has convinced millions of people that the Bible is trustworthy. They therefore look to it as a reliable guide to direct their steps. Why not learn more about the Bible so that you can decide for yourself whether you too can trust it?



Weather forecasts are likelihoods. Bible prophecy is inspired by God, who can maneuver events if he chooses to do so.
For more details regarding the fulfillment of Isaiah’s prophecy, see pages 27-29 of the brochure A Book for All People, published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.
For more examples of Bible prophecies and the historical facts documenting their fulfillment, see pages 117-33 of the book The Bible—God’s Word or Man’s? published by Jehovah’s Witnesses.

