An Enduring Expression of God’s Love
THE seven wonders of the ancient world were so named because they evoked awe in the minds of men. Yet, with the exception of the pyramids, these edifices no longer exist. On the other hand, the Bible, although penned by humble men on perishable materials, still exists and has been accurately transmitted down to our very day. We can have the fullest confidence in this unique book.—Isaiah 40:8; 2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
By having his thoughts put in writing, Jehovah God ensured that their transmission would not be left to the flawed memories of men. Additionally, the simple language God’s penmen used enables even many with a limited education to read the Bible with understanding. (Acts 4:13) Would you expect any less of the Creator and his inspired secretaries? Besides that, the Bible’s wide distribution gives proof of God’s great love for his human creation, no matter where people live or what language they speak. (1 John 4:19) To be sure, the wide availability of the Bible does not cheapen it but, instead, elevates it!
The contents of the Bible reveal even more about God’s love. As we have seen in the preceding articles, God’s Word explains where we came from, why life is so short and filled with trouble, and how God will remedy this situation by means of his Kingdom government. We have also considered some excellent Biblical advice on how to enjoy a happy and rewarding life even now. (Psalm 19:7-11; Isaiah 48:17, 18) Above all, we have learned how our Creator will clear his name of all the reproach that has been brought upon it by Satan’s lies.—Matthew 6:9.
What other book is so rich, so relevant, so practical, and so filled with hope for ailing mankind? Yes, unlike the seven wonders of the ancient world, most of which were constructed to glorify false gods or powerful men, the Bible truly is an enduring expression of Jehovah’s unselfish love for his human creation.
If you have not already done so, why not examine the Scriptures for yourself. At present, Jehovah’s Witnesses are conducting free Bible studies with more than six million people worldwide. They count it a privilege to help sincere individuals to see for themselves that the Bible really is trustworthy, the inspired Word of God.—1 Thessalonians 2:13.

