Kingdom News No. 25
Why Are We Here?
ARE WE HERE . . .
BY MERE ACCIDENT?
JUST TO LIVE A SHORT TIME, GET WHAT WE CAN OUT OF LIFE, AND DIE?
Many people view life in such ways. But still they may wonder . . .
Where am I really going?
Is there no greater purpose than the brief cycle of birth, life and death?
Some try to give meaning to life by devoting themselves to a cause, to art, to another person, or to pleasure.
But none of these things satisfy our desire to keep on living and to know the purpose of life. Yet . . .
THERE IS REASON TO BELIEVE THAT LIFE HAS A REAL PURPOSE. WHY SO?
Well, consider:
The unchanging laws of the universe—gravity, atomic forces, heredity. These things make it possible for life to be stable and to continue.
You are not a mere robot, but were born with the capacity to enjoy . . .
● beautiful music
● delicious foods
● healthful living
WHY, THEN, ARE WE HERE?
The Bible comes to grips with this question.
It reveals that God “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing”; he “formed it even to be inhabited.”—Isaiah 45:18.
But there must be more to it than simply having people live on earth.
Surely God’s purpose for humans is not reflected by today’s wars, crime, hunger and pollution. These must be removed.
Therefore God purposes that “as regards the wicked, they will be cut off from the very earth.” “The blameless are the ones that will be left over in it.”—Proverbs 2:21, 22.
Jesus Christ taught men to pray for this very thing in the Lord’s Prayer when they ask God:
“Let your kingdom come. Let your will take place, as in heaven, also upon earth.”—Matthew 6:10. See also 1 Corinthians 15:25.
A SATISFYING PURPOSE
With all obstacles to peace and happiness removed, God promises that . . .
“The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.”—Psalm 37:10, 11, 29.
Living forever, humans will then be able to realize their full potential . . .
Endless opportunities to learn and be creative will open up before mankind.
Peaceful and satisfying relationships with all our fellow humans will prevail earth wide.
You may say all of this sounds good, but—
WHEN WILL GOD BRING THIS ABOUT? WHY HAS HE WAITED SO LONG TO DO SO?
Chapters in the book offered below are devoted to discussing these very questions. Reasonable and satisfying answers from the Bible are offered.
More than this, the book shows how your life can have a purpose beyond your fondest hopes! Why not take this opportunity to learn more?
Please send me, postpaid, the 192-page book “Life Does Have a Purpose.” I am enclosing 25 cents (U.S.).
[Picture on page 2]
There Must Be a Purpose Behind It All!
[Picture on page 4]
Under God’s Kingdom, Mankind’s Full Potential Will Be Realized

