Building One Another Up While in the Ministry
1 All of us appreciate receiving an encouraging “word spoken at the right time.” (Prov. 25:11) When we work with others in the ministry, how can we make sure that our conversation results in encouragement?
2 Upbuilding Conversation: How upbuilding it is to include spiritual matters in our conversation while engaging in the preaching work! (Ps. 37:30) We could talk about our presentation or relate encouraging field service experiences we recently enjoyed. (Acts 15:3) Did we glean an interesting point from our personal Bible reading, the recent magazines, or a congregation meeting? We might discuss points presented in a public talk we recently heard at the Kingdom Hall.
3 We may feel disheartened when a householder raises an objection that we are unable to overcome. It would be beneficial for us to take a few minutes after leaving the door to consider with our partner how such a situation might be handled in the future, perhaps by consulting the Reasoning book. And if we appreciated something about our partner’s presentation, a word of sincere commendation would provide welcome encouragement.
4 Take the Initiative: Are there some in our book study group with whom we have not worked recently? Extending a personal invitation to accompany us in the ministry may result in “an interchange of encouragement.” (Rom. 1:12) Regular and auxiliary pioneers appreciate having others to work with, especially in the early morning or late afternoon, when fewer publishers may be sharing in the ministry. We can support the pioneers by making ourselves available. Is there an infirm publisher whose health limits what he is able to do in the ministry? Arranging for such a one to accompany us, perhaps on a Bible study, may be beneficial.​—Prov. 27:17.
5 Commendation and expressions of appreciation are always encouraging, even in small matters. We should have that in mind when working with others in the ministry, since we want to “keep . . . building one another up.”​—1 Thess. 5:11.

