How May We Assist Memorial Attenders?
 1. What powerful witness will be given on March 22, 2008?
1 On March 22, 2008, millions of people around the world will receive a powerful witness. Those attending the Memorial will hear about Jehovah’s great love in providing a ransom for mankind. (John 3:16) They will learn about the Kingdom and how Jehovah will use it to accomplish his will for all the earth. (Matt. 6:9, 10) They will see firsthand the love and unity of God’s people and experience our warm hospitality.​—Ps. 133:1.
 2. How may we assist Bible students who are present?
2 Bible Students: Some in attendance will be those who have just started studying the Bible with us. Introduce them to the brothers and sisters. Explain the weekly meetings, and give them a brief tour of the Kingdom Hall. During the talk, the speaker will encourage such ones to continue making spiritual progress. You can use his comments as a basis to encourage your students.
 3. What can be done to encourage inactive publishers who are in attendance?
3 Inactive: Some attending will be inactive publishers. Take the initiative to greet them warmly. Avoid asking personal questions or making statements that may cause embarrassment. Shortly after the Memorial, the elders should visit any inactive ones who attended, commend them for their efforts to attend, and warmly invite them to the next congregation meeting.
 4. How may each of us help visitors?
4 Visitors: Some of those present may be acquaintances or family members whom we personally invited. Others may have received an invitation during the special campaign. If you see individuals you do not recognize, take the initiative to introduce yourself and welcome them. It may be that they have not attended one of our meetings before. In your conversation you may be able to find out how to contact them. By a personal visit or a brief telephone call a few days after the Memorial, you could try to cultivate further interest and offer a Bible study.
 5. What might we say to start a Bible study?
5 The information in the Memorial talk can be used as a basis for introducing the Bible Teach book on a return visit. For example, the Memorial speaker will read Isaiah 65:21-23. On the return visit, you might mention the talk and say, “Let me show you other blessings the ransom makes possible.” Then consider pages 4-5 of the Bible Teach book. Or you could say, “Many wonder when we will experience the fulfillment of Isaiah’s prophecy.” Then consider paragraphs 1-3 in chapter 9. Another option is simply to refer to the Memorial speaker’s comments, introduce the Bible Teach book, and demonstrate the study.
 6. What opportunities do we have as we obey Jesus’ command to commemorate his death?
6 May each of us be alert to opportunities to assist Bible students, inactive publishers, and visitors who will be in attendance. (Luke 22:19) Jehovah will surely bless any increased activity in our Kingdom service.

