Question Box
▪ What type of clothing is appropriate when visiting facilities used for Jehovah’s service?
Around the world, Kingdom Halls, Assembly Halls, Bethel homes, and branch facilities stand out as places dedicated to Jehovah’s service. They are modest, clean, and well-arranged, reflecting dignity in appearance. The contrast with what is often seen in Satan’s system of things is great indeed. Those who visit places used for Jehovah’s service should also be recognized as belonging to Jehovah, ones who are doing his will.
As Christians, we “recommend ourselves as God’s ministers” in every way, including our appropriate, well-arranged dress and grooming. (2 Cor. 6:3, 4) We are also expected to maintain proper decorum. At all times our dress and grooming should reflect the decency and dignity that befit servants of Jehovah God. This is especially true when visiting the headquarters facilities in New York as well as the branches around the world.
In discussing the importance of proper dress and grooming, Organized to Do Jehovah’s Will comments on the need for physical cleanness, modest dress, and good grooming when we engage in the field ministry and attend Christian meetings. Then, on page 138, paragraph 3, it states: “Remember, the name Bethel means ‘House of God.’ Therefore, our dress, grooming, and conduct should be similar to what is expected of us when attending meetings for worship at the Kingdom Hall.” This high standard should be observed by Kingdom publishers visiting Bethel from the local area as well as those from more distant places. In this way, the visitor demonstrates appropriate appreciation and respect.​—Ps. 29:2.
Our clothing should identify us as those “professing to reverence God.” (1 Tim. 2:10) Appropriate dress and grooming have a positive influence on the way others view the true worship of Jehovah. However, it has been noted that when visiting facilities used for Jehovah’s service, a few brothers and sisters tend to be extremely casual, sloppy, or revealing in their dress. Such attire is not appropriate for Christians at any time. In this matter, as in all other aspects of our Christian life, we desire to maintain the high standards that distinguish God’s people from the world, doing all things for God’s glory.​—Rom. 12:2; 1 Cor. 10:31.
So when visiting the headquarters and branch in New York State or other branch facilities, whether on a planned visit or while on vacation in tourist areas, ask yourself: ‘Does my dress and grooming reflect the modesty, the cleanliness, and the dignity of the place I will be visiting? Does it reflect well on the God that I worship? Would others be distracted or offended by my appearance?’ By our dress and grooming, may we always “adorn the teaching of our Savior, God, in all things”!​—Titus 2:10.

