Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting March 10
Song 131
10 min: Local announcements. Using the suggestions on page 4 or other presentations appropriate for your territory, demonstrate how to offer the March 1 Watchtower and the March Awake! along with the Memorial invitation.
20 min: Why Meet Together? Talk and audience discussion based on the May 15, 2007, Watchtower, pages 11-13. Invite audience to comment on how attendance at congregation meetings has benefited them and how they have overcome obstacles in order to attend meetings regularly.
15 min: “We Can Give to Jehovah.”a As time permits, invite audience to comment on the cited scriptures.
Song 8
Week Starting March 17
Song 144
10 min: Local announcements. Remind audience to bring the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake! to the Service Meeting next week and to be prepared to discuss appropriate presentations for the local territory. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry.
15 min: Question Box. To be handled by an elder. Read and discuss entire article.
20 min: “How May We Assist Memorial Attenders?”b When considering paragraph 5, briefly demonstrate how a Bible study may be started with a visitor who attended the Memorial.
Song 214
Week Starting March 24
Song 111
10 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments.
15 min: Prepare to Offer the Current Magazines. Audience discussion. After giving a brief overview of the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake! ask the audience which articles may appeal to people in the territory and why. Invite audience to mention specific points in articles they plan to feature. What question could be asked to start a conversation? Which scripture in the article could then be read? Using presentations suggested for the local territory, demonstrate how to offer the April 1 Watchtower and the April Awake!
20 min: We Bring Good News of Something Better. Following an introduction of less than one minute, an elder gives a talk based on the July 1, 2005, Watchtower, pages 18-19, paragraphs 10-14. Invite the audience to comment on how the Kingdom message gave them comfort and hope when they first heard it.
Song 29
Week Starting March 31
Song 37
10 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for March.
20 min: Make Good Use of the 2008 Yearbook. Talk and audience discussion. Discuss “A Letter From the Governing Body,” on pages 3-5. Have two or three in the audience relate an experience from the Yearbook that has been especially encouraging to them. Arrange in advance for one or two publishers to comment on how they schedule their personal reading of the Yearbook. Conclude by encouraging all to read the entire book.
15 min: “Building One Another Up While in the Ministry”c
Song 122
Week Starting April 7
Song 186
10 min: Local announcements.
20 min: Why Put Off Getting Baptized? Talk by an elder based on the July 1, 2006, Watchtower, pages 29-30, paragraphs 14-17. Include a brief interview of one or two publishers who were baptized as teenagers. What moved them to take this important step at a young age? How did their baptism help them develop spiritual maturity, which is a protection?
15 min: Have You Tried the Direct Approach? Talk and audience discussion based on the January 2002 Our Kingdom Ministry insert, page 6. Discuss the sample presentations and how they may be modified to start a Bible study in the Bible Teach book. Then have one or two demonstrations. Encourage audience to try at least once during the next week to start a Bible study in the Bible Teach book using the direct approach.
Song 225
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

