Announcements
● Literature offer for October and November: Subscription for either The Watchtower or Awake! or both. Cost of subscriptions is $3.50 per year for semimonthly magazines, $2.00 per six months for semimonthly magazines and $2.00 per year for monthly magazines. (There is no six-month subscription for monthly magazines.) December: New World Translation with any 192-page book for $3.75. January and February: Live Forever book for $2.50.
● New Publications Available:
“Let Your Kingdom Come”—Greek
My Book of Bible Stories—Hungarian
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—French, Greek
Watch Tower Publications Index 1976-1980—Portuguese
Aid to Bible Understanding (Part 5, As-Ba)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Part 6, Ba-Be)—Italian
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Tagalog
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
To the Romans (single cassette)—Japanese
The First to the Corinthians (single cassette)—Japanese
The Second to the Corinthians (single cassette)—Danish
To the Galatians, to the Ephesians (single cassette)—Danish
To the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians (single cassette)—Japanese
To the Philippians through The Second to the Thessalonians (single cassette)—Danish
● Prepare for the special talk and Memorial: Please order special talk handbills and Memorial invitations now so that your congregation will receive them well in advance of the special talk to be held on Sunday, April 10, 1983, or during the week following, and the Memorial celebration on Tuesday, March 29, 1983. Check locally for time of sundown. The special handbills should be ordered on the yellow Special Talk Handbill Order. Memorial invitations may be ordered in lots of 250, 500 and 1,000, using the special blue Memorial Invitation Order Form. Two copies of each form are being sent to the congregations with the October statement. It would be appreciated if these could be filled out as soon as possible and returned for processing. This will save the Society and the congregations considerable expense in postage. The special talk will be on the subject: “Religion’s Time of Judgment.” PLEASE DO NOT REMIT WITH YOUR ORDER. The handbills and invitations will be charged to your congregation’s literature account. Payment for these should be included with the amount of money remitted for literature. Please do not list payment for handbills and invitations separately on the remittance form.
● Portions of the book Man’s Salvation out of World Distress at Hand! will be studied in the congregation book studies beginning the week of December 5, 1982, and continuing through the week of May 29, 1983. It should not be necessary for older publishers to order new copies of this publication as the majority will have a personal copy from prior years that can be used. If local congregation supplies are depleted, the Society has a limited supply to fill congregations orders for those newer publishers who do not yet have a copy. Or, it may be that copies can be obtained from nearby congregations.
● With this issue of Our Kingdom Ministry, we are including the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule for 1983. This will enable school overseers to make assignments well in advance.

