Keep the Word of Jehovah Moving Speedily
1 The apostle Paul encouraged the brothers in Thessalonica: “Carry on prayer for us, that the word of Jehovah may keep moving speedily and being glorified.” (2 Thess. 3:1) Yes, Paul saw the need back there for ‘the word of Jehovah to move speedily’ so that as many as possible could be reached with the message of truth. Now that we are living so close to the end of this wicked system of things, do we appreciate the need for the word to move speedily in our day?—Zeph. 1:14.
2 We recognize that only with Jehovah’s blessing can our work meet with success. (Ps. 127:1) So when we meet for service we always unite in prayer for Jehovah’s guidance and blessing. And no doubt many times while we are engaged in the ministry we seek Jehovah’s help so that we may effectively share the truth with others. But Jesus encouraged his followers to pray for something else. What was that? For more workers to share in the harvest. (Matt. 9:35-38) We want to pray in that same way, and thereafter act in harmony with those prayers.
REGULARITY IN SERVICE
3 What would you do if someone prohibited you from speaking or saying a word for a whole month? Or for six months or even longer? Would it be possible to spend so much time without speaking or conversing with someone? It would be difficult indeed! Nevertheless, some have allowed a month to pass without speaking to others about the message of the Kingdom of God, allowing themselves to become irregular publishers. Others have permitted six months or more to go by without talking to others about the truth, thus becoming inactive.
4 How can such a situation arise? A clue is found in these words of Jesus: “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.” (Matt. 12:34) If our hearts are filled with appreciation for Jehovah’s Kingdom and all that he has done, we will be moved to share in the preaching and teaching work on a regular basis. Our attitude will be exactly that of the disciples of Jesus who said of themselves: “As for us, we cannot stop speaking about the things we have seen and heard.”—Acts 4:20.
5 We experience fine effects by sharing regularly in the service. Our own faith is strengthened. When individuals ask questions this prompts us to do further research; in this way our own knowledge grows. The more we use the Bible, the more our ability to give Scriptural answers improves.—1 Pet. 3:15.
6 Think of how the truth has helped us! It has comforted us with the marvelous hope for the future. And it has helped many of us to overcome bad habits. When we give consideration to how precious the truth is to us, we will be moved to help others.
SUBSCRIPTIONS SUPPLY SPIRITUAL FOOD
7 During October and November we will have the privilege of featuring subscriptions to either The Watchtower or Awake! or to both. Those who obtain subscriptions will have the opportunity of receiving a regular supply of spiritually upbuilding information. How about yourself? It is a fine thing if each member of a family has a personal subscription. Then each one is better equipped to urge others to subscribe also.
8 When going from house to house, do not hesitate to offer subscriptions. Sometimes we may be inclined to prejudge individuals as not being interested enough to subscribe or too poor to afford a subscription. But rather than let such personal feelings hold us back, we should go ahead and make the offer. Why withhold good from anyone? The householders may surprise us! And, of course, the magazines will do much to benefit them. Think of it, they can get a whole year’s supply of spiritual food for less than the cost of a meal of material food! But if individuals turn down the subscription offer, then we can offer the two current issues on a 30-cent contribution, and perhaps at a future time they will decide to subscribe.
9 Our topic for conversation “Earth’s Future—Secure!” will fit in easily with our offer of the subscription to either one or both of our magazines. May all of us do our part in keeping the word of Jehovah moving speedily. Do this by helping others to appreciate the spiritual food in The Watchtower and Awake! magazines and thereby learn of the secure future for those who truly love Jehovah.—Prov. 1:33.

