Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 3
Song 81
 8 min: Local announcements and Announcements. All should endeavor to participate in magazine work this coming Saturday, which is the second Saturday of October.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Offering Watchtower and Awake! Subscriptions.” Question-and-answer discussion. In considering paragraph 3 ask audience what specific points they have used or plan to use in connection with the October 8 Awake! Demonstrate suggestions outlined in paragraphs 6 and 7.
17 min: Prepare locally according to needs. Or consider “Money-lending and Christian Love” from August 1, 1982, Watchtower.
Song 10 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 10
Song 103
10 min: Local announcements. Review congregation report for September.
20 min: “Keep the Word of Jehovah Moving Speedily.” Question-and-answer discussion. Consider scriptures cited as time allows. Briefly interview two or three publishers when considering paragraph 5, showing how being regular in field service has been of help to them.
15 min: “New ‘Live Forever’ Book Creates Excitement.” Service overseer conducts discussion of article and has paragraphs read. When considering paragraphs 4 and 5 call for local reactions to release of book at district convention.
Song 89 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 17
Song 29
 8 min: Local announcements and accounts report.
25 min: “Directing Interest to the Organization—Part III.” Talk by elder. Have two brief demonstrations showing what may be done to acquaint student with organization, using brochure Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century.
Demonstration #1: Effective teacher considers with student key points from page 6 of the brochure, highlighting the modern-day organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Show growth from a small group of Bible students to thousands of congregations worldwide; from 50 persons in full-time service in 1888 to over 150,000 in world currently. Use 1982 Yearbook to show student current number of Jehovah’s Witnesses worldwide. Highlight purpose of this publication. The modern-day organization of Jehovah’s Witnesses has been active for more than 100 years.
Demonstration #2: Another qualified teacher considers material from pages 30 and 31 with more advanced student, encouraging participation in the preaching work. Read key paragraphs and consider Bible texts as time allows. Make arrangements for student to accompany publisher in door-to-door work as an observer.
Chairman concludes by encouraging all to be conscious of directing persons to Jehovah’s organization. Use suggestions that have been presented in last three issues of Our Kingdom Ministry.
12 min: “New Subscription System.” Discuss with audience. Encourage prompt follow-through on subscription renewal slips. Include brief demonstration or experiences as time permits.
Song 108 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 24
Song 68
 8 min: Announcements and consider daily text briefly.
15 min: “A Wise View of Education.” Talk based on two articles, pages 11-15 of July 15, 1982, Watchtower.
10 min: Following Through on Subscription Prospects. Talk and demonstration showing need to follow through on all interest found. Demonstrate return visit on individual who took magazines to see what they were like or someone who wanted to subscribe but did not have the money at time. Encourage all to be subscription conscious.
12 min: Local experiences in field service. Line up some participants ahead of time, preferably auxiliary or regular pioneers, who had interesting experiences recently in field. Encourage participation in field service this weekend.
Song 41 and prayer.

