New “Live Forever” Book Creates Excitement
1 “Do not miss the presentation with which Saturday’s program concludes,” The Watchtower advised when telling about the coming district convention, “it will feature information that will have long-lasting effects on the Kingdom-preaching work worldwide.”
2 How excited we were to be there and to receive what was being referred to—the new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth! Already, in our Brooklyn printery, the 5,000,000 first-edition printing has been exceeded. And about 2,000,000 more copies have been produced in our printeries in Germany and Japan.
3 It was noted at our recent conventions that in the some 20 years that “Let God Be True” was our primary study book (from 1946 to the mid-1960’s) over 1,000,000 new Kingdom proclaimers were added to our ranks. Then another 1,000,000 publishers were added when The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life became our primary study book following its release in 1968. With the use of our new study book, You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth, will we see a similar expansion in the ranks of the Kingdom publishers? Surely, if this be Jehovah’s will!
4 However, is this new publication just what we need for the great Kingdom work ahead? Well, as the letter from “The Publishers” in your convention copy of the Live Forever book says: “It contains all the important Bible truths that new ones need to understand in order to dedicate their lives to Jehovah and to serve him acceptably. . . . So this is indeed an excellent book to use in studying with everyone, young or old, no matter what their standard of education.” But what has been your reaction to the development of the book’s subject material and the way it is written?
5 No doubt you were impressed by the more than 150 visual illustrations. These are not just attractive decorations in the book, rather, they are real teaching aids. They are designed and placed so as to emphasize the point of the text being considered. Thus the reader or student can consider the content of the pictures along with the material being studied. And well-worded captions briefly and concisely highlight the teaching point of the pictures. These involve the student and impel him to act.
6 We will want to give this new Live Forever book the widest distribution possible. During the months of January and February we will be featuring it in the field service. So do not be caught short: Be sure your congregation has plenty of supplies on hand!

