Part III—Directing Interest to the Organization
1 During the past two months we have considered various ways of using the brochure, Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century to direct interested persons to Jehovah’s organization. Let us give further thought to how it may be used.
BE SELECTIVE
2 Advance preparation on your part is needed. Select information from the brochure that will fit the particular needs of the student. Keep in mind that new ones do not all advance at the same rate so you will need to select points for discussion that will enhance the appreciation of each individual. Take into consideration the progress the student has already made. There is a need to be flexible. A good teacher knows the potential of his students and can discern just which points to present at a particular time. (John 16:12) Keep your discussion of the organization progressive, building appreciation week by week.
3 It would be well to make a copy of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century available to the student. Then he can be encouraged to take the initiative to read it through. He will have it available as you consider information from it on a regular basis.
ENCOURAGEMENT FOR NEW STUDENTS
4 We want our students to appreciate the scope of the work being done by Jehovah’s Witnesses, as well as the international brotherhood we enjoy. This should help even very new ones decide to attend congregation meetings without delay. A brief review of the modern-day organization is presented on pages 6 through 9 of the brochure. Building appreciation for the organization can be accomplished by briefly reviewing the heading, “Their Modern Development and Growth.” We can emphasize the phenomenal growth of Jehovah’s Witnesses during the past 100 years, and point out the value of The Watchtower in helping persons to study the Bible. Referring to page 8, we can discuss the increase in circulation of Awake! Also, we can discuss our name on the basis of Isaiah 43:10-12.
5 The world headquarters of Jehovah’s Witnesses at Brooklyn is a beehive of activity. The work done there is described on pages 9 and 10. The illustrations on page 10 show the Society’s facilities in New York City and at Watchtower Farms. At these locations volunteer workers prepare and print the Bible literature we use. Help the student to see that all of this is being directed by God’s organization in order to accomplish the work commanded by Jesus.—Matt. 28:19, 20.
6 We can direct the attention of more advanced Bible students to finer details on these same topics. For instance, we may refer to page 7 and discuss what is stated about the year 1914 and what has been said about it as “a turning point in human history.” Later, we could discuss “Court Victories” on page 8 or expand on “Special Training Programs” mentioned on pages 8 and 9. Page 30 gives us a fine opportunity to point out to the advanced student the responsibility that all have to preach the good news. We can review with them the Scriptural reasons why we need to preach. (Matt. 24:14; 1 Cor. 9:16) It may take several study sessions to cover these paragraphs thoroughly.
OTHER SUGGESTIONS
7 One brother who has used these methods effectively said: “The thing for which to strive is simplicity. Just a couple of scripture texts, a brief discussion touching on the need for being present at meetings, and, would you believe it?—it works!” Another brother stated: “In my opening and closing prayers I always refer to Jehovah’s organization and express that it is a grand privilege to be associated with it.
8 Remember to discuss points about the organization on a regular basis. As you use Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Twentieth Century, let it help you to become more effective in directing new ones to associate with Jehovah’s people regularly.

