Presenting the Good News—By Offering Watchtower and Awake! Subscriptions
1 At least four times a month we Witnesses receive good news, namely, when we receive our copies of the latest issues of The Watchtower and Awake! How happy we are to be supplied with spiritual food through Jehovah’s earthly organization! The Watchtower keeps us abreast of the latest understanding of God’s Word. Awake! keeps us up-to-date on a wide variety of topics, including how world affairs are fulfilling Bible prophecies.
2 We find happiness in reading these publications regularly, and we know others would too. They can if they subscribe to these two fine magazines. With every issue of The Watchtower and Awake! coming into the home, there are excellent possibilities that a number of individuals in the household will pick them up and read articles of interest. Thus many may have opportunities to learn the truth. So we have good reason to offer subscriptions to all we meet.
FEATURE ARTICLES OF SPECIAL INTEREST
3 In the October 8 Awake! there are articles that will be of interest to people in all walks of life. The title of one of these asks, “The Design in Nature—What Does It Prove?” This can no doubt be used effectively in arousing interest in the Awake! magazine. Another article you might choose to highlight when presenting this issue is, “Adam and Eve—Real Persons or Only Fiction?” Most people have heard about Adam and Eve, but some may not believe they actually existed. This article would be of particular interest to them. Those who do believe they were real persons would be interested in having proof that they can share with others. Or you might want to point out the article, “When All Nature Will Be in Harmony,” which emphasizes the wonderful hope we have for the future. This subject might be especially appealing to older people.
4 The October 15 issue of The Watchtower discusses the subject, “Our Needs—Can Governments Fill Them?” followed by, “How Our Needs Will Be Filled.” You may want to select a sentence or two out of one of these articles to use in connection with offering The Watchtower subscription. If you are talking to a youth or parent you may wish to highlight a point in one of the articles about youth, “Do Children Want Rules?” or “Sound Guidance for Today’s Youth” or “Rearing Your Children to Love Jehovah.”
5 The October 22 issue of Awake! features information dealing with television, “Television—What It Can Do for You . . . and to You.” Included is fine information on family life and education and how television affects this.
TIE IN SUBSCRIPTION WITH TOPIC FOR CONVERSATION
6 As we go from house to house, we want to arouse the interest of householders in the Bible and this can best be done by endeavoring to share the information in our Topic for Conversation before offering the subscription. If we choose to highlight the October 8 Awake! after reading Psalm 119:90 we might say something like this: “Since it is God’s purpose to keep the earth in existence, do you think he will want it to continue to be filled with problems as it is today, with mankind ruining the environment? [Allow householder to answer.] To explain what God intends for the earth, I would like to share this issue of Awake! with you. It has a discussion on the subject, ‘When All Nature Will Be in Harmony.’” Then you might point out a specific item in the article and proceed to explain the subscription offer.
7 When offering The Watchtower subscription, after considering Psalm 119:90 with the householder, you might highlight the article, “How Our Needs Will Be Filled” in the October 15 issue. Refer to a specific point and then explain the subscription arrangement.
8 Let your own enthusiasm for these fine magazines shine through as you offer the subscriptions at every opportunity. Our magazines are valuable! May you experience the joy of helping many others to appreciate this value and to benefit by their Bible-based message.

