R1749 : page 1 

VOL. XVI. JANUARY 1, 1895. No. 1. 



CONTENTS. 



Our New Dress 2 

Accepting God's Gifts Gratefully 2 

A German Quarterly 2 

Views from the Tower 3 

"This is the Way." 6 

Poem: Pray Without Ceasing 7 

On Trial for Life 7 

Bible Study: John the Baptist Beheaded 9 

Bible Study: Feeding the Five Thousand 9 

Bible Study: Christ the Bread of Life 10 

Selections for the Family Circle 1 1 

"Out of Darkness"— Interesting Letters 1 1 

R1750 : page 2 

THIS JOURNAL AND ITS MISSION. 



THIS journal is set for the defence of the only true foundation of 

the Christian's hope now being so generally repudiated,— Redemption 

through the precious blood of "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself 

aransom [a corresponding price, a substitute] for all." (1 Pet. 1:19; 

1 Tim. 2:6.) Building up on this sure foundation the gold, silver 

and precious stones (1 Cor. 3:1 1-15; 2 Pet. 1:5-11) of the Word 

of God, its further mission is to— "Make all see what is the fellowship 

of the mystery which. ..has been hid in God,. ..to the intent 

that now might be made known by the Church the manifold wisdom of 

God"— "which in other ages was not made known unto the sons of men, 

as it is now revealed."— Eph. 3:5-9,10. 

It stands free from all parties, sects and creeds of men, while it 
seeks more and more to bring its every utterance into fullest subjection to 
the will of God in Christ, as expressed in the Holy Scriptures. It is thus 
free to declare boldly whatsoever the Lord hath spoken;— according to 
the divine wisdom granted unto us, to understand. Its attitude is not 
dogmatical, but confident; for we know whereof we affirm, treading with 
implicit faith upon the sure promises of God. It is held as a trust, to 
be used only in his service; hence our decisions relative to what may and 
what may not appear in its columns must be according to our judgment 
of his good pleasure, the teaching of his Word, for the upbuilding of his 
people in grace and knowledge. And we not only invite but urge our readers 
to prove all its utterances by the infallible Word to which reference 
is constantly made, to facilitate such testing. 

TO US THE SCRIPTURES CLEARLY TEACH 



That the Church is "the Temple of the Living God"— peculiarly "His 

workmanship;" that its construction has been in progress throughout the 
Gospel age— ever since Christ became the world's Redeemer and 
the chief corner stone of this Temple, through which, when finished, 
God's blessings shall come "to all people," and they find access to 
him.-l Cor. 3:16,17; Eph. 2:20-22; Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:29. 

That meantime the chiseling, shaping and polishing, of consecrated believers 
in Christ's atonement for sin, progresses; and when the last of these 
"living stones," "elect and precious," shall have been made ready, 
the great Master Workman will bring all together in the First Resurrection; 
and the Temple shall be filled with his glory, and be the meeting 
place between God and men throughout the Millennium.— Rev. 15:5-8. 

That the Basis of Hope, for the Church and the World, lies in the fact that 
"Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every man," "a ransom 
for all," and will be "the true light which lighteth every man that 
cometh into the world," "in due time."— Heb. 2:9; John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:5,6. 

That the Hope of the Church is that she may be like her Lord, "see him 
as he is," be "partaker of the divine nature," and share his glory as 
his joint-heir.- 1 John 3:2; John 17:24; Rom. 8:17; 2 Pet. 1:4. 

That the present mission of the Church is the perfecting of the saints for 
the future work of service; to develop in herself every grace; to be God's 
witness to the world; and to prepare to be the kings and priests of the 
next age. -Eph. 4:12; Matt. 24:14; Rev. 1:6; 20:6. 

That the hope for the World lies in the blessings of knowledge and opportunity 
to be brought to all by Christ's Millennial Kingdom— the restitution 
of all that was lost in Adam, to all the willing and obedient, at the 
hands of their Redeemer and his glorified Church.— Acts 3:19-21; Isa. 35. 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, Editor; MRS. C. T. RUSSELL, Associate. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



OUR NEW DRESS. 

We trust that the new arrangement of the TOWER will meet the 
approval of its readers. It contains fewer pages, but more reading 
matter than formerly. 

ACCEPTING GOD'S GIFTS GRATEFULLY. 



There are many who cannot pay for their TOWER, during the year 
1895, but who would be greatly disadvantaged if deprived of it. Such 
should notice our Terms to the Lord's Poor, above. It is a part of 
God's provision for your spiritual sustenance, and should be accepted, 
like all of his blessings, with thanksgiving. But people who are not 
too poor to buy tobacco and similar gratifications of the flesh, which 
war against the spirit, are not of the class for whom the offer is meant 
by the Lord and by us his stewards. 

page 2 

A GERMAN QUARTERLY. 

Shall be pleased to hear, from those of the friends interested in 
circulating the truth amongst German Christians, their opinion respecting 
the advisability of a German periodical, Quarterly: How many subscriptions 
can be guaranteed to commence with, at the rate of say 10 
cents per year, or twelve copies quarterly for $1.00, or seventy -five 
copies quarterly for $5.00, sent post free to any address you may send. 

R1750 : page 2 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN. 

This volume contains a very choice selection of 150 Poems and 333 
Hymns, purged, we trust, from much of the too common, erroneous, 
hymn-book theology: 494 pages, good print, cloth binding only. It is 
the Gospel of the Kingdom in verse, by the pens of many of God's dear 
saints of all centuries. It is a companion to MILLENNIAL DAWN, and 
sells at the same price as the cloth-bound volumes. It is designed to 
lead the mind aright in meditation and worship. 

ALLEGHENY CHURCH MEETINGS. 

Our meetings are held in Bible House Chapel, Arch St., Allegheny, Pa. 
Friends will be warmly welcomed. Preaching every Sunday at 3:30 P.M. 



R1751 : page 3 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER extends to its readers, 
one and all— Best Wishes for the Year 1895. It 
may, and no doubt will, have its storms, its difficulties, its 
trials: such experiences our Lord advises us are necessary to 
the development in us of character. What the effect of the 
trial will be lies with each of us to decide for himself. We 
may permit them to discourage us so that we would give up 
the race for the prize set before us in the gospel; or we 
may grow stronger and more Christ-like as the result of 
those experiences. Which will it be with us? 
It may be a year of profitable progress in the knowledge 



and service of our Lord and Redeemer, and of helpfulness 
to the fellow-members of his body, or it may be 
marked by increasing confusion and uncertainty— darkness 
—concerning things once clearly seen and greatly rejoiced 
in and a time of confusing the minds and stumbling the 
faith of others. 

Which course do we choose, and with what degree of 
positiveness do we make our choice, at this, the beginning 
of this new year? Much of our comfort, joy and peace 
and usefulness in the Lord's service depends on our decision. 
It was so last year: it was one of increase or else 
one of decrease in spiritual knowledge, strength and usefulness. 
It is so with every year,— yes, with every week and 
every day. 

Of course no one will decide to go into darkness and 
away from the Lord and the Truth. The test is a more 
crucial one than that. The question is will we take 
and keep the path that leads nearer and nearer to the 
Lord, and be permitted more and more fellowship with 
him, a fuller and fuller knowledge of the minutiae of the 
great plan of the ages which he is out-working, and a greater 
share in that work with the great Chief-Reaper, or will we 
allow self-interest or self-conceit or ambition or spiritual 
sloth or the cares of this life to turn us aside from the path 
of full consecration which our Master trod and in which we 
have pledged ourselves to follow, in his footsteps. 

The right path is still the "narrow path" of self-abasement 
and self-denial— the path of meekness and humility: 
and it will require as much effort and grace to walk 
it this year as last, or possibly more; for the more we grow 
in grace and knowledge, the stronger will be the temptations 
to be boastful, puffed up, heady, high-minded; and the 
higher we climb in faith and hope and love and activity in 
the Lord's service, the more the great Adversary will oppose 
our progress, and the more his emissaries will slander, 
backbite, and generally seek to injure us. "Beware of 
dogs."-Phil. 3:2. 

But this is only one side of the matter; for, while the 
more exposed to Satan's attacks and to severer tests of 
our hope, faith and love, as we go onward in our narrow 
way, we will have increasing spiritual joys, peace beyond 
compare, and will be enabled to rejoice even in trials and 
tribulations, knowing that these are working out for us a 
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. We will 
be enabled to endure, as seeing him that is invisible, as 
being upheld and led by his hand. We will have the 
promise of his presence in every trouble, and that he will 
never leave us nor forsake us; and that all things (even 
the seeming evils of life) he is able and willing to over-rule 
for our highest good;— because we love God and his way 
and his plan more than self and self's ways— because we 
are called according to his purpose and have accepted the 
call, are in sympathy with its object and are seeking so far 
as in us lies to walk worthy of the Lord and his high calling, 
and thus to make our calling and election sure. 



R1751 : page 4 

Beloved, let us each and all silently pledge ourselves 
afresh, to the Lord, that, by his grace assisting, this year, 
1895, shall be started aright, in humility and with loving zeal 
for Him and his people and his truth: and that, his grace 
still assisting us, the year to its very close shall be one of 
onward and upward effort and progress in the knowledge 
and likeness (graces) and services of our Redeemer-King. 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



E. V. Debbs, President of the American Railway 
Union, has been found guilty of Contempt of Court in 
connection with the railroad strike and attendant rioting 
in and near Chicago last summer. His sentence is, Imprisonment 
for six months. Seven other officers of the same 
union shared the sentence to the extent of three months. 

Our remarks are regardless entirely of the justice of 
the case, when we say that the effect will be to help widen 
the breach between Labor and Capital. Labor will surely 
conclude that it should have liberty to accomplish its ends, 
even though blood should flow, business be prostrated and 
all other men inconvenienced. And they will, of course, 
regard the Judge who gave the sentence as a tool of Capital, 
and the laws under which he acted and ruled as made in 
the interest of railroads, even though it could be shown that 
the laws existed before railroads were dreamed of. As respect 
for law and its representatives dies, anarchistic ideas 
will flourish; for however fallen and degraded men are, 
they have respect for justice. This idea, therefore, that 
they are subjects of unjust laws and unjust decisions, is at 
the foundation of the growing unrest amongst the masses. 
They will even admit the injustice of their own course in 
interfering with the rights of others; but they will claim 
that they are merely fighting injustice with injustice. 

The fact is that machinery, invention and general intelligence 
have brought in new conditions to which the 
laws of the past, however reasonable in their day, are no 
longer adapted; and it is a fear and despair for the future 
that is goading many unwillingly to violation of laws which 
they admit contain wisdom and justice, but which are inadequate 
to the relief of present conditions. 

Capital fears, but, unwilling to lose increment, hopes. 
It vainly hopes that labor has been taught a lesson to right 
their wrongs, or fancied disadvantages, by some other means 
than stopping commerce and destroying property. It does 
not stop to arrange matters, and to fix a proper relief, a 
safety-valve. It says, Let Labor look out for itself. It will 
watch its own interests: it keeps us busy to mind our own 
business. It does not wisely foresee that it will require 
much less to drive the majority to despair and to bring an 
explosion today than at any previous time when the masses 
were less intelligent, their wants fewer and their contentment 



greater. 

Thus all things are moving onward toward the grand 
catastrophe pointed out in the Scriptures as the close of this 
dispensation and the preparation for the next and better 
one under our prince Immanuel. 

The coal mines at Monthieux, France, once operated 
by a stock company which experienced much trouble in 
dealing with its workmen, were finally turned over to its 
workmen free of charge. After a struggle the mine has 

R1752 : page 4 

gotten to a paying basis, and now requires additional hands. 
The additional men were not granted a share in the mine, 
but were hired as wage-workers, and are surprised that their 
fellows so soon learned to be capitalists. Riots ensued and 
the laboring capitalists were forced to apply to the police 
for aid. So says the Hanoverische Courier. 

Alas! how differently people can reason under different 
circumstances. And so long as selfishness rules the 
heart, it will be so. The only remedy for unbalanced 
minds on all such subjects is the writing in the heart of the 
divine law of Love. This will bring "the spirit of a sound 
mind," and enable those who possess it to think soberly 
and reasonably, and to look not every man upon his own 
interest, but also upon the interests of others. 

THE RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



The Catholic journals are in great glee over the fact 
that a Roman Catholic priest was recently invited by Dr. 
Briggs and the faculty in general of Union Theological 
Seminary (Presbyterian) to preach before its students and 
professors. The Catholic Mirror assures its readers: 

"Nothing could be more gratifying to Father Doyle 
than the reception he was accorded at the theological seminary. 
Professors and students received him with true 
brotherly warmth. He was accompanied by Father O'Callaghan 
(who recently had the distinction of preaching 
before Harvard University students) and Father O'Keefe. 
This line of light along our religious horizon is a most 
comforting sign." 

Dr. Briggs, in introducing the speaker, said some things 
very pleasant to Catholic ears, and hoped that the reunion 
between Catholics and Protestants was not far distant. 



Religious and secular journals, Catholic and Protestant, 
are discussing the possibility of reunion, and the Protestant 
Episcopal Church, it is thought, will be invited from Rome 
ere long, and many think it will readily accept the invitation. 
We do not share this opinion. To us the Scriptures 
indicate that the Church of England will unite with the other 



Protestant churches, or they with her, and that federated 
together they will fraternize, but not unite, with Papacy. 

The thirty-first article of the Anglican confession 
avers:— 

"Wherefore the sacrifices of masses, in which it was 
commonly said that the priest did offer up Christ, to have 
remission of pain or guilt, were blasphemous fables and 
dangerous deceits." 

Even aside from the Scriptures we should reason 
that very many intelligent Protestants could never accept 
all of Rome's doctrines. And Rome dare not change 
them; for her chief claim is infallibility. 



The New Theology has broken out afresh amongst the 
Baptist. Its leader is Rev. A. H. Strong, D.D., president 

R1752 : page 5 

of Rochester Theological Seminary. Of course he 

has peculiar ideas, which are "original," if not patented. 

His views have a strong coloring of Buddhism and Theosophy. 

Indeed, the Doctor announces himself as a Monist, 

and he does not scruple to claim that literature, theology 

and philosophy all evince the overwhelming drift of modern 

thought toward the views which he has himself finally 

espoused as the true theology. He declares:— 

"It is not too much to say that the Monistic philosophy, 
in its various forms, holds at present undisputed sway 
in our American Universities. Harvard and Yale, Brown 
and Cornell, Princeton and Rochester, Toronto and Ann 
Arbor, Boston and Chicago, are all teaching it. 

"It is of great importance, both to the preacher and to 
the Christian, to hold the right attitude toward the ruling 
idea of our time. This universal tendency toward Monism 
—is it a wave of unbelief, set agoing by an evil intelligence, 
in order to overwhelm and swamp the religion of 
Christ? Or is it a mighty movement of the Spirit of God, 
giving to thoughtful men, all unconsciously to themselves, 
a deeper understanding of truth, and preparing the way for 
the reconciliation of diverse creeds and parties by disclosing 
their hidden ground of unity? 

"I confess that I have come to believe the latter alternative 
to be possibly, and even probably, the correct one; 
and I am inclined to welcome the new philosophy as a most 
valuable helper in interpreting the Word and works of God. 
Monism is, without much doubt, the philosophy of the 
future, and the only question would seem to be whether it 
shall be an ethical and Christian, or a nonethical and anti-Christian, 
Monism. 

"If we refuse to recognize this new movement of 
thought, and to capture it for Christ, we may find that 
materialism and pantheism perversely launch their craft 
upon the tide and compel it to further their progress. Let 
us tentatively accept the monistic principle, and give to it 



a certain Christian interpretation. Let us not be found 
fighting against God. Let us use the new light that is given 
us, as a means of penetrating more deeply into the meaning 
of Scripture. Let us see in this forward march of thought 
a sign that Christ and his Kingdom are conquering and to 
conquer." 

How remarkable that a man of learning, nay, that 
nearly all the men of learning, are being duped by Satan 
either into spiritism or into theosophic -monism, its sister 
error. It calls to our minds the words of the Lord that, 
If it were possible they would deceive the very elect; 
the Apostle's words, "Who shall be able to stand?" and 
the Prophet's words, "Who may abide the day of his coming? 
for he shall be as a refiner's fire and as fuller's soap." 
The fully consecrated only will stand; and they, not because 
of their own superior wisdom, but because, being 
humble minded and wise toward God, they seek that wisdom 
which cometh from above— the Word of God. 

Dr. Strong, like Dr. Briggs and all "new theology" 
people, speaks respectfully of the Bible while he criticizes 
it, and thereby will do far more harm than if he 
openly denied its teachings, as he does in fact. They know 
very well that the Bible is opposed to their theories, but 
they also know that an open attack upon it would be as 
unpopular as Mr. Ingersoll's course. 

The new Chicago University, under Baptist patronage, 
was known to be far advanced toward agnosticism; but they 
had regarded the Rochester institution, of which Dr. Strong 
is the head, as very staunch. This deflection will carry with 
it hundreds of Baptist ministers and thousands of Baptist 
church members; for there are always many so anxious to 
be considered wide-awake and advanced that they will strive 
to be in the front rank of any thing headed by a notable 
man, and which they think likely to become popular. 

Thus the "harvest sifting" progresses— in all denominations. 
The falling of these "stars," while it will influence 
the majority, will awaken the true children of God 
to greater thought and freedom and study. Thus the sickle 
of truth is separating "wheat" from "tares." 

As usual, the denial of the ransom is one of the first 
steps in the new departure. Dr. Strong remarks concerning 
the atonement, that the sufferings of Christ for sin 
began away back at the time when Adam sinned. Hence 
he cannot have faith in the ransom taught in the Scriptures 
—"a corresponding price"— the death of the man Christ 
Jesus for, and to secure the release from the death sentence 
of Adam and all in Adam when he was condemned. The 
Scripture teaching is that our Redeemer was made flesh, 
that he by the grace of God should taste death for every 
man.-Heb. 2:9. 

THE DECADENCE OF RELIGIOUS FAITH IN GERMANY. 



While we have frequently called attention to the fact 



that Protestantism is no longer a protest against the great 
Papal counterfeit of true Christianity, it is worthy of note 
that Germany, the home of Luther and the Great Reformation 
of the sixteenth century, is fast sinking into open 
and avowed infidelity. 

Many theological Professors in the schools of Germany 
have not only themselves become unbelievers, but through 
their writings have scattered wide the seeds of error 
and skepticism; and it is largely from these writings that 
many of the so-called "higher critics" of this and other 
lands draw their arguments against the accuracy and authority 
of the sacred Scriptures. 

It is said by Mr. Cooper, a liberal German, that "Critics 
in search of a reputation are unable to find a book of the 
New Testament on whose authority they can make an 
original assault." The statement is current that the number 
of persons in Germany who disclaim all religion is fourteen 
times as great as it was in 1871. 

A gentleman who has recently been traveling in Germany, 
in correspondence with the Lutheran Observer, says, 
that in Berlin, out of a population of 1,600,000, there are 
less than 60,000 church sittings in the entire city. In 
Wittenberg, the home of Luther, a city of 16,000 inhabitants, 
"for decades only one church has been open, and 
about four hundred people attend there." In Hamburg it 
is said that out of a population of 400,000 only 5,000 
attend public worship. Dr. Stacker, the German Court 
preacher, published in his own journal the following:— 

R1752 : page 6 

"With few exceptions the academically educated German 
is alienated from the Christian faith. The amount of 
ancient culture and scientific knowledge which he must 
take in during the gymnasial time, without a sufficient 
counterbalance in the world of Christian and national thought 
leads the German mind, if it be not restrained by special 
influences, to free thinking and indifference. The discontented 
condition of our whole public life has its chief cause 

R1753 : page 6 

in this. Even upon our national relations, such false 
culture confuses and ungermanizes. In the Church it has 
wrought irreparable devastation." 

Professor Scott, of the Chicago Theological Seminary, 
who has had extensive opportunity for observation in Germany, 
in a recent address said:— 

"Germany is probably sinking in immorality and 
crime more rapidly than any other nation in Europe. In 
some of the cities half the births are illegitimate. In ten 
years saloons have increased by fifty per cent, and the people 
are fast becoming sodden with their immoderate 
beer-drinking." 

While such is the religious situation in the land of the 
Reformation, the social and political conditions are consequently 



such as to awaken fearful forebodings of an ultimate 
reign of terror, such as France witnessed a century ago. 
To such an extent are socialistic and anarchistic sentiments 
prevailing, that the aid of Papacy, from whose tyranny they 
fled in the days of Luther, is now being courted in view of 
the greater evils of impending anarchy. Surely this is the 
time of "distress of nations." 



R1753 : page 6 
"THIS IS THE WAY." 



"And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, 

This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, 

and when ye turn to the left."— Isa. 30:21. 

HOW often in the midst of life's perplexities and trials 

have weary hearts felt the need of wise direction 

and counsel. The counsel sought, however, is not always 

wise: sometimes it is the counsel of the ungodly and 

sinners; and sometimes that of the immature and inexperienced, 

and the results of such counsel are unsatisfactory and 

often disastrous, and the way pursued in consequence one of 

trouble and darkness. Such is the way of the world; for it 

is not in the power of man to direct his own steps. (Jer. 10:25.) 

But not so is the way of the child of God. He has 

learned where to seek counsel, and the counsel of wisdom is 

always ready to come to his aid. 

The Prophet describes it as a word, a voice, "behind 
thee." It is not a voice before thee, of some new theology 
—of Evolution, or Spiritism, or Christian Science, or 
other human philosophy— but it is the old theology with 
all its blessed doctrines of hope through Christ our Redeemer 
and Lord, our Teacher, our Example and our 
Leader. It is the voice of the Lord uttered through his 
inspired apostles and prophets from two to four thousand 
years ago. It is to this Word of divine inspiration, then, 
that the prophet would direct the attention of all those 
desiring wise counsel; and in that Word we hear the voice 
of God, saying, "This is the way, walk ye in it." If we 
have come to the forks of the road— to some crisis in our 
experience— and know not whether to turn to the right or 
to the left, we should stop at once and listen to the voice. 
Or, in other words, we should turn at once to the Word of 
the Lord, and by pondering its precepts and principles and 
its illustrations bearing on the perplexing subject, seek to 
learn the will of the Lord, asking also the leading of his 
spirit and endeavoring to bring the mind into a loving, 
submissive and trustful attitude. "This is the way, walk 
ye in it," will be the plain answer to every such inquiring 
heart. 

These words of the Prophet were, however, addressed 



directly to fleshly Israel, though their application to spiritual 
Israel is none the less forcible. As applied to them it 
foretells the return of divine favor to them when the long 
season of their chastisement and blindness shall be at an 
end. Then, under the Millennial reign of Christ, the blind 
eyes shall be opened and the deaf ears shall be unstopped 
and the voice of the whole inspired Word, then made clear 
to their understanding, will direct them in the right ways 
of the Lord; for the books (the law and the prophets and 
the New Testament Scriptures) shall be opened, and they 
shall be judged according to their teaching.— Rev. 20:12. 

The way then indicated to fleshly Israel and to all the 
world will be a grand highway of holiness; and the ransomed 
of the Lord shall go up thereon with songs and 
everlasting joy upon their heads (Isa. 35:10); and the 
end of that way will be life and peace,— salvation to the 
uttermost, from sin and death, and complete restitution to 
human perfection. 

While the way of life will be made very clear to Israel 
and the world in the age to come, it is made none the less 
clear now to the children of God who walk by faith and 
not by sight. It is shown to be (1) a way of faith; and 
those who now walk by faith are the true seed of Abraham 
(Rom. 4:12-16), to whom pertain the covenant and the 
exceeding great and precious promises in their largest fulfilment. 
(2) It is a way of entire consecration to God, 
even unto death, which implies the burial of one's own will 
into the will of God— the presenting of self a living sacrifice. 

In harmony with these two principles— of faith and 
consecration— we are taught to walk, in newness of life, 
not after the flesh, but after the spirit; not as other Gentiles 
walk in the vanity of their mind, but circumspectly 
and not as fools, but as wise, redeeming the time; and not 
by sight, but by faith. -Rom. 6:4; 8:1; Eph. 4:17,18; 
5:15,16; 2 Cor. 5:7. 

By faith and consecration we have come into a new 
life as spiritual sons of God, and yet we have this treasure 
in earthen vessels and the new life is only in its embryo 

R1753 : page 7 

condition. Hence the necessity of walking after the spiritual 
instincts of the new nature and keeping down the 
stronger impulses of the old nature. This is what it is to 
walk in newness of life, after the spirit, and not after the 
flesh. To walk after the flesh is to pursue its hopes, aims 
and ambitions; and since the flesh and the spirit are at war 
one with the other, it is impossible to maintain the life of 
both. Therefore, it is written, "If ye [spirit-begotten ones] 
live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through the spirit 
do mortify [put to death] the deeds of the body, ye shall 
live."-Rom. 8:13. 

While the Word of the Lord speaks thus on general 
principles as to the way in which we should walk, we are 
also bidden to come with all the minor affairs of life, to inquire 
of these divine oracles. If we know not whether to 



turn to the right or to the left, we come and find the promise, 
"Commit thy way unto the Lord, and he will direct 
thy steps." Or, if heavy laden, we find the promise, 
"Come unto me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and 
I will give you rest." Thus the voice behind brings comfort, 
peace and rest in the midst of all life's cares and trials, 
if we walk in obedience to its principles and precepts. 
"And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on 
them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God." 



PRAY WITHOUT CEASING. 



UNANSWERED yet, the prayer your lips have pleaded 

In agony of heart these many years? 

Does faith begin to fail, is hope declining, 

And think you all in vain those falling tears? 

Say not the Father has not heard your prayer, 

You shall have your desire, sometime, somewhere! 

Unanswered yet? Tho' when you first presented 

This one petition at the Father's throne, 

It seemed you could not wait the time of asking, 

So anxious was your heart to have it done: 

If years have passed since then, do not despair; 

For God will answer you sometime, somewhere. 

Unanswered yet? But you are not unheeded; 

The promises of God forever stand; 

To him our days and years alike are equal. 

Have faith in God! It is your Lord's command. 

Hold on to Jacob's angel, and your prayer 

Shall bring a blessing down sometime, somewhere. 

Unanswered yet? Nay, do not say unanswered; 

Perhaps your part is not yet wholly done. 

The work began when first your prayer was uttered; 

And God will finish what he has begun. 

Keep incense burning at the shrine of prayer, 

And glory shall descend, sometime, somewhere. 

Unanswered yet? Faith cannot be unanswered; 
Her feet are firmly planted on the Rock. 
Amid the wildest storms she stands undaunted, 
Nor quails before the loudest thunder shock. 
She knows Omnipotence has heard her prayer, 
And cries, "It shall be done," sometime, somewhere. 
—Mrs. F. G. Burroughs. 



R1748 : page 7 



ON TRIAL FOR LIFE. 



"For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through 
the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." 
-Rom. 8:13.- 

THERE is no intimation in this scripture of a second 
probation for any of those addressed: the words were 
spoken and written for those who, in the present existence, 
are on trial for life. It does not say, If ye live after the 
flesh, ye shall have another trial; neither does it say, Ye 
shall be punished with eternal torments; but it does speak 
of a present probation, the issue of which shall be either 
life, or death— the extinction of life, cessation of existence. 

Neither does the text say anything about faith in the 
atoning sacrifice of Christ as a requisite to salvation: it 
says nothing whatever about what we believe or do not believe, 
but simply and only about how we live. Shall we, 
therefore, spring to the conclusion, as many do, that it 
teaches that it makes no difference what we believe if we 
only live righteously? By no means; and those who consider 
it to be in conflict with either the doctrine of restitution 
(the Millennial age of judgment or trial for the world) 
or the ransom, or who have failed to observe its contradiction 
of the theory of eternal torment, have taken but a 
shallow observation of the Apostle's teaching, and in fact 
have lost its entire force. 

Not noticing that the words are addressed to the Church, 
and not to the world, the heedless Christian applies the 
admonition to the world, and allows it to lose its force 
upon himself. This is the very reverse of the Apostle's 
intention: he is talking to the saints, to consecrated believers 
in the redemption, who have been begotten of the 
holy Spirit and become new creatures in Christ Jesus. 
(Rom. 8:1-8.) And it is for this reason that he says nothing 
here about faith in the ransom, that being conceded; 
nor about the Millennial age of trial, because those addressed 
are on trial now, and their trial will be over and 
their reward obtained before the world comes into judgment. 
-1 Cor. 6:2. 

The warning, therefore, is not at all applicable to the 
world, but is full of solemn import to the Church— to the 
consecrated believers, new creatures in Christ Jesus, who, 
having been begotten of the holy Spirit, have now a spiritual 
nature, the old human nature having been consecrated 
to death. Such, having solemnly covenanted with God to 
present their bodies— their human nature— a living sacrifice 
(which was acceptable through Christ, and therefore accepted 

R1748 : page 8 

of him), and to henceforth live after the spirit, are 

not at liberty now either to annul that covenant, or to ignore 

it. They cannot claim again that (redeemed human 



nature) to which, by their covenant, they have given up all 

right, claim and title. And if they endeavor to do so, 

either by ignoring or despising their covenant, they thereby 

forfeit their claim to the new, spiritual nature, which 

can only be attained by faithfulness to the covenant of sacrifice, 

even unto death. 

It is therefore logically manifest, even if the Apostle 
had not said it, that if we, consecrated believers, turn back 
again to live after the flesh, we shall die; that for us to be 
carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is 
life and peace. (Rom. 8:6.) Our Lord's words in Matt. 16:24,25 
are to the same effect— "Whosoever will save 
his life shall lose it: and whosoever will lose his life for 
my sake shall find it." 

An important question then is, What is it to live after 
the flesh? We answer, It is to live after, or in conformity 
to, and in gratification of, the inclinations and cravings of the 
fallen human nature. And it is the easiest thing possible 
to do this. All we have to do is just listlessly to abandon 
ourselves to the current of our old nature, and cease to strive 
against it. As soon as we do this, we begin to float down 
the stream, and by and by we find the current more and 
more rapid and resistance more and more difficult. 

The death to which our text points as the inevitable 
end of such a course, is manifestly the "second" death. We 
were redeemed from the first death and then placed on trial 
for eternal life, and in the event of failure, the loss of that 
new life will be the second death,— from which there can 
be no redemption and no deliverance. 

The Apostle defines the works of the flesh thus (Gal. 5:19-21) 
—"Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which 
are these,— Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, 
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, 
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, 
revelings and such like." What moral filth and 
pollution this describes; but such is the tendency of the 
fallen human nature. Just cease to strive against the old 
nature, and presently some of these noxious weeds will be 
flourishing and crowding out the good that remains. 

"Ah, well," says one, "I have not all those mean qualities." 
Well, we are glad you have not: very few people 
have all of them; but beware, you may not know what 
manner of spirit you are of. Be sure that your old nature 
is not without an inherited and perhaps a formerly cultivated 
bias in some of these directions. Watch and pray against 
them, that ye enter not into temptation. 

On the other hand, consider the blessed fruits of the 
spirit (Gal. 5:22,23), which are "love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance. 
Against such there is no law." To live in the cultivation 
of these graces is to "live in the spirit." And "if we 
live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit"— make 
progress in the spiritual life. "Walk in the spirit, and ye 
shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh; for the flesh lusteth 
against the spirit, and spirit against the flesh; and these are 
contrary the one to the other."— Gal. 5:25,16. 



Thus the Christian life is of necessity a warfare, a battle, 
between the new and the old natures, a hand to hand 
conflict which we dare not relinquish; for, not only is the 
prize of our high calling dependent upon it, but also the 
issues of life and death are in it. How solemn a thing is 
it, therefore, to live under these circumstances; for daily 
and hourly we stand before the bar of judgment. The 
words of our text have no application to the world now, 
but to us who are now on trial: If we live after the flesh, 
we shall die; but if through the spirit we do mortify [put 
to death, refuse to gratify] the deeds of the body [the 
tendencies of the old nature], we shall live." And all who 
are truly the sons of God will do this: "for," says the 
Apostle (verse 14), "as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, they are the sons of God." If we wilfully refuse the 
leading of God's spirit, we forfeit the relationship of sons; 
if we listlessly disregard it, we endanger that relationship, 
and as surely as we are sons we shall receive chastisement 
for our correction and discipline. 

But while we should be very grateful for the chastening, 
restraining hand of the Lord which thus helps to keep us 
in the straight and narrow way in which the spirit of God 
leads his own, we should be very careful to require just as 
little of it as possible. "If we would judge ourselves, we would 
not be judged of the Lord" and chastened. (1 Cor. 11:31,32.) 
But, nevertheless, with the most careful and 
prayerful watching against the uprisings of the old will of 
the flesh, we will doubtless make some missteps and need 
some of the Lord's chastening; for, says the Apostle (Heb. 12:5-12), 
"What son is he whom the Father chasteneth not? 
If ye endure chastening, God dealeth with you as with sons, 
but if ye be without chastisement whereof all are partakers, 
then are ye bastards and not sons; for whom the Lord 
loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth. 
Let us, therefore, not forget the exhortation which 
speaketh unto us as unto children, My son, despise not 
thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art 
rebuked of him." 

In the difficult course before us, and in view of all the 
dangers that beset it, how blessed is the promise that our 
Heavenly Father is ever willing to give the holy spirit to 
them that ask him, and the assurance also that if we be 
filled with the spirit we shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh. 
How necessary is it, therefore, to live near the fountain of 
divine grace, to pray without ceasing— especially in these last 
times when our great adversary is so active and so cunning 
in his devices to deceive and lead astray the Lord's people. 

The words of the poet are most appropriate to every 
one at this particular time— 
"Leave no unguarded place, 
No weakness of the soul; 
Take every virtue, every grace, 
And fortify the whole." 



R1754:page9 

JOHN THE BAPTIST BEHEADED. 



I. QUAR., LESSON I., JAN. 6, MARK 6:17-29. 

Golden Text— "Fear not them which kill 
the body, but are not able to kill the soul." 
-Matt. 10:28.- 

JOHN the baptist was the last of the prophets, and the 
greatest, in that the special favor was granted to him 
of being the forerunner and introducer of the Messiah. Aside 
from his privilege in this respect and his faithfulness in 
the position to which he was called, we see in the man a most 
worthy and beautiful character. He was self-sacrificing 
and devoted to God— willing to fare on locusts and wild 
honey, to be clothed in coarse clothing and to make his 
abode in the desert, because the special service to which he 
was called required such conditions. 

Then when the multitudes, drawn by the power of God 
manifested in him, came to him from every quarter, and he 
became very popular, never did he seem lifted up with 
pride and vanity. Even when the Son of God came to be 
baptized of him, instead of becoming vain under such an 
honor, he shrank from the task, saying, "I have need to 
be baptized of thee, and comest thou to me?" No thought 
of envy or self-exaltation seems to have entered his mind. 
He was willing that his glory should be totally eclipsed by 
the presence of the one greater than he— his cousin according 
to the flesh— yet whose shoe's latchet he declared himself 
unworthy to loose. "He must increase," said he, "but I 
must decrease;" and while the fame of Jesus was being 
noised abroad, the worthy prophet soon found himself 
within the confines of a prison dungeon where he was 
cruelly beheaded, as the world's reward for his faithfulness 
to his mission. 

And his disciples, who had become the disciples of 
Jesus, hearing of it, came and took his body and buried it, 
and went and told Jesus. No doubt, the Lord sympathized 
with the sadness of the occasion, and groaned in spirit as he 
did at the grave of Lazarus,— because the time for the 
powers of darkness to work had not yet come to an end, 
and until it does those that live godly shall suffer persecution; 
and often, as also in his own case subsequently, 
even unto death. Evidently John's course was finished. 
He had fulfilled his mission and proved his worthiness of a 
distinguished place in the earthly phase of the Kingdom of 
God. Consequently there was no effort on the Lord's part 
to interfere with, or to influence, the powers of darkness that 
for a year restrained John's liberty and finally took his life. 

While the Lord never in any way interfered with the 
course of this world, either to instruct, reprove or overpower, 
but confined his ministry in all these respects to 



Israel, the course of John in boldly and openly reproving 
the king, who was not an Israelite, but a Gentile and a 
godless and wicked tyrant, was in marked contrast. We 
are at a loss to account for this contrast, and for the seeming 
lack of wisdom on John's part in this matter, until we 
call to mind the typical character of John to which attention 
has already been called. (See M. DAWN, VOL. II., 
Chap. VIII.) In this view of the matter we see King Herod 
as the representative of the world power of the present 
time, Herodias, his unlawful wife, as the representative or 
type of the ecclesiastical powers of Christendom now seeking 
and longing for union with, and the co-operation of, the 
civil powers. Such is to be the result of the present movements 
in both civil and ecclesiastical circles for closer bonds 
of sympathy and co-operation. John, as we have shown, 
was a striking type of the true Church in the "harvest" 
or end of this age. We, like John, must stand aloof from 
all those whose cry is, "A confederacy, a confederacy!" 
(Isa. 8:11-13); and by our teaching and example declare 
unlawful the proposed and sure to come union between 
church and civil government. 

The type is a striking one, and the fulfilment thus far 
is none the less so; but carried to its end it gives to the 
faithful overcoming Church a premonition of the approaching 
final test of faithfulness. As the course of John incurred 
the wrath of the infamous woman who ruled the 
king and thereby accomplished John's beheading, so the 
course of the John class— the true Church— will incur the 
wrath of the antitype. And the culmination of that wrath 
will doubtless bring about the dark night foretold by the Lord 
and the prophet, and typified by John's imprisonment (John 9:4; 
Isa. 21:12), wherein no man can labor in the great 
"harvest" work. And as John never emerged from that 
prison, save to enter the deeper dungeon of the grave from 
whence God will in due time bring him forth to power and 
glory, so when the coming night imprisons and fetters the 
faithful elect, the only deliverance they can hope for will be 
through the depths of the valley of the shadow of death 
into the glorious Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus 
Christ, whose they are and whom they serve. 

For an explanation of the golden text see our issue of 
Feb. 1893— "What saith the Scriptures about Hell." 



R1754:page9 

FEEDING THE FIVE THOUSAND. 



I. QUAR., LESSON II., JAN. 13, MARK 6:30-44. 

Parallel Accounts-Matt. 14:13-21; Luke 9:10-17; John 6:1-14. 

Golden Text— "He hath filled the hungry with good things."— Luke 1:53. 



SOMEWHAT previous to the martyrdom of John the 

baptist, the Lord had sent his disciples out to preach 

the gospel of the Kingdom in the villages of Galilee, himself 

going also. The news of John's death and the possible 

effect upon their work of this sudden outburst of royal 

wrath seems to have brought them all together again to 

take counsel of the Lord. It was quite possible that the 

persecution might extend to the disciples of John and to 

Jesus whom he had baptized and introduced. Or, on the 

other hand, there was danger of a revolt against the government 

which had thus outraged the public sense of honor 

and decency; for John was generally regarded as a great 

prophet: and such a revolt might tend to the immediate 

advancement of Jesus to the kingly office; for his fame 

had spread abroad throughout the nation, and indeed 

throughout the world. --Matt. 4:23,24; Luke 4:14,15,37; 

5:15; Mark 6:33; Matt. 14:1; 9:26,31. 

Doubtless it was in view of these considerations, as 
well as of the necessity, on the part of his disciples for rest 
and spiritual refreshment from himself, that Jesus counselled 
their retirement with him to a rural retreat beyond 
the dominions of Herod, where they might rest awhile. 

R1754:page 10 

Just so the Lord would have all his disciples come to him for 
counsel and for rest and refreshment. "He never asks of 
us such busy labor as finds no time for resting at his feet." 
Nor would he have us rest too long when other weary hearts 
are waiting for our ministries of love and consolation. 
His invitation is, not to the listless and idle, but to the 
active souls— "Come unto me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest"— rest in the midst 
of your cares and trials and perplexities, a sweet rest of 
mind, and peace, which the world with all its delusive 
charms can never give, nor with all its sin and woe can 
ever take away. 

In this case the season of retirement continued only 
until their boat landed on the opposite shore of the sea of 
Galilee, where about five thousand men, besides women 
and children (Matt. 14:21), awaited the Lord's ministry. 
Then came refreshment of their faith, the inspiring 
of their zeal and the revival of their hopes as they 
heard the Master's gracious words to the multitudes and 
witnessed his miracles of healing (Matt. 14:14) and finally 
the great miracle of feeding the whole multitude to their 
satisfaction on the five loaves and two fishes, so marvelously 
increased that twelve baskets of fragments were gathered 
after they had been fed. 

While the chief object of the miracle was doubtless to reinforce 
and establish the faith of the apostles, its secondary 
object and actual effect upon the multitudes was very similar; 
for they said, "This is of a truth that prophet that 
should come into the world." But "when Jesus perceived 
that they would come and take him by force to make him 



king, he departed again into a mountain himself alone." 
(John 6:14,15.) The Lord afterward on another occasion 
(Matt. 16:9,10) sought to further impress upon the 
minds of his apostles the lesson of faith which this miracle 
was given to establish in them specially. 

It is further worthy of notice that the Lord's miracles 
of feeding and of healing were performed, not upon his 
consecrated disciples, but upon others. His followers having 
covenanted to share with him in the work of sacrifice, 
might therefore, like him, avail themselves only of the natural 
means of recuperation, relinquishing all right, claim 
and title to all restitution privileges. When Christ was 
weary, he rested (John 4:6); when he was hungry, he partook 
of food, and never in any case worked a miracle for 
his own present benefit, nor for his disciples. (Matt. 4:2-4; 
2 Cor. 12:8-10.) The disciples also followed his example 
(1 Tim. 5:23), any other course being inconsistent with 
their covenant. 

The golden text is a part of the prophetic utterance of 
Elizabeth in her salutation of Mary prior to the birth of 
Christ. It has reference to the restitution blessings to be 
granted to all the meek of the earth through the Millennial 
reign of Christ. As in many other prophecies, the standpoint 
of the future is taken and the things are spoken of 
as accomplished facts. For examples of this method see 
Isa. 9:6; Rom. 4:17. 



R1755 : page 10 

CHRIST THE BREAD OF LIFE. 



I. QUAR., LESSON III., JAN. 20, John 6:25-35. 

Golden Text— "He gave them bread 
from heaven to eat."— John 6:31. 

AFTER the miracle of the feeding of the five thousand, 
and the manifested disposition of the people to 
take him by force to make him a king, Jesus, knowing 
that such was not the Father's plan, withdrew from the 
multitude and even from his disciples, sending them in 
advance of him to Capernaum, while he retired to the 
mountain alone for a season of communion with God. 
Possibly his human nature felt the force of the temptation 
to accept of present advancement and at once enter 
upon the work of blessing the world, instead of pursuing 
the long and tedious purpose of God. It was a repetition 
of the temptation in the wilderness, and he doubtless 
needed the reinforcement of divine grace through 
prayer and communion with God. And if our Lord needed 
frequent seasons of such communion, how much more do 
we, his followers. Let us remember his words, "Watch 



and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." 

Before the day dawned, the Lord improved another 
opportunity to impress upon his disciples the lesson of his 
divine anointing. Walking upon the waves of a stormy 
sea, he bade them trust him, saying, "It is I, be not afraid." 

The day following proved how eager and excited the 
people were over the power of Jesus manifested among 
them; for multitudes had taken shipping and gone to Capernaum 
seeking for him. Their seeking him, however, was 
not from a clear apprehension of his divine credentials, but 
rather from curiosity and probably an increasing determination 
to push him forward to the ruling position, from which 
they presumed he shrank merely from a sense of modesty. 

Verses 26,27. The Lord read their thoughts and 
sought to draw their attention away from the mere facts of 
his miracles to the lessons which they and all Israel should 
have learned from them; viz., that they were the divine 
testimonials to his Messiahship, the seals of God, whereby 
they might know him, and that therefore they should believe 
on him and become his disciples and followers. 

Verses 28,29. To their question, "What shall we do 
that we might work the works of God"— the works that 
would please God— he replied that the work most pleasing 
and acceptable to God would be their exercise of faith in him, 
as the one whom God had sent in fulfilment of his promise to 
their fathers. Thus the Lord indicated the importance of 
a right faith. Many to-day ask the same question, hoping 
to please God by their works, and underrating the importance 
of faith. Such a course is contrary to the Lord's teaching: 
first get the faith rightly established in Christ; receive 
him into the heart, and then out of the heart filled with his 
spirit will flow words and deeds pleasing to God. Without 
faith— the faith inspired by the divine Word— it is impossible 
to please God. 

Verses 30-36. In their unbelief the quibbling multitude 
began to draw a comparison between the miracle which 
Jesus had worked in their midst and the more extensive 
miracle of feeding all Israel in the wilderness with manna 
from heaven; and they demanded a similar sign. But no 
such gratification was granted them: they had sufficient 
evidence upon which to found faith had they been so disposed, 
and upon that evidence Jesus founded his claim and 
declared himself the bread of life— the manna sent down from 
heaven, the bread of life for all Israel and the world as well. 
This gift of God, this bread from heaven, was a greater 
miracle than the feeding with manna in the wilderness. 

Those who partake of this manna, he declared, should 
never die. Though they sleep (in the Adamic death), they 
shall not be hurt of the eternal death (the Second Death) 
from which there shall be no resurrection. 



R1756 :page 11 

SELECTIONS FOR THE FAMILY CIRCLE. 



"THE INELEGANCE OF HURRY." 

There is an idea prevalent that to be in a hurry is a 
sign of importance, of large business and large achievements. 
It is a serious mistake. An experienced person always mistrusts 
the man who hurries, for he fails in emergencies. 
Serenity of mind and leisurely action are necessary to fine 
work of any kind. It is in leisure that the mind assimilates 
best. 

Scipio Africanus declared, "I am never less at leisure 
than when at leisure." A rare bit of wisdom of which all 
reflective minds know the value. If we admit this as true, 
the inelegance of a hurried manner has the best of reasons. 
It is wasteful, inconsistent with the finest action, and is 
caused by a man losing control of himself, and suggests an 
uneasy, indecisive mind. 

A distinction, however, should be recognized between 
activity and excited hurry, and between slowness and self-possession. 
Activity with self-possession is the desirable 
condition. 



TROUBLES MADE BEAUTIFUL. 

Most of the shells of the oyster are pearly in the interior; 
and as the true pearls are merely morbid growths, 
they may all produce pearls of various qualities. The formation 
of pearls is caused by the introduction of irritating 
substances, such as grains of sand, between the mantle and 
the shell. The irritation causes the animal to cover the 
obnoxious object with layers of pearl, which generally 
attach the foreign body to the interior of the shell. The 
Chinese produce pearls artificially by placing substances in 
the position just described; and we have seen some shells 
to the interior of which small metal images were attached by 
this pearly secretion. 

When we look at a pearl, we look at an annoyance which 
has been ennobled. The oyster by itself is of merely nominal 
value. But the result of the oyster's own treatment of its 
irritation— the pearl— is something "of great price." Apart 
from its pecuniary worth this gem has a moral significance. 
It suggests that troubles may be made beautiful, and reminds 
us that amongst mankind some martyrs are more remembered 
for the glory with which they invested their sorrows than 
for any other portion of their lives. Biography has its 
moral pearls, which are treasured long after the creators of 
them have perished, just as material pearls are valued long 
years after the oysters have been discarded. 



GOD CHOOSETH. 



There are men who have strong and laudable desires 
to serve the Lord, and who fervently pray for his glory; 
but he does not always seem to hear their prayers. There are 
various reasons for this. Sometimes men are unfit for the 
Lord's service. They are not purged from their sins; they 
are not vessels unto honor, fitted for the Master's use; and 
so he sets them aside as not adapted to his work. Sometimes 
men wish to do great things, but find themselves 
straitened, hindered, limited and circumscribed; sometimes 
they are reserved for still greater work; in other cases they 
are rejected of the Lord for reasons well known to him. 

Moses longed to lead Israel into Canaan, but he was 
not permitted to enter the promised land. So David would 
gladly have built the temple at Jerusalem, but the Lord 
would not accept that service at his hands. Paul was forbidden 
by the holy Spirit to preach the gospel in Asia, and 
though he essayed to go into Bithynia, the Spirit suffered 
him not. In like manner we may have desires and aspirations 
for usefulness which will never be gratified. The 
Lord may see that we could not bear the exaltation and 
the honor which we seek. He knows far better than we do 
what is for our good, and so he would have us rest 
contented in his providence, not idle, but diligent; not 
careless, but watchful; not indifferent, but full of intense, 
earnest longing to do the will of God; yet patient under 
restraint, and content to be neglected and forgotten, remembering 
that "they also serve who only stand and wait," 
and that the Lord in his own well-chosen hour can lead us 
forth to fulfill his purposes of grace. 



R1755 :page 11 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT." 



MY DEAR SIR: --MILLENNIAL DAWN was introduced 
to me by some of its opponents; and after spending about 
nine months endeavoring to prove its teaching to be wrong, 
I came to the conclusion that it is perfectly scriptural. I 
have since joined a small class we have near here [See letter 
of Bro. Townsend in last TOWER], and we meet every Sunday 
and Tuesday, with a view to learning from the Bible 
the "present" truth. 

I heartily thank our Father for the truths he has been 
pleased to publish through yourself, and my earnest prayer 
is that as each of us comes more fully into the light, we 
may realize the more our responsibility as "bondservants" 
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, through whom alone 
is possible our acceptance. May we live every day as in his 
presence. Yours in the one faith, 

J. H. JEFFREY. 



GENTLEMEN:— I take pleasure in availing myself of the 
offer made in one of your excellent tracts, which found its 
way into my hands, and request your generosity to send 
me "A Reply to Ingersoll" and whatever other tracts you 
believe would be beneficial to one who has been driven into 
skepticism by the pernicious teachings of orthodoxy; 
assured that he will take pains to spread the truth wherever 
he can, as fast as he can get hold of it himself. 
Sincerely yours, C. A. 

R1755 :page 12 

DEAR BROTHER:— A Brother recently picked up, among 
the rubbish of the freight room of a railway station, an 
old, well-worn copy of a book, entitled MILLENNIAL DAWN. 
He read it with increasing interest, and then handed it to 
me with the request that I read it and get the other volumes 
of the series. I have only glanced over the volume, 
but find many things that are in accord with my own ideas 
of God's Plan of Redemption, and hence am the more 
anxious to secure the entire series. Please send me your 
catalogue, and oblige, Fraternally yours, 

B.L. B. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Several months ago I decided 
to write, informing you of my appreciation of your labors 
and expressing my deep gratitude to you, as the instrument 
of the divine spirit, in my enlightenment in the blessed 
"harvest truth;" but though tardy in acknowledging my 
indebtedness, I trust you will believe that my appreciation 
and gratitude are not the less sincere. 

Remarkable indeed is the change that has taken place 
in my life since reading MILLENNIAL DAWN. The world 
appears new, for "old things have passed away." It is 
only about a year since I left the nominal church, yet 
it seems like an age, so great is the disparity between my 
past and present beliefs. 

Bro. Pearson (whose experience is similar) and I had 
been for about seven years local preachers in the Primitive 
Methodist denomination; but for some months prior to 
our leaving, we had been restless and dissatisfied. The 
hollowness of the religious life of the orthodox churches, 
the shallow thought, the assumed authority and the greed 
of many of its teachers had caused a feeling within us, 
which was sufficiently manifested to induce among our 
friends grave uneasiness concerning our spiritual welfare. 
The trend of our life undoubtedly was toward the so-called 
"liberal thought" of the day. Both of us, by nature 
ambitious, naturally sought to be in the advance guard of 
religious truth. 

One doctrine that was a great factor in causing our 
dissatisfaction with orthodoxy, was that of "Hell." For 



some months before we left the Church we prided ourselves 
upon the fact that we never alluded to that place of 
eternal torture, except in a condemnatory tone, in any of 
our sermons. We could not prove that it was not taught 
in the Scriptures, yet we thought that somehow it must be 
untrue. At any rate, we did not believe in it, but instead 
made rapid progress toward Universalism. The climax 
was brought about by Bro. Pearson reading a Christadelphian 
work, which had been in his house for years. He 
passed it on to me, and I too, fell under its influence. To 
our minds, dissatisfied with the palpable errors of Orthodoxy, 
and unlearned in the true teaching of Scripture, there 
seemed no escape from its logic. But we were by no means 
satisfied, for our hearts craved something broader and kindlier 
than its narrow and harsh doctrines. We felt we could 
do nothing else than sever our connection with "Babylon." 
It cut us to the heart to do so, for to both of us the Church 
had seemed a second home. Our friends and relations were 
its members. We had attained a position of some honor 
and influence in connection therewith. We were besought 
not to leave. It was a dark trial to leave the church of 
our fathers; it was a dark trial to be forced to believe in the 
doctrines of Christadelphianism. We sought to escape 
from its domination, we held interviews with several gentlemen 
representing sects who made professions of having 
come out of the "Churches." It was of no avail. The 
only result of the interviews was to make us wonder why 
they made so much noise about coming out; for on almost 
all, if not all, fundamental points their beliefs were 
marvelously alike. But after a few weeks of great trouble 
we met Bro. Pickworth, previously connected with the 
same church, who lent us the DAWNS and one or two 
numbers of the TOWER. Our darkness was changed to 
light: we felt that we had obtained that for which our hearts 
had so long been hungering. What wonderful things they 
have brought to light from the Scriptures! I cannot sufficiently 

R1756 :page 12 

praise the dear Lord. 

After two or three months' study of the "harvest 
truth," we commenced preaching services in the town 
hall. It has been an uphill work. Our experience has 
brought us to concur heartily in the belief expressed in a 
recent TOWER— that the most effective factor in spreading 
the truth is the printed page. I enclose order for two 
Pounds. Please send me the value in DAWNS, also some 
copies of that excellent tract, "Do you know?" and any 
others you may deem suitable. 

We feel the solemn responsibility of our position as pioneers 
of the harvest truth in this Austral land. We ask 
your prayers on our behalf. 

Yours in Christ, JOHN W. FLACK. 



page 12 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I hand you herewith payment 
for two TOWER subscriptions. 

Personally, I have received much needed light on 
God's precious promises, and have also had my faith in the 
same greatly increased by reading the TOWER. And I wish 
to do what I can towards sending the truth to friends, so 
take this means, as I have already supplied them with DAWN. 

I also take this opportunity of extending to you my 
heartfelt gratitude for the comfort and hope that God's 
message through your books has established within me. 
Have read and re-read the volumes with increased pleasure 
and profit. God's plans seem more reasonable and harmonious 
to me now than ever before. And yet I feel there 
is much more I need to learn. Received much assistance 
over rough places from dear friend Bohnet. 

Yours, stronger in faith, and hungering for all the truth, 
A. S. BUCHANAN. 



GENTLEMEN:— A friend loaned me the three volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN, and I am so well pleased with them 
(I not being a member of any religious sect nor an attendant 
at any religious meetings) that I want to own it myself, 
and read it again, and then induce other of my non-religious 
friends to read it. It seems to touch a chord in 
my nature that no other religious work ever did, and it has 
induced me also to read the Bible and with a better understanding 
than ever before. 

I avail myself of your offer to TOWER subscribers to 
get the work at a reduced price. Respectfully, 

J. A. H. 



ZION'S WATCH TOWER:-I was born and raised an 
Israelite, but, thank God! "the truth has made me free." 

Enclosed find one dollar, for which please send me 
some tracts for distribution. If you think it would be 
more effective to give away DAWNS, send them instead. 

I wish all could derive as much pleasure from MILLENNIAL 
DAWN as I have. I am trying to be an "Israelite 
indeed." And in course of time, when I have mastered 
their contents, it will give me pleasure to declare in public 
what I shall gain from those books. May the Lord bless 
you all. Your obedient servant, G. L. 



page 13 

VOL. XVI. JANUARY 15, 1895. No. 2. 



CONTENTS. 



Items— Tracts, Binders, Towers 14 

Views from the Tower— 15 

The Religious View 15 

The Bible Dangerous to Autocracy 15 

Encouraging a Military Spirit 16 

The Social View 18 

Poem: All This Be Thy Portion 19 

The Ministry of Evil 20 

Bible Study: The Good Confession 21 

Bible Study: The Transfiguration 22 

Encouraging Letters 23 

page 14 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



TRACTS Nos. 1, 3, 4, 12 and 22 are out at present. Nos. 1,12 
and 22 will be ready in about six weeks. 



TRACT No. 25, "THE ONLY NAME,- A criticism of Bp. Foster's 
New Gospel"— we have now in good supply. Our present edition is 
130,000 copies. Order sample copies for all the honest-hearted of your 
Christian friends, free. 



WE have arranged to supply to our readers Emerson's Patent Cloth 
Binders of the proper size for the TOWER, large enough to contain say 
50 copies, representing at present full two years' issues. The usual 
price for them is 80 cents, but by special arrangement for quantities we 
can include postage and supply these at 60 cents each. 



THE address label on your TOWER wrapper is a receipt for subscription 
and shows the date to which you have paid. For instance, 
your payment for the present year, if there were no past dues would 
change your "tag" to read Dec. '95. But owing to the rush of letters 
at this season of the year, we are usually behind in the work of correcting 
the "tags." We hope to have all changes made by Feb. 15. 



SPECIAL TOWERS. 

For the benefit of our new readers we mention that we still have 
copies of several of our back issues dealing with subjects of special interest, 
as follows— 

The Scripture Teaching respecting the subject of God;— the Father, 
the Son, the Holy Spirit. June '92. 

What Saith the Scripture About Hell? An examination of every 
text of the Bible containing the word "hell," and many others supposed 
to imply the thought of eternal torment. Feb. '93. 

The True Church;— which it is, where to find it and how to join it. 
Sept. '93. 

The Law of God— the Sabbath, etc.— a most important subject, 
upon which all Christians should have a clear understanding. We know 
of nothing in print so well adapted as this to meet and answer the 
peculiar points of doctrine on this subject set forth by Seventh-day 
keepers. Nov. '94. 

The above are all double numbers— ten cents each (free to 
Lord's interested poor). For circulation we will supply them at 
rate of six for twenty-five cents, or twenty-five for one dollar. 



R1756 :page 15 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



ONE of the sensations of the world during the past 
few months has been the disclosures made before 
the LEXOW COMMITTEE of investigation, showing that 
the government of the city of New York has for years been 
in league with gamblers, the keepers of immoral houses, and 
thieves; and that probably millions of dollars were paid 
within the past fifteen years to the "Tammany" democracy 
by merchants and others for special police protection, and 
by thieves and others as blackmail to save them from justice. 

The public, irrespective of party, rejoices to be relieved 
of such polluting parasites, and its thanks and commendations 
go out in large measure to the Rev. Dr. Parkhurst 
(Presbyterian), whose energy and perseverance had very 
much to do with the present exposure. 



The public has an eye to utility, and sees in this a new 
field of usefulness for ministers. The public sees no value 
in faith, but great value in works. It virtually says,— 
"Ministers are useful in their way: they help to keep 
up the moral tone of society by Sunday orations, visit the 
sick, and offer consolations to the bereaved at funerals; and 
why not keep their eyes on our office-holders and be ready 
and active in every reform? Would not this be a most 
practical way of enforcing Christian principles respecting 
honesty, etc., and a way that would make the Churches 
and their ministers more popular?" 

Ministers will at first disdain such a course, but as it 
will appear more and more that it would please and interest 
the public, and as purely religious interest will be seen 
to be failing, we may be sure that ambition will lead out 
one minister after another into this new field— political, 
moral and religious combined— until it will be once more 
considered quite the proper thing (as in the days of Calvin 
and Zwingli), and Church and State will be practically one, 
although still theoretically two. Keep watch along this 
line: you will see it gradually draw nearer until the federative 
Union of all Protestant denominations shall have been 
accomplished— then matters will move forward rapidly. 

Reliable accounts of the atrocious attack recently made 
by Turkish soldiers (Mohammedans) on several villages of 
Armenian Catholics in Turkey show that the spirit of savagery 
still exists in the breasts of fallen men as much as it 
did during the so-called "dark ages." Men, women and 
children were shot, stabbed and cut to pieces, their houses 
were set on fire and the occupants driven back with swords 
and bayonets when they attempted to escape. The descriptions 
almost equal the history of massacres of Waldenses, 
Huguenots, etc., by the papists. 

THE BIBLE DANGEROUS TO AUTOCRACY. 



In southern Russia, especially in the Polish provinces, 
there resides a class of very simple-hearted Christians, who 
are too enlightened from a Scriptural standpoint to have 
fellowship in the forms, ceremonies and image worship of 
either the Greek or Roman Catholic Churches. Since no 
other Christian churches or worship are tolerated in 
Russia, these have no preachers or preaching services. 
They have for years, however, held prayer-meetings at 
which some times one of their number would have a Bible 
and read therefrom to their general edification. These 
meetings usually last one hour (we are under the impression 
that a law hinders a longer session), and the people 
have been nick-named "Stundists," from the German word 
meaning an hour. 

Some years ago one of our brethren (now interested in 
the present truth) was arrested and compelled to leave the 
country, because as a Bible Society's agent he was quietly 
circulating the Bible amongst these poor people. They are 



R1756 : page 16 

brought to our attention now by the decree of the Russian 

R1757 :page 16 

government, published in the Official Messenger, Dec. 5, 
'94, prohibiting the "Stundists" from holding their 
prayer meetings and declaring them to be a religious sect 
most dangerous to the Church and State. Yes! the Bible 
in its purity and simplicity is always dangerous to the prosperity 
of superstition and tyranny— and however meek and 
law-abiding its adherents may be, they must be suppressed, 
so far as priest craft can control the governmental arm. 

How long will it be after the coming federative union 
of all Protestant denominations and their entente cordiale 
with the Papacy, before they will feel that ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER and MILLENNIAL DAWN are "dangerous" to their 
welfare, because they hold up to the common people the 
word of God in its simplicity? We are expecting that time 
to come, but not for at least ten years in Great Britain and 
in this land where liberty has made and will yet make its 
bravest struggle. Meantime, let all who love the truth serve 
it diligently. "Labor while it is called to-day; for the 
night cometh wherein no man can work." 

The Guardian, Bombay, India, says on this subject: 

"The same spirit of intolerance is spreading toward 
all who love and worship God according to the holy Scriptures 
in that country. The British and Foreign Bible Societies' 
depot in Kiev has been closed by the order of the 
Governor-General, Count Ignatieff. A further step has 
been taken by an order, which is published in several Russian 
papers, forbidding the colportage of Bibles carried on 
in the provinces which stand under this Governor. 

"It is alleged, as the ground of this prohibition, that 
the Societies' workers have been guilty of spreading the 
doctrines of 'Stundism.' What has led to such a charge 
is difficult to see, as the colporteurs are in almost all cases 
loyal members of the Russian Church, and have received 
stringent injunctions to avoid implications with all forbidden 
movements. In the district of Saraisk, in a certain 
village, the chief of the rural gendarmerie had observed 
that several peasants were in the habit of meeting in the 
cottage of one of their number, where they read the Gospels, 
prayed, and sang hymns. Suspecting these persons 
to be 'Stundists,' the officer raided the place and arrested 
ten peasants who were assembled in religious conclave. 
Before the local magistrates the accused declared that they 
were faithful Orthodox believers, but that, as the Scriptures 
were never read or expounded to them by the priests, they 
claimed the right to do this for themselves. The Court 
held that the case came within the rescript with regard to 
the "Stundists," and each of the accused peasants was fined 
fifty rubles (about $37), or, in default, ten weeks' 
imprisonment." 



STILL LATER ADVICES. 



The clergy of the Greek Catholic Church of Southern 
Russia recently met at Kiev to discuss the present position 
and prospects of the "Stundists." Its report has just been 
presented to Governor-General Ignatieff. It states that in 
their opinion Stundism is no longer able to attract great 
masses of the people from the Greek or "Orthodox" 
Church. They thank the Governor-General for the help 
of the secular arm in combating heresy and state that the 
measures most effective were the following: (1) Forbidding 
the meeting together of the heretics for prayer. 

(2) Forbidding the colportage of the British Bible Society. 

(3) The ordinance by which children baptized into the 
"Orthodox" or Greek Church can be removed from the 
guardianship of either parent becoming connected with the 
Stundists. (4) Forbidding Stundists from membership or 
other association in societies of artisans. (5) The enactment 
preventing Stundists from purchasing land. 

Truly these Stundists must be our "brethren;" for 
their only crimes (?) seem to be love for the Lord, a desire 
to worship him in the spirit of the truth, and a desire to 
be separate from the Greek quarter of "that great city" 
Babylon. Give them your sympathy and prayers. Should 
the Lord open the door for it these people would doubtless 
be found hungry and thirsty for the truth, and we should 
take pleasure in doing what we could to serve it to them. 
But there is little hope now, since even the Bible Society's 
representatives have been excluded. The "night" has already 
come to them. Let us the more diligently labor for 
others upon whom such restrictions have not yet come. 

ENCOURAGING A MILITARY SPIRIT. 



It is well known that Roman Catholics have for years 
encouraged the military spirit amongst their young and 
middle-aged men, who are known as "Hibernian Rifles," 
and other names, and are regularly drilled and equipped. 
The American Protective Association freely charges that the 
basement of nearly every Catholic church is an arsenal, well 
stocked with rifles and general ammunitions of war, ready 
for a conflict which they hold will be incited by papists to 
get possession of the government. But we pass by this 
view, which if it ever was Rome's policy we believe has 
been abandoned, at least for the present, in favor of more 
cunning as well as more peaceable methods of gaining the 
same desired end; and we now call attention to the fact 
that the military spirit not only permeates all the colleges 
of the land (to many of which the U.S. Government 
regularly supplies free professors of military tactics), but is 
being adopted by enterprising Protestant Sunday School 



Superintendents in the larger cities all over our land. Summer 
picnics and Christmas treats and S.S. papers and books 
are growing stale, and something new must be devised to fix 
the religious interest of the rising generation and hold them 
in the Sunday School,— which will also insure the presence 
of female scholars. 

We do not charge the promoters of this new enterprise 
with any really bad motives: they are certainly free from 
Jesuitical schemes. But what a commentary it is upon the 
spiritual condition of the various denominations of Christendom, 
that they are not only blind and cannot see afar off 
and have [almost] forgotten that they were purged from 
their old sins (2 Pet. 1:9), but they are so very blind that 
they do not see that the spirit they are cultivating is the 
very reverse of the spirit of Christ, who is called "the Prince 

R1757 : page 17 

of Peace," and who declared, "They that take the sword 
shall perish with the sword," and said, My Kingdom is not 
of this world, else would my servants fight, but now because 
ye are not of the world [and under my teachings are opposed 
to wars, fightings, etc., and are children of the "God 
of peace"], therefore the world [which is of the other spirit] 
hateth you. -Matt. 26:52; John 18:36; 15:19. 

As we look out from our office window we see three 
companies of boys, ranging in years from ten to twenty, in 
blue uniforms and with imitation (wooden) guns and swords 
drilling in front of the First Presbyterian Church; and 
picking up the daily paper we note that the same is going 
on everywhere, and that within the past few days the Secretary 
of War, by influential request, loaned a lot of regular 
military repeating rifles to a company of the larger Christian (?) 
soldier boys of one of the New York Church 
Sunday Schools, and that they gave "a very creditable exhibition,' 
which drew to them general attention and applause 
for their skill. 

Our thoughts run on into the future in line with what 
God's Word shows us is "coming upon the world," and 
we wonder how any can be so blind as not to see that 

"All things are onward moving" 
in perfect accord with what God has prophetically outlined. 

Truly the morning cometh, when the nations "shall beat 
their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruninghooks, 
neither shall they learn war any more." (Isa. 2:4.) 
But that time lies beyond a dark intervening "night," and 
for that night all the world is preparing, consciously or 
unconsciously. This, too, is pointed out by the Prophet, 
who cries the Lord's message to this Laodicean phase of 
Christendom, saying,— 

"Proclaim ye this among the nations, Prepare war, 
wake up the mighty men;. ..let them come up— all the 
men of war. Beat your plow-shares into swords, and your 
pruningknives into spears: let the weak say, 'I am a hero.' 
Assemble hastily together, and come, all ye nations from 
every side, and gather yourselves together: Thither, O 



Jehovah, cause thy mighty ones to come down! 

"Let the nations awake, and come up to the valley of 
Jehoshaphat [God's pleading judgment]; for there will I 
sit to judge all the nations from every side.... 
Multitudes, multitudes, are in the valley of decision [trial, 
crisis], for near is the Day of Jehovah in the valley of decision. 
Sun and moon [Gospel and Law] are obscured and 
the brilliancy of the stars [teachers, especially the apostles 
—Rev. 12:1] is obscured. And the Lord will roar out of 
Zion [the elect Church], and from Jerusalem [Israel in restoration] 
will send forth his voice; and the heavens [nominal 
church] and the earth [society] shall quake: but the 
Lord shall be a refuge for his people, and a strong hold for 
the sons of Israel."— Joel 3:9-16. 

LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE. 



"There are ministers of the Gospel who are losing 
golden opportunities for usefulness, because they have not 
been called to fill a conspicuous pastorate. Their light, 
they are quite sure, was intended for a lighthouse on some 
oft traveled sea, and they cannot come down to the humble 
destiny and duty of a village lamp."— N.Y. Observer. 

This same fault can be found nearer home. How 
many of God's children, readers of the WATCH TOWER, are 
praying to God to open to them some great work to do in 
his name and for the spread of his truth, and are neglecting 
opportunities God has already given them in their homes 
and in their neighborhoods, etc. The Lord loves most the 
humble who take hold of the most important work they 

R1758 :page 17 

see to do and do it with their might, and when he wants a 
servant for an important place in his service, he gives the 
opening to these humble ones. Their humility permits him 
to honor them without injuring them, and thus permits them 
more and more to honor him. 

PROTESTANT INCONSISTENCIES. 



Of all religionists "Protestants" seem the most inconsistent. 
Evangelist Moody continues to charge Protestants 
a good stiff price for reviving them, but shows his love for 
papists by donating $500 to help build a Roman Catholic 
church, and by prohibiting the sale upon his school premises 
of a newspaper containing an anti-Romanist article. 

The World's Parliament of Religions clearly showed 
that many professed ministers of Christ were not only 
ready to ignore the faith, but even the name of Christ— to 
draw men after them. 

Recently a Baptist church edifice was dedicated, and 



all the denominations of the town were represented at the 

ceremony by their ministers except the Roman Catholic. 

For his consistency and honesty the priest was roundly denounced. 

His reply was to the effect that he recognized 

a wide difference between the teachings of his church and 

that of the one to be honored by the dedicatory services, 

and that he wished to be consistent and honest in his conduct 

as well as in his professions. 

A Jewish synagogue was dedicated in Cleveland, and 
Protestant ministers vied with each other at the service to 
show that faith in Christ means nothing. This is not 
Christian love, or "love of the brethren," so highly commended 
by the Apostle as one of the evidences that we 
"have passed from death unto life." It is worldly love— 
the result either of ignorance or of disloyalty to Christ. 
It is the kind of love mentioned in the Scriptures thus: 
"If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not 
in him." 

Far better, far more consistent, is the Jewish view of 
the matter, expressed by the Jewish Exponent, as follows: 

"The participation of Christian divines in the services 
at Jewish houses of worship, a notable instance of which— 
at the dedication of a synagogue in Cleveland— has attracted 
attention, is accepted as a welcome evidence of 
good-will and mutual toleration, if it has no under or deeper 
significance. 

"It must be confessed, however, that the expression 
of this sentiment in this way does not seem specially appropriate. 
For men to ignore broad lines of demarkation, 
and to announce a harmony where none exists, can only 
lead to eventual discord. We prefer that Christians and 
Jews shall remain distinct in the domain of religion, mutually 

R1758 :page 18 

respecting each other's convictions, but agreeing to 
disagree on this one subject. On all others they can join 
hands, or at least the lines of cleavage will be other than 
between Jews and Christians. 

On occasions of large and general importance, even of 
religious significance, it may not be unmeet for Jews and 
Christians to join where no sectarian question is at issue. 
On other occasions it is better to follow the Mosaic injunction 
not to remove the landmarks." 

Not a great while ago a conference of Christians and 
Jews was held in the First M.E. church of Chicago, in 
which ministers of several denominations took prominent 
part, notably Revs. W. E. Blackstone, C. A. Blanchard, 
D. C. Marquis, E. P. Goodwin. The meetings were opened 
and closed with devotional "exercises"— singing, prayer, 
etc., and the name of Christ was entirely ignored;— even 
the benediction was Moses' blessing, written off and read 
for the occasion. 

The Chicago Tribune criticized the matter and interviewed 
both Jews and Christians on the subject. The 
Jewish Rabbi said:— 



"It was undoubtedly the intention on the part of those 
who arranged the affair to have all reference to Christ and 
the Trinity omitted from the devotional exercises. As 
such it was a great concession on their part, and I think an 
unfortunate one. More than that, it was the most inconsistent 
in those who believe that prayer should be offered 
in the name of Christ. It seems to me that the whole thing 
was unfortunate. 

"I do not wish to be understood as questioning the 
honest intent of the promoters of the conference. I was 
of the impression that it was a scheme to convert us and 
wrote Mr. Blackstone that were such the case he had better 
not waste his efforts. He assured me that such was not the 
case and I am now convinced to that effect. I am quite 
certain it did no good and I hope it did no harm. I was 
amused at one thing. Mr. Blackstone asked me if I thought 
the conference would draw a crowd. I replied that it 
certainly would, as anything in the nature of a show was 
certain to draw well in Chicago. He replied that he intended 
to take from it the character of a show by having 
devotional exercises. I was much surprised at that, wondering 
all the while how Jews and Christians could possibly 
worship together. You see, I did not think they would 
eliminate Christ. It was done, I suppose, to give the conference 
a solemn character. This end, however, was not 
fully attained, as I was often interrupted during my address 
by applause." 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



In England, the special representatives of the lower 
classes in Parliament are yearly becoming more numerous, 
and correspondingly the demand is urged, that members of 
Parliament shall receive a salary of L. 300 ($1500) per year, 
and that all Election expenses be paid by the government. 
The demand will become a law— though perhaps at first 
modified so as to apply only to those who will declare 
themselves as needing such assistance. Hitherto, no salaries 
have been paid; so that all except men of means have 
been practically barred out. 



In Germany, the various parties of socialistic tendency 
are becoming very strong. Recently, when cheers for the 
Emperor were proposed in the Reichstag (the German Congress), 
some of its members refused to join. The government 
representative attempted to make an example by 
punishing the disloyalty, but was greatly surprised that the 
Reichstag, by a vote of nearly two to one, refused to 
punish. 

The government (that is, the Emperor, through his 
representative) is about to introduce a new bill, giving the 
Emperor more power and limiting the scope of the Reichstag's 



powers. This, of course, will be opposed by all 
liberals and socialists and the government expects to be 
forced to make concessions to the Church of Rome, in 
order to secure the votes of the Roman Catholic members, 
who are thoroughly under the control of the papacy, and 
can be relied upon to vote for anything that will promote 
its interests. The newspapers representing the Catholic 
party are very strong in their opposition to the new measures 
for restricting the Reichstag's powers; but those familiar 
with their methods assert that this is only to secure the 
larger price— the greater concessions to Papacy— for their 
votes, when the time for voting arrives. 

The London Daily Chronicle gives the following 
account:— 

"Yesterday we predicted that the coming session of 
the German Reichstag would be a very stormy one, but we 
little thought that its first sitting would be marked by a 
'scene of tumult almost unequalled in the history of the 
Imperial Parliament' The Socialists refused to join in a 
cheer for the Emperor, at the instance of the President- 
refused even to rise from their seats. This was indeed a 
very ominous inauguration of the parliamentary sittings in 
the new Reichshaus. Indeed, it will take rank as a kind 
of historical landmark. 

"Substitute 'King' for 'Emperor,' and it may be 
said that a precisely similar scene occurred yesterday in the 
Belgian Chamber of Deputies, when a Socialist Deputy 
protested against all royal grants. The reply of the Premier 
was to call upon the House to give three cheers for the 
King. This was goading the Socialists into a further demonstration, 
and they retaliated by crying, 'Long live the 
People! Down with the Capitalists!'" 



In the French Chamber of Deputies (the French Congress) 
a socialist member recently introduced a bill granting 
a small city the right to establish a drug store to be 
operated in the interest of the citizens. This was intended 
to be an entering wedge for communistic principles in all 
kinds of business and in every city of France. The measure 
was voted down by a large majority; but its advocate 
declared that revolution would yet accomplish what was 
peaceably refused. 



Greater precautions than ever before are now being 
taken against assassins in and about the President's mansion 
in Washington. Twenty-four policemen, divided into 
three watches, guard it day and night. Within the past 
month a sentry box has been placed in the middle of the 
roadway and about fifty feet in front of the mansion. Under 
an order recently issued no one is allowed to cross the 



R1758 :page 19 



White House porch while a member of the President's 
family is entering or leaving it. 

The N.Y. Sun asks, "What new danger threatens the 
inmates of the mansion, that it should be more closely 
guarded than at any time in its history, even during the 
civil war?" We answer, in the words of our Lord's prophecy, 
that they hear "the sea and the waves roaring," 
threatening, and their "hearts are failing them for fear, 
and for looking forward to those things coming." 



The years 1893 and 1894 proved very unsatisfactory 
to Labor Organizations in the United States. Their strikes 
were failures in almost every instance. The loss of their 
reserve funds by the societies, as well as the loss of wages 

R1759 : page 19 

by the individuals, has greatly dispirited them all. But although 
wages are falling so are prices of goods— which never 
before were so cheap. If Capital would content itself with 
a lower rate of interest and smaller proportionate returns 
from business investments and thus share the general reduction 
the great "time of trouble" might, for the present at 
least, be averted. 

But we know that the Scriptural forecast is correct, and 
we need expect no abandonment by Capital of the time 
honored principle of selfishness, which for centuries has controlled 
all classes; namely, "Secure for yourself all you can 
legally get possession of." Acting upon this principle, firms 
and corporations and trusts will say, We did not make 
as much money last year as the year previous and cannot 
pay as large a dividend: we must pinch a little more off 
each employee's wages, for we do not want our business 
and its profits to get behind what they have been. 

Because of their present impoverished condition, and 
in view of the failure of so many of their strikes recently, 
wage-workers will feel forced to submit, and will submit. 
But as they witness the extravagant use by their employers 
of the money thus pinched from their wages, hard and revengeful 
thoughts will arise within the hearts of all except 
those who have made the Lord their refuge and habitation, 
and who are waiting patiently for the establishment of God's 
promised Kingdom of Righteousness.— James 5:7. 



The movement against Anarchists and Socialists in 
France, and the new legislation pending against them in 
the German Congress, are supplemented by a recent Government 
decree in Italy, by which every Socialist club, 
society or union has been dissolved and their papers and 
archives confiscated. The decree and its execution came 
suddenly and unexpectedly. It is said that papers of importance 



were seized by the police. 

Such repressive measures may or may not prolong the 
lives of the governments adopting them; but will they not 
make the explosion and wreck, when they do come, all the 
more terrible? Holding down the lever of the safety-valve 
of a steam generator may stop the noise of the escaping 
steam temporarily, but every engineer knows that would 
be bad practice. Instead he would reduce his fire; so the 
wiser plan would be to reduce the causes of social unrest. 

But the Lord's time has come for the great change 
which will demolish totally the present social structure, that 
upon its ruins he may establish his Kingdom so long promised 
and for which his saints have so long prayed, "Thy 
Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as in heaven." 
Therefore, as is declared in the Scriptures, "The wisdom 
of their wise [states-]men shall perish, and the understanding 
of their prudent [business-]men shall not be manifested." 
-Isa. 29:14. 



Although the American Federation of Labor at its recent 
meeting in Denver voted down by a strong majority 
resolutions favoring Socialism, this should not be understood 
as signifying opposition to everything Socialistic: they are 
opposed to the general theory of Socialists as being, at least 
at present, impractical. They still favor community ownership 
or at least regulation of railroads, telegraphs, telephones, 
etc., indispensable to human progress and comfort. 
Their newly elected President, John McBride, is a man of 
moderation who favors peaceful methods rather than riot. 

These things show what we have heretofore called attention 
to— that the majority of American workmen are 
not disposed to be Anarchists; that when anarchy does 
come, it will be years hence (probably not before 191 1) — 
and then as a result of despair at being unable to secure equity 
by other methods. 



The Pope has recently, after two years' consideration of 
the subject, put under his ban three secret societies;— 
Knights of Pythias, Odd Fellows and Sons of Temperance. 
No Roman Catholic may hereafter belong to these orders. 
Similar restrictions have long since applied to the Masonic 
order. 

The Pope wishes so to draw the line that his faithful 
will be forced into orders whose regulations will not hinder 
the full knowledge of the priests of all their affairs through 
the Confessional. The developed Christian will find membership 
in the Order of the "Royal Priesthood" quite sufficient. 
In it he will find use for all the hours not due to his 
family and himself. In it he will find the best of earthly 
fellowship, and with its Head the perfection of fellowship. 



R1748 : page 19 

ALL THIS BE THY PORTION. 



NEW mercies, new blessings, new light on thy way; 
New courage, new hope and new strength for each day; 
New notes of thanksgiving, new chords of delight, 
New praise in the morning, new songs in the night; 
New wine in thy chalice, new altars to raise; 
New fruits for thy Master, new garments of praise; 

New gifts from his treasures, new smiles from his face; 
New streams from the fountain of Infinite Grace; 
New stars for thy crown, new tokens of love; 
New gleams of the glory that waits thee above; 
New light of his countenance, full and unpriced- 
All this be the glory of thy new life in Christ. —Selected. 



R1759 : page 20 

THE MINISTRY OF EVIL. 

-PSA. 130.- 



THE life of every human being has its lights and shadows, 

its seasons of joy and its depths of sorrow. 

These make up the warp and woof of experience, and the 

web of character that flows from the active loom of life 

will be fine and beautiful, or coarse and homely, according 

to the skill and carefulness with which the individual appropriates 

and weaves into it the threads of experience. 

In every life, under the present reign of sin and evil, the 

somber shades predominate; and to such an extent that the 

Scriptures aptly describe humanity in its present condition 

as a "groaning creation." Nor is the Christian exempt 

from these conditions that are upon the whole world; for 

"we also groan within ourselves, waiting for deliverance." 

-Rom. 8:22,23. 

But while we are waiting for the deliverance, the daily 
experiences of life have a most important mission to us, 
and the manner in which we receive and use them should 
be a matter of deepest concern to us; for, according to the 
use we make of them, each day's prosperity or adversity and 
trial bears to us a blessing or a curse. Those experiences 
which we are accustomed to regard as prosperous often 
have in them subtle dangers. If wealth increase or friends 
multiply, how almost imperceptibly the heart finds its satisfaction 
in earthly things; but, on the other hand, when 
the keen edge of sorrow and disappointment are felt, when 
riches fail, and friends forsake, and enemies take up a reproach 
against us, the natural temptation is to despondency 



and despair. 

Just here is an important part of the great battle of the 
Christian's life. He must fight the natural tendencies of the 
old nature and confidently claim and anticipate the victory 
in the strength of the great Captain of his salvation. He 
must not succumb to the flattering and deceptive influences 
of prosperity, nor faint under the burdens of adversity. 
He must not allow the trials of life to sour and harden his 
disposition, to make him morose, or surly, or bitter, or unkind. 
Nor may he allow pride or ostentation or self -righteousness 
to grow and feed upon the temporal good 
things which the Lord's providence has granted him to 
test his faithfulness as a steward. 

Sorrows indeed may, and often will, come in like a 
flood, but the Lord is our helper in all these things. The 
soul that has never known the discipline of sorrow and 
trouble has never yet learned the preciousness of the Lord's 
love and helpfulness. It is in seasons of overwhelming sorrow, 
when we draw near to the Lord, that he draws specially 
near to us. So the Psalmist found it, when, in deep affliction, 
he cried to the Lord and reasoned of his righteousness, 
saying, "Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O 
Lord. Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to 
the voice of my supplications." Feeling his own shortcomings, 
and longing for full deliverance from every imperfection, 
and prophesying the bountiful provisions of the 
divine plan of salvation through Christ, he adds, "If thou, 
Lord, shouldest mark iniquities [imputing them to us], O 
Lord, who shall stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, 
that thou mayest be feared [reverenced]" 

How blessed are such assurances when the soul is 
painfully conscious of its infirmities and of its inability to 
measure up to the perfect law of righteousness. When the 
heart is true and loyal, God does not mark our infirmities 
in a record against us. They are not imputed to us, but 
are freely forgiven through Christ in whose merit we trust 
and whose righteousness is our glorious dress,— arrayed in 
which, we may come with humble boldness, even into the 
presence of the King of kings and Lord of lords. 

If God thus ignores the infirmities of our flesh and 
receives and communes with us as new creatures in Christ, 
his children should also so regard one another, considering 
not, and charging not against each other, the infirmities of 
the flesh, which all humbly confess and by the grace of God 
strive daily to overcome. "If God be for us, who can be 
against us?" The case is different, however, when the infirmities 
of the flesh are cultivated, indulged and justified 
that the errors may be continued. Then, indeed, they are 
charged against us, and if we do not speedily "judge 
ourselves," the Lord will judge and chasten us.— 
ICor. 11:31,32. 

"I wait for the Lord," the Psalmist continues, "my 
soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. My soul 
waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for the 
morning." How necessary is this patient waiting for the 
Lord! In the midst of cares, perplexities, difficulties and 



infirmities we may remember that all the jarring discords 
of life are working together for good to them that love the 
Lord, to the called according to his purpose. But for the 
consummation of this purpose of God toward us we must 
"wait," and, while waiting patiently, endure hardness as 
good soldiers. "Trust in the Lord, and wait patiently 

R1760 : page 20 

for him, and he will bring it to pass." Time is an important 
element in all God's plans: we are not, therefore, to 
be disappointed when the test of endurance is applied while 
the blessings we crave tarry long. God took time to frame 
the world and to fit it for human habitation; time (6000 
years) to give the world its necessary experience with evil; 
time (4000 years) to prepare for the advent of Christ as the 
world's Redeemer; time (2000 years) for the preparation 
of the Church to share in his glorious reign; and time must 
be allowed for the shaping and adjusting of the individual 
affairs of all his people. God has not forgotten when the 
answers to our prayers seem to tarry long. He who heeds 
the sparrow's fall and numbers the very hairs of our heads 
is not indifferent to the faintest call or the smallest necessity 
of his humblest child. 
O, how blessed is the realization of such care over us. 

"MORE THAN THEY THAT WAIT FOR THE MORNING. 



"My soul waiteth for the Lord more than they that wait for the 
Morning,— I say more than they that wait for the Morning." 

The "brethren," are not in darkness respecting the 
dawn of the Millennial Morning, because taught there 

R1760 : page 21 

of by the Comforter (See 1 Thes. 5:4), and because to 

their eyes of faith the Day Star (the Day-bringer— Christ) 

has already appeared, and they rejoice in the inspired testimony 

that although "weeping may endure for the night 

[of sin's predominance] joy cometh in the Morning" of the 

great day of the Lord. And as the dawn of the new day, 

"the day of Christ," becomes more and more distinct, 

many besides the "brethren" can and do see signs that 

"the night is far spent and the day is at hand;" and by 

and by, notwithstanding the dark clouds and terrible storm 

of trouble that will temporarily hide the signs of morning 

from them, all the world— even the still sleeping nominal 

church— will awake to the fact that "The morn at last is 

breaking." 

But many of those who are now watching for the Morning 
from the standpoint of Socialism, Nationalism, etc., are 
not waiting for the Lord— in fact, they do not know the 
Lord, his character and his Kingdom having been so sadly 
misrepresented by those who claimed to be his mouthpieces. 



They rejoice in the Morning, because it ushers in the golden 
age of human equality, general education, decreased toil, 
and increased privileges, comforts and luxuries. "God is 
not in all their thoughts," when they look for the Morning. 
Looking from a more or less selfish standpoint, and unguided 
by the divine revelation— for no man knoweth the 
mind of God save he who has the spirit of God (1 Cor. 2:11,12) 
—they fail to see the real object and chief characteristic 
of the coming age of blessing, and are merely championing 
the interests of the masses as against the present special 
advantages of the wealthy. They see not the greatest 
blessings of the dawning day;— that with earthly comforts 
and privileges it will bring the great blessing of a trial 
for everlasting life;— that it will be the world's Judgment 
Day, to determine who, under those favorable conditions, 
will develop characters in harmony with God's character. 

But with the "brethren" it is different. While they 
appreciate the coming earthly blessings none the less, but 
the more intelligently, the Lord, his character and the 
work which will be accomplished for men by the great Physician 
—as Prophet, Priest and King— these more weighty 
and more valuable considerations outweigh by far the 
earthly favors which will attend his Kingdom's rule. Yes, 
the "brethren" wait for the Lord himself, longing to see 
the King in his beauty— the fairest among ten thousand, 
the one altogether lovely. Yes, truly our souls "wait for 
the Lord more than they that wait for the Morning." 

Then let all the Israel of God hope in the Lord 
(verses 7,8), for with the Lord there is mercy; mercy not 
only in dealing with our infirmities, but also in shielding 
from overwhelming trials and in granting grace to help in 
every time of need,— to those who abide in the Vine by 
faith and obedience. "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget 
not all his benefits." 



R1760 : page 21 

THE GOOD CONFESSION. 



I. QUAR., LESSON IV., JAN. 27, MATT. 16:13-23. 

Golden Text— "Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God."-Matt. 16:16. 

AFTER the many proofs of his divine anointing 
which his disciples had seen, the Lord had reason 
to expect their faith in his claim to the Messiahship to 
be established. Hence the questions of this lesson— (1) 
"Whom do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?" and 
(2) "But whom say ye that I am?" The former was but 
a leading question; the latter, the pointed one calculated 
to bring out a full expression of their faith. 



Here Simon Peter's impulsive zeal, which sometimes 
led him into difficulties and errors, led him to a very 
warm and prompt expression of his full conviction that 
Jesus was indeed the Messiah. "And Simon Peter answered 
and said, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God!'" 
Such a prompt and full profession of his faith brought the 
immediate reward of the Master's approval. The conviction 
thus impressed upon his mind was not such as the 
carnal mind would arrive at, but such as the mind could 
gain only by submitting itself fully to the spirit of God. 
Peter and all the other apostles had done this, but Peter, 
being the most prompt to confess it, received the first and 
warmest commendation and reward. 

Verse 18. "And I say unto thee, that thou art Peter 
[Greek, petros, a stone, a piece of a rock]; and upon this 
rock [Greek, petra, the rock in mass, the foundation rock] 
I will build my church; and the gates of hell [hades, the 
grave, death] shall not prevail against it." 

The foundation "rock" was Christ— "this rock"— 
which Peter had just confessed, and not Peter, as the Church 
of Rome claims, and as some Protestants are now willing 
to concede. Peter himself disclaims such distinction, 
and such usurpation of the Lord's place, when he points to 
Christ as the foundation stone in the spiritual temple of 
God, and to all the members of his body as living stones 
to be built upon that foundation.— 1 Pet. 2:4-6. See also 
Isa. 28:16; Matt. 21:42; Acts 4:11; Rom. 9:33; Eph. 2:20; 
Psa. 118:22,23; 1 Cor. 3:11. 

The promise that the gates of death should not prevail 
against the Lord's true Church has indeed been verified; 
for though assailed by the fiercest persecutions she has never 
yet been exterminated. Throughout the entire age down 
to its close in the present time the Lord has preserved a 
people; and his further promise, "Lo, I am with you alway, 
even to the end of the age," has also been richly verified. 

But while the gates of death (hades) have not prevailed 
against the Church as a whole, they have done so (temporarily) 
against its members— even against the Head, our 
Lord. But they shall not prevail everlastingly. Our Lord 
triumphed or prevailed over hades (the grave) on the third 
day in his resurrection (by the Father's power), and we his 
Church also shall prevail on the third (thousand-year) day. 
For it is promised that He who raised up our Lord Jesus 
shall raise up us also by Jesus. And thus the gates of the 
grave shall not eventually prevail or triumph over us. 
"Weeping [and death] may endure for a night, but joy [in 
resurrection] cometh in the morning." 

Verse 19. The "keys of the kingdom" granted to Peter 
signified the privilege which he subsequently enjoyed of 
opening the gospel door to both Jews and Gentiles: 

R1760 : page 22 

to the Jews on the day of Pentecost, after the anointing of 
the holy Spirit (See Acts 2:14-40); and to the Gentiles 
at the house of Cornelius, the first Gentile convert. (See 



Acts 10:33-46.) The ability to bind and loose on earth 

and in heaven, while here expressed to Peter specially, applied 

also to all the other apostles. It was the guarantee 

of that divine inspiration which subsequently so guided 

their teachings as to make them infallibly authoritative to 

the entire Church. Whatever they, under divine inspiration, 

bound upon the Church as duty was bound in 

heaven; and whatever they loosed, e.g., the obligations 

of the Mosaic law, were loosed in heaven.— See our issue 

of May 1, '93. 

Verse 20. The charge that they should not yet begin 
to preach this doctrine was given probably in consideration 
of the fact that the people in general still needed line 
upon line and precept upon precept in the way of evidence 
before they would believe. The Lord apparently desired to 
multiply the evidences rather than the assertions of his 
character. He gave them the evidences and led them thus 
to the right conclusions. 

Verse 21. Having fully convinced the apostles— his 
chosen witnesses— of the verity of his claims, he now began 
to instruct them further in the purposes of God with 
reference to himself. Step by step, as a wise teacher, he led 
them into the truth. 

Verses 22,23. While the love of Peter would, if possible, 
protect the Lord from his predicted tragic end, the 
Lord promptly rebuked any interference with the divine 
plan to which he himself was fully submitted. Like our 
Lord, we should be so fully submitted to the will of God 
that even the kindly meant dissuasions from duty on the 
part of our own friends, or the natural desires of our own 
flesh, we should recognize as besetments of the Adversary; 
and we should promptly and firmly resist them. 

Thank God for the Peters of his flock, with their 
own earnest confessions. Their characters, as well as that 
of the Paul class, demand and have our admiration— 
notwithstanding their need of reproofs at times, for misdirected 
zeal. 



R1761 : page 22 

THE TRANSFIGURATION. 



I. QUAR., LESSON V., FEB. 3, LUKE 9:28-36. 

Parallel Accounts-Matt. 17:1-13; Mark 9:2-13. 

Golden Text— "This is my beloved Son in whom I 
am well pleased: hear ye him."— Matt. 17:5. 

THIS lesson should begin with verse 22. Verses 22-26 

tell us how the Lord disclosed to his disciples 

the intelligence of the tragic end of his life which he must 



soon meet, and assured them of his resurrection on the third 
day. He then intimated that his disciples would not be 
exempt from similar persecution and counselled faithfulness 
under even such trials, assuring them of an abundant reward 
in the glory of his Kingdom at his second advent. 

Verse 27 was a prophecy which received an almost immediate 
fulfilment, as the narrative of this lesson proves. 

Verses 28-36. We have the Lord's own words to 
prove that the incident here recorded was a "vision,"— 
not a reality. "And as they came down from the mountain, 
Jesus charged them, saying, 'Tell the vision to no 
man, until the Son of man be risen again from the dead.'" 
-Matt. 17:9. 

The import of this "vision" is also clearly indicated 
by the Apostle Peter. (2 Pet. 1:16-18.) He declares it 
to have been a "vision" of the coming glory of Christ's 
Kingdom, saying, "For we have not followed cunningly 
devised fables when we made known unto you the power 
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses 
of his majesty; for he received from God the Father honor 
and glory when there came such a voice to him from the 
excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we 
heard, when we were with him in the holy mount." 

As a "vision" it is to be understood as a symbolic 
representation of the glory of Christ's Millennial Kingdom. 
The changed appearance of the Lord's person and clothing 
were symbolic of his coming personal glory. And the 
glorious appearance also of Moses and Elias represented 
the association with the Lord in the glory of his Kingdom 
of the two companies from among men who shall constitute 
the earthly and the heavenly phases of the Kingdom. 
Moses represented the earthly phase and Elias the spiritual 
or heavenly phase. Here in symbolic "vision" was represented 
the established Kingdom, referred to in verse 27— 
"I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which 
shall not taste of death till they see the Kingdom of God." 
It was not the actual Moses and Elias, remember, for this 
was a "vision," not a reality. (Jude 9; Rom. 5:12; Eccl. 9:5; 
Psa. 146:4; Job 14:21; John 3:13; Acts 2:34; Psa. 90:3.) 
Nor was their resurrection due then: "They [the 
ancient worthies of the Jewish dispensation] without us 
[the Church] shall not be made perfect." (Heb. 1 1:40.) 
Their resurrection tarries, therefore, until the second advent 
of Christ and the full establishment of the spiritual 
phase of the Kingdom— the Gospel Church. 

Verse 3 1 records the theme of the three glorified ones, 
which was the great transaction shortly to be accomplished 
at Jerusalem— the crucifixion of the Lord, the payment of 
our ransom price. 

The object of the "vision" was probably two-fold— 
for the comfort and strengthening of the Lord, and for the 
enlightenment of his chosen witnesses. The communication 
with the Lord concerning his decease was probably 
while the disciples were asleep (verse 32), and was doubtless, 
therefore, specially for his own comfort. The "vision" 



came in answer to the Lord's prayer, and though it was 

not understood by the disciples at the time, it was afterwards 

a blessed inspiration to them, and should be to us also. 

Yet, says Peter, "we have a more sure word of prophecy 

[concerning the Kingdom and its glory. It is spoken of 

by all the holy prophets since the world began— Acts 3:19-21], 

whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a 

light that shineth in a dark place until the day dawn, and 

the day star arise in your hearts." (2 Pet. 1:19.) The 

"vision" was a vivid and refreshing symbolic view of the 

Kingdom, but without the "sure word of prophecy" it 

would have been unintelligible. 

Verses 34,35. Here was another testimony by a voice 
from heaven to the claim of our Lord to be the Son of 
God, and pleasing and acceptable to him. At his birth the 
heavenly messengers announced him; at his baptism the 
voice from heaven declared him the acceptable Son of God; 
and here, very near the close of his human existence, he is 
again proclaimed the acceptable and well-pleasing Son. 

R1761 : page 23 

Verse 36. "And when the voice was past, Jesus was 
found alone." The "vision," the voice and the cloud had 
all passed away, and the natural conditions were again 
realized, while the lessons of that solemn hour remained to 
gain a yet broader significance when, by and by, after 
Pentecost, they would receive the anointing of the spirit, 
and understand its significance. 

Thus with line upon line, and precept upon precept, 
the blessed truths of God concerning his glorious benevolent 
plan were riveted upon the hearts and minds of his 
disciples; and they shall be upon ours also as we bring ourselves 
more and more into communion with his word. 



R1761 : page 23 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I have the pleasure of informing 
you that we have just had a great spiritual feast. The Nov. 
double number of our most welcome semi-monthly visitor 
came, loaded with good things. Oh! how glad I am that 
our Father in heaven gave you thoughts on the Law 
question so satisfying, encouraging and strengthening to 
his children; for I have long waited to have a solution of 
these subjects from your pen. I feel very thankful indeed. 

Just as we were enjoying these blessed truths, Brother 
McPhail came. We had a blessed time. The Brother 
spoke from the Chart. The following night we had a 
grand meeting, which closed with many questions, well 
answered. Bro. M. is the right man in the right place, according 



to my judgment, and I pray that he may do all of 
the congregations as much good as he did us. I consider 
him sound in the truth. On Sunday we had two meetings. 
The three o'clock meeting lasted until dark, and the eight 
o'clock meeting until nearly eleven o'clock. I think all 
were benefited. 

We hope that Brother M., or some other brother as 
well posted will visit us again soon. He gave me a satisfactory 
solution of every text brought up, except Psa. 49:19, 
which he says he will speak to you about. 

Your brother in Christ, M. L. STAPLES. 

[REPLY-Psa. 49:19,20 must be interpreted in the 
light of its connections and in harmony with all the declarations 
of Scripture. These who "perish like the beasts" 
—hopelessly— and who shall never after "see light," are 
not men who have died in ignorance of God, as the heathen 
(at home and abroad); they are specially declared to be 
such as when "in honor" appreciate it not. 

Father Adam, when perfect, was "crowned with glory 
and honor" (Psa. 8:5), but lost this in sin and degradation 
by disobedience. Restitution to "honor" and life 
in God's favor was redeemed for all by our Lord's sacrifice, 
and this honor and life are reckoned as offered or given 
back to a man when he is brought to a knowledge and opportunity 
of regaining them: and those thus reckonedly 
honored again through Christ, who do not appreciate it so 
as to accept it, are subjects of the Second death— will perish 
as the beasts and never see light. Or the "they" of verse 19 
might be understood to refer to the earthly riches and 
"glory" of verse 17; these will never more be seen as his. 
Any other views would seem to conflict with verse 14, which 
distinctly says, of mankind in general, that "the righteous 
shall have dominion [rule] over them in the morning,"— 
when the Millennial Day has dawned. This agrees with 
the Bible as a whole which assures us that "all the families 
of the earth shall be blessed" with the gracious knowledge 
and opportunities of the New Covenant, when "the saints 
shall judge the world."-EDITOR.] 



DEAR FRIEND:— I take the liberty to enclose a couple 
of clippings from the San Francisco Examiner, as showing 
that the promised light is breaking. People are beginning 
to see as they never saw before; and by and by their hearts 
will have to confess the power of Christ. Oh! that they 
would give in willingly, and sooner. My infidel friends 
keep me supplied with their literature, well written and 
powerful, but so misleading, so false. I return the compliment 
with TOWER, tracts, etc., and so the battle goes. 
I read the DAWNS over and over again, they are ever fresh as 
their fountainhead, the Bible. How welcome are the TOWERS; 
they deal with living questions, and are always good. 

Twenty years yet remain. It seems to me a long time. 
I cannot imagine any one wishing it to be million of years 



hence. The reign of injustice, of sin, has already been 
full long. Let us welcome the new Day, and cry, as the 
saints under the altar, "How long, O Lord?" (Rev. 6:10.) 
The hard times here in this truly Golden State would be 
hard to describe. The people have been driven to the 
verge of revolution. Starvation stares the once happy and 
prosperous farmers in the face. So little money circulates 
that it may be said to have disappeared. The future has 
no ray of hope for the worldly. Yet this cannot be the 
end, and prosperity after a fashion on a lower scale no 
doubt will return by and by. I find this a good opportunity 

R1762 : page 23 

to start the DAWNS and TOWERS where during prosperity 
there would have been "no time" to read them, and I 
think some fruit will yet come of it. 

I enclose a clipping containing an account of the 
strange death of a spirit-medium. This phase of Satanic 
power is surely on the increase. I am ever on the watch 
on this line. Work on the Second Tower of Babel is 
also progressing; viz., the coming together of rulers, 
Church and State, and various plans for the salvation of 
man by man. The signs are multiplying; for, verily, is it 
not a deluge of blood that is coming?— Rev. 6:10. 

How I have longed since a youth to take up the sword 
and fight for the oppressed; but the teachings of your books 
are against such a course, and I am forced to admit you are 
right; for history stands as a proof that none of the patches 
put on Governments are lasting: ultimately oppression again 
comes to the front, if possible in a worse form; and the 
last revolution to right the wrongs of the nations must end 
in anarchy worldwide. How I pity the brave and earnest 
men who will go into it! How great will be their disappointment! 
Yet my whole bent has been that way. This 
is the point where your books hit me hard. How much 
we owe to those who of yore took up the sword and fought 
for the rights of man; yet it seems now we must not do it. 
In the near future I hear "the thunder of the captains and 
the shouting," and the "cause" on the surface, no doubt, 
will appear as right as any ever fought over. It will be 
impossible to show others what we see and know; and I 
hear the word "coward!" It is a hard thing. Perhaps I 
am climbing a hill in advance. My friend, Capt. H, feels 
about the same as I do on this subject. He does not think 
he could help but go. 

R1762 : page 24 

[If Brother H. grows strong in faith he will gain 
strength thereby to be an "overcomer" of this spirit which 
is part of the spirit of the world— of the natural man. Besides 
we see a more excellent way of dealing with these 
matters— God's way; and as we receive of his spirit we prefer 
his way and will follow it, at any cost— EDITOR.] 

On another subject. In his answer to Job (Chapters 38-41), 



God was speaking of actual things throughout; and 

I think that the snow and hail (38:22,23) indicate actual 

snow and hail. If this could be sustained, would it not 

point to the actual (literal) fulfilment of part of the prophecies 

and revelations? 

[We consider that a number of symbolic prophecies 
are intended to have both a literal and a symbolic fulfilment; 
but the above expression by Job seems to us to be 
figurative language and not prophetic— EDITOR.] 

Yours in the hope of the better Day, 

A. R. PEARSON. 



page 24 



MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Below is my list for TOWER, 
seventeen in all, but mostly renewals, as you will see. 
Find amount enclosed. Sorry the list is so small, but it 
is the best I could do. 

I have been meeting with the friends, and preaching, at 
different places in this vicinity for some time past, as you 
know, and find many who appear (and some are) interested; 
and I want to continue to advance the cause. God 
bless the truth, and prosper it in 1895. S. WILLIAMS. 



DEAR MR. RUSSELL:-I am thankful that I have another 
opportunity of writing to you. I am glad to say that 
I am still making a little advancement. With this I send 
an order for seven subscriptions. Some are now beginning 
to read both DAWNS and TOWER, who a short time 
ago would not hear anything of the sort. 

I find your notes on the International S.S. Lessons 
most useful in helping me to present the truth, especially 
in my Bible class, as they help to elicit questions, and also 
to give answers, and frequently open the way for further 
talk on the subjects; in fact, I often wish you could insert 
your notes a month in advance, so that we could always 
get them beforehand. [It is our intention to do this during 
the present year.— ED.] If you could see some of my 
old copies, it would give some idea how their contents have 
been studied: many of them are in small pieces, completely 
worn by use. I lend many out with the object of getting 
new subscribers. 

Yours sincerely, R. EVANS. 



DEAR BROTHER:— Quite an affecting incident occurred 
at the last meeting held here by Brother McPhail. A poor, 
decrepit old Jew edged his way up to Bro. M., and in a feeble 
voice asked, "What had, or would, become of all the sons 
of Jacob who died this side of the cross?" He seemed to be 
satisfied that those on the other side of Calvary were safe 



and would be duly restored during the Times of Restitution. 
When Bro. M. read to him the prophecy about their 
being taken up out of the graves and sent back home, the 
old man received the message with a beaming countenance, 
and simply said, "I am so glad to hear that." 

The old man's faith touched me, and I was reminded 
of other scenes in New Testament times, where the simple 
truth was announced, and as simply accepted. 

Your brother, L. R. BROWNE. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I had hoped to get a letter of 
respectable proportions to you a month ago; but good intentions 
do not always come with fitting opportunities. 
And now we must be content simply to forward subscriptions 
and to tell you that we have abundantly proved that 
our God is faithful and keepeth his own. We are sometimes 
tempted to mourn over the small outward fruitage of 
our work, but we have the better fruitage of the Lord's 
work within us, which gives us peace and joy in spite of 
surrounding and ever closing-in trouble— a meek and quiet 
spirit of trustfulness that he will enable us to endure. We 
see that the nominal church (the Christian world) is more 
and more forsaking Christ in spite of so much religiousness 
and zeal in really good work (temperance, purity guilds, 
Christian Endeavor Societies, etc.): they will not hear the 
voice of the Shepherd. Verily, though they think they are 
doing God service, they are working only their own wills. 

We have been greatly helped and blessed of late by 
realizing that God's thoughts are not man's, and neither 
are man's ways God's; indeed, they cannot be. We are 
very prone to set ourselves some "good thing" to do, and 
then to conclude that is what God would have us do; and 
although I do not quite unconditionally accept the preaching 
of one of the great preachers who says in effect that 
"a Christian is one who does what he does not like," or 
"he mostly finds God's way the very reverse of his own," 
yet I do believe that if two courses are open to us we shall 
often be safest to choose the most unpleasant. 

I have just been laid aside a little through sickness, and 
it has prevented me from getting round or writing to librarians; 
so that the matter I spoke of, respecting supplying 
free libraries with sets of DAWN, is no nearer completion. 
[Brother Riley has been supplying public libraries with a 
set of DAWN each.— ED.] But another thought has occurred 
to me. If you think the plan worth anything, how would it 
be to insert a notice in TOWER, setting forth the scheme, 
and asking readers to see the librarians in their own districts, 
and so get the interest spread? 

I have just been refreshing my memory and strengthening 
my faith by reading history, and it has mightily confirmed 
me in the belief that Christians, and the saints specially, 
have nothing to do with either the good or the bad 
methods of governments of this world; that we are not 
only to be quiet and submissive to good rulers, but to be 



in subjection to every ordinance of man; to suffer indignities, 

imposition, the spoiling of our goods and the taking 

away of name or life; for our God will not allow this unless 

it be for our good. I am amazed to find so few who 

are not swallowed up in politico-religious (!!) broils. The 

whole of nonconformist churches are given over to this delusion 

of bringing about Christ's Kingdom. The Lord's 

people must leave themselves in his hand, and he will deliver 

them from worse than Egyptian bondage, but he will 

never submit to be helped by man. The image (earth's 

governments) is not only to be destroyed, but carried away, 

so that no trace of it can be found. We must not be deceived 

into thinking that this or that or the other good 

cause is God's way of improving matters. Christ's Kingdom 

will not grow out of the best of earth's governments: 

it is not of this age at all, and so nothing but utter destruction 

can clear the way for it. 

We always remember you in our prayers. We very 
much appreciate the Nov. TOWER. Indeed, this year has 
given us some of the best. May the light increase more 
and more. With heartiest love from all here, 

Ever yours sincerely in Christ, A. P. RILEY. 



page 25 

VOL. XVI. FEBRUARY 1, 1895. No. 3. 



CONTENTS. 



Items— Binders, Charts, etc 26 

Views from the Tower— 27 

The Jewish Convention 27 

Seeking Fellowship with Rome 30 

The Social View 32 

To Wage War on Infidelity 32 

International Protestant Federation 33 

Bible Study: Only the Humble Shall 

Share the Kingdom 33 

Bible Study: The Good Samaritan 34 

Encouraging Letters 35 

page 26 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, 

ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, 
or other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be 
supplied FREE, if they will send a Postal Card each December, 
stating their case and requesting the paper. 



SPECIAL ITEMS. 
IF YOU MUST SEND STAMPS, please send one-cent ones. 



PLEASE BE PARTICULAR to give your full name and full address 
in every letter. You will thus save our time materially. 



THE DEC. 15th, 1894, TOWER. Our supply is wholly exhausted, 
and we are unable to fill recent demands for it. Some of the friends 
who take several copies, or who do not preserve files, may have some 
for which they have no further special use: if so, we will be thankful 



for any they may send us, and will send other TOWERS or tracts in 
exchange. Send a card indicating what you send, and what you wish 
in exchange. 



TOWER BINDERS. We still have patent binders suitable for 1891 
and 1892 also for 1893 and 1894— price 50 cents each, postage paid by 
us. The 1895 Binders for the new sized TOWERS will be ready shortly, 
and orders will be filled as received, 60 cents each. Each binder will hold 
50 issues. Those who can should keep a special file for future reference 
besides the copies they read and loan to others. 



PLAN OF THE AGES WALL CHARTS-five feet long, with spring 
rollers, painted in oil colors, very artistically done— price one dollar and 
fifty cents (includes express charges). These charts we have painted by 
artists. They would ordinarily cost $5.00 each, but we get them done 
by the hundred, at times when other work is scarce. Our readers who 
have studied the chart in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., chap. 12, will 
find that to have one of these charts in the parlor and to know how to 
explain it fluently to friends is an excellent way to illustrate and simplify 
the Truth. 



R1762 : page 27 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



AS in Christianity the tendency for the past twenty-five 
years has been markedly toward agnosticism— 
every new invention and discovery seeming to further call 
in question the reliability of all things old— and as ambitious 
doctors of divinity and professors of theological 
Seminaries have improved the opportunities thus offered by 
the tendency of public sentiment to push themselves into 
notice by their so-called "higher criticism" of the Bible, 
and as this is leading to a crisis as between those who are 
Christians in faith, as well as in name and morals, and 
those who are Christians in morals and name and ceremony 
only— denying the ransom and its atonement and other 
fundamentals— so it is with Judaism. 

Judaism has been passing through a similar experience. 
The leading Jews led by Rabbis now call themselves "Reformed 
Jews;" and a "Reformed Jew" is one who, while 
of the blood of Abraham, repudiates entirely his faith; 
while of the nation organized by Moses, denies his Law. 
In a word, they are generally Infidels, and many of them 



Atheists, who merely maintain circumcision and other rites 
as national characteristics, and whose meetings on Sundays 
are as social or literary clubs. 

The "orthodox"— Law-obeying, prophecy-believing— 
Jews are beginning to awaken to the fact that he is not a 
Jew who is one in outward matters only, and they are inquiring 
upon what grounds the unbelieving Jews claim to 
be Jews at all. 

A leader and spokesman has arisen in their midst, 
Mr. Leo N. Levi, who as much as seven years ago through 
the Jewish press addressed the Rabbis on this subject in 
behalf of "orthodox" Jews generally. His thirty questions 
on the subject of What constitutes a Jew, the Rabbis 
have tried, but in vain, to answer, some claiming in substance 
that for any man to say that he is a Jew is sufficient. 
Others add that a moral life, but irrespective of faith, is 
essential to his being a true Jew. 

(This reminds us of the similar disregard of the quality 
of faith amongst Christians of the "new theology" and 
"higher-criticism" schools of thought. At the Parliament 
of Religions, 1893, it was claimed that reverence for holy 
things and good moral character constitute Christianity, 
and not faith in the Bible and its teachings respecting 
Christ and his work for men. It was inquired upon what 
ground the Jews, Mohammedans, Buddhists and Confucianists 
could come together as one Church, and it was 
suggested that the name of Christ might be dropped as well 
as his doctrines.) 

A Hebrew Convention was held in New Orleans 
on the 3rd of December of last year, and from the speech 
of its leading orator, the Mr. Levi above mentioned, we 
quote some excellent passages which, if he expresses the 
sentiments of any considerable number of Hebrews, or if 
his sentiments should make the deep impression which their 
value deserves, will greatly assist that people in coming to 
the condition which Scripture indicates must be theirs very 
shortly; and which will prepare their hearts for the reception 
of Messiah at his second advent in its Millennial Kingdom 
majesty. This is the class whose eyes will open first 
to the light of the Millennial dawn. He said, as reported 
by the daily press:— 

"From their exalted positions the Rabbis in turn lead 
and drive us, with appeals and denunciations, and we 
hearken and heed or remain obdurate as the case may be, 
with never an opportunity to say one word by way of rejoinder. 
To-day, from this rostrum, in the presence of and 
in the name of the laymen of our faith, I venture for once 
to 'talk back.' 

R1762 : page 28 

"As children we were taught a simple faith from a 
simple catechism, prepared by those charged with the duty 
of studying, knowing and expounding the religion of our 
fathers. The education bestowed upon us by our progenitors, 
we in turn must bestow upon our descendants. We 



cannot escape the obligation if we would, we would not if 
we could. Neither can we escape the obligation to be 
honest with our children, and to require their teachers to 
be honest with us. It is our duty as it is our privilege, 
when we have reached man's estate, to catechise those who 
have catechised us and who will catechise our children. 
We are entitled to know what we are asked to believe and 
why. We are entitled to know what our teachers believe 
and why. And when we ask, we are entitled to replies 
that even our children can comprehend, instead of answers 
that not even we can understand. 

"I have already shown that the so-called reform rabbis 
in the United States are not generally in accord, and they 
are unable or unwilling to define Judaism, and to indicate 
the common ground upon which they all stand, however 
great their differences may be upon minor matters. In 
many instances they have suffered themselves to become intoxicated 
by the iconoclastic and revolutionary spirit of the 
age. They have yielded themselves to the superficial skepticism 
of the present era, which is, after all, but a repetition 
of the same manifestations at different periods of the world's 
history. Whenever a man has made great progress in the 
subjugation of nature to his own wants, he has set up his 
own reason, his own intellect, as an object of worship. 
The human understanding is set up by a process of deification 
to be worshiped by itself. It undertakes to test every 
proposition by its own powers, and whatever it is not able 
to grasp, conceive or comprehend, it rejects as necessarily 
untrue. 

"Even in the time of that great philosopher, Montaigne, 
it was the case, and of it he says: 

""Tis a very great presumption to slight and condemn 
all things for false that do not appear to us likely to 
be true; which is the ordinary vice of such as fancy themselves 
wiser than their neighbors. Reason has instructed 
me that resolutely to condemn anything for false and impossible, 
is to circumscribe and limit the will of God and the 
power of nature, within the bounds of my own capacity, 
than which no folly can be greater. If we give the names 
of monster and miracle to everything our reason cannot 
comprehend, how many such are continually presented before 
our eyes! Let us but consider through what clouds, 
as it were, groping through what darkness, our teachers 
lead us to the knowledge of most of the things which we 
apply our studies to, and we shall find that it is rather custom 
than knowledge that takes away the wonder and 

R1763 : page 28 

renders them easy and familiar to us, and that if those 
things were now newly presented to us we should take them 
as strange and incredible, if not more so than any others. 

"'He that had never met a river imagined the first 
he met to be a sea; and the greatest things that have 
fallen within our knowledge, we conclude the extremes that 
nature makes of the kind. 'Things grow familiar to men's 



minds by being often seen, so that they neither admire nor 
are inquisitive into the things they daily see (Cicero).' The 
novelty rather than the greatness of things tempts us to 
inquire into their causes. But we are to judge with more 
reverence, and with greater acknowledgement of our own 
ignorance and infirmity, of the infinite power of nature. 
How many unlikely things are there testified by people of 
very good repute which, if we cannot persuade ourselves 
absolutely to believe, we ought at least to leave them in 
suspense, for to condemn them as impossible is by presumption 
to pretend to know the utmost bounds of 
possibility.' 

"The innovations which find their genesis in such a 
mental process as is here condemned are necessarily diverse 
and without cohesion, because the mental process differs in 
the ratio of the minds in which they occur. And when to 
this erratic mental process is added an abnormal thirst for 
novelty, it is readily conceivable how great and how numerous 
must be the consequent errors. 

"Lord Bacon in his essay on Innovation justly appreciates 
and gives warning against this tendency, in the following 
words: 

'"Beware that it be the reformation that draweth on 
the change and not the desire for change that pretendeth 
the reformation; and lastly that the novelty though it be 
not rejected yet be held for a suspect.' 

"It would be easy to show how the greatest minds of 
every age have reached the conclusion that there can be no 
greater folly than to limit one's faith to facts that the mind 
can comprehend and fully explain. It would be equally 
easy to demonstrate by authority that the understanding or 
reason can not safely be relied upon as a guide to conduct. 
If reason is set up as an object of worship or even as a 
guide to conduct, it should possess the quality of constancy, 
it should operate uniformly in all men, and in all men 
possessed of the same data it should reach the same conclusion. 
But, on the contrary, nothing is so inconsistent as reason. 
It not only operates differently in different men, in different 
eras, but it operates differently in the same man at different 
times. If truth or the conception of it is to depend upon 
the constant changes in the operations of the human intellect, 
it is unworthy of man's aspirations. But the truth exists 
whether men apprehend it or not, and it cannot be 
measured by man's capacity to apprehend it. 

"Mr. Edison, one of the foremost, if not the foremost 
man of his time, one who has done more to distinguish this 
age, than any other; one who has mastered more mysteries 
of nature than any other man of his time, has truly 
observed that 'We don't know a millionth part of one per 
cent about anything.' Again, he has said, I find that the 
conceit of man is in the inverse ratio to the square of his 
knowledge.' This is but stating in a different way a proposition 
accepted of all wise men, that the greater our 
learning, and the greater our wisdom, the more we appreciate 
how little we know, and how much is beyond the 
capacity of man to know. Nothing could so clearly demonstrate 



the inconsistency and the importance of reason as 
the subject of this discussion. Men who have refused and 
do refuse to believe those things which their reason cannot 
comprehend or explain, find themselves totally unable by resort 
to their reason and understanding, to explain so simple 
and historical a fact as the essential nature of Judaism. 
"It is a common error to claim that a want of faith is 
peculiar to men of great learning and wisdom, and that 
the enlightenment of this age is responsible for the decadence 
of faith. That this is an error is easily shown. 
Faith is no easier or harder now than it was aforetime. The 
discoveries of this age render it no more difficult to believe 
the Bible now than in times gone by. The ethical qualities 
of the Bible are not impaired in the least by any discoveries 
of science in this or any other age; and as to the narrative 
portion of the Scriptures, scientific discoveries have not 
augmented the difficulties over what they were two thousand 
years ago. It was as difficult for the human mind to comprehend 
and believe some portions of the Bible twenty centuries 
ago as it is now. Skepticism has always arisen from 

R1763 : page 29 

the deification of the human intellect by superficial thinkers 
who do not realize that with the infinite the most exalted 
mind compares no better than the lowest. It is true that 
increase of knowledge involved the decrease of superstition 
and in the decadence of superstition faith necessarily suffered. 
Superstition bears the same relation to faith that alchemy 
does to chemistry. It is doubtless true that chemistry has 
suffered by reason of relation to alchemy, but it would be 
the height of folly to entirely set aside and decry chemistry, 
because it was once aligned with the spurious doctrines 
of false science. 

"True wisdom dictates that we should separate the 
wheat from the chaff, that we should rid ourselves of the 
false and guard the true. This distinction which wisdom 
demands has not been observed by many so-called Reform 
Rabbis in the United States. With them there has been 
no preservation or constructive process. It is not to be 
gainsaid that even those who have departed radically from 
the traditional faith of their fathers have preached virtue 
and righteousness of conduct. But upon what basis? They 
have not derived it from God, nor from his law, but from 
their own minds. They have based it upon utility, man's 
nature, man's natural rights, duties, etc., leaving it at last 
without any warmth or vitality which stir the emotions and 
influence the heart. The religion which they have taught 
is like an artificial flower which may deceive the eye for a 
time, but when closely inspected excites the keenest 
disappointment. 

"There can be no religion without faith, and that 
faith cannot be limited by man's power of comprehension. 
Even when it involves something beyond the comprehension 
of the intellect it is not repugnant to reason, for it is 
altogether reasonable that revelation and miracles should 



have occurred for the ends for which they did occur. To deny 
that they could have occurred is to deny the omnipotence 
of the Creator and to limit his power to those achievements 
that man can understand. 

"Moreover, the extraordinary occurrences that men 
reject on the ground of reason were in no sense more wonderful 
than those which we see every day and unhesitatingly 
accept. They differ only in their rarity from phenomena 
that are daily apparent. The faith that is made to accommodate 
itself to the powers of comprehension in the individual 
begins and ends nowhere, for, as has been shown, the power 
of comprehension is constantly changing and necessarily 
the faith must change with it. The faith that is based on 
reason alone, as reason is defined by the so-called reformers, 
is in the highest sense unreasonable, for it has no stability 
and cannot be imparted to others. No man can teach a 
faith that has such narrow limitations, neither can he inspire 
faith in his reason, for to inspire faith in his reason 
he must have reason in his faith. The Jews in America 
cannot with safety permit the demoralization which exists 
in their synagogues to continue. If they desire to preserve 
their ancient religion and impart it to their children, they 
must insist that their spiritual leaders shall define that religion, 
adhere to it themselves, and teach it to the congregations. 
Such a demand made by the members of each 
congregation upon their respective ministers will, doubtless, 
result in much temporary demoralization, acrimony 
and strife. Many of those who are now posing as Jewish 
Rabbis will doubtless find that they must recede from some 
of the propositions they have held, or must separate themselves 
from Judaism. But when that is accomplished we 
will no longer see the sacred doctrines of Judaism assailed 
from Jewish pulpits to Jewish hearers by so-called Jewish 
Rabbis. Time and again have the priests, among the Jews, 
taught false doctrines, time and again have they been compelled 
to recant or depart from the Jewish fold. 

"When Ezra came, he found the law being violated by 
the priests, and disregarded by the people, and with the 
aid of Nehemiah, he drove out the false priests and led the 
people back to an observance of the law. History repeats 
itself and in this country there will arise some one who, 
animated with the spirit that governed the life of Ezra, 
will point out to the people wherein they are disregarding 
the law, and by inspiring the people with love and obedience 
for the law will cause them to scourge from the pulpits 
the false priests who are scandalizing the ancient faith. 
The people are ripe for the coming of such a leader. They 
have come to distrust their Rabbis. They have come to regard 
with indifference the doctrines which are preached from the 
pulpit. They find themselves unable to teach morality to 
their children except upon grounds of expediency. They 
find in short that they have departed from their ancient 
bearings, and are drifting without rudder or compass; they 
are beginning to look with suspicion upon Rabbis who 
recommend themselves almost exclusively by their skill in 
oratory, by their grace of diction, by their capacity to entertain, 



but who are wanting in the true elements of the 
ideal Rabbi. 

"The ideal Rabbi, for whose coming they are longing, 
will be a man imbued with a perfect faith in God's law as 
written in Torah; he will study it with a broad and liberal 

R1764 : page 29 

mind, seeking always to comprehend the will of the Creator 
to the end that he may observe it; he will be imbued with 
this faith and filled with this understanding, devoting himself 
to teaching and practicing the ancient religion, not as 
a mere matter of form, but as a vital and forceful agency 
to accomplish the true development of man's highest nature. 
To him eloquence will consist in deeds, not words; to him 
entertainment will only be incident to instruction; to him 
theology only an aid to piety; to him ceremonies will be 
divinely ordered means to a divinely ordered end; to him 
the human intellect will be infinitely small compared with 
the infinite mind of God; to him man will be most clearly 
distinguished from the animal in that he has received by 
revelation the will of God. Such a man believing, following, 
teaching and practicing the doctrine, the rites, and 
the ceremonies of Judaism will stand forth before the eyes 
of the Jews as a leader to be followed. Around him will 
be gathered disciples eager to learn and eager to follow, 
and the multitude will take from his lips, and from the lips 
of his disciples, the truths which have been hidden from 
them so long. And as in the days of Ezra, after many 
years of indifference the people will gather in the temples 
to pray with a truly worshipful spirit. It is only then that 
the doubts, the vexations, the groanings of spirit which 
now so commonly manifest themselves among the people 
will disappear; then will the people rest their doubts, their 
difficulties and their troubles upon the altar of their faith, 
accepting whatever betides as the will of their Creator." 

Amen! Say we, and add, Under such a leader the outcasts 
of Israel will again become the objects of divine favor. 
Out of Zion shall come forth the Deliverer, and he shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob. It is the Messiah that 
Israel needs. No other competent rabbi will be found. 
Thank God that the set time to remember and bless Israel 
is nigh; soon they shall be saved from their blindness, and 
"what shall the receiving of them be but life from the 
dead?" "God hath concluded them all in unbelief that he 
might have mercy upon all."— Rom. 11:15,26-31. 

R1764:page30 

SEEKING FELLOWSHIP WITH ROME. 



The following letters show the tendency of Protestants 
to cease protesting and to seek reconciliation as true 
daughters of their dear "Mother," the Church of Rome. 



Taunton, Mass. 

"Dear Cardinal:— You are, without doubt, familiar with 
and interested in the fact that there is a movement among 
the Protestant churches toward reunion. If such a reunion 
is to take place, why may it not include the Roman Catholic 
church? Has not the Roman church some foundation 
to propose upon which we may all stand? Can not she 
meet us with concessions which may be temporary, if she 
believes us wrong, until we learn of Christ and his plans 
more perfectly? 

"Of one thing I feel sure, that personally I have a growing 
tendency to look more and more carefully for the good 
in all branches of the Christian church, and I apprehend 
that I am not alone in this. Sincerely yours, 

Geo. W. King, First M. E. Church." 

To this the Cardinal replied as follows: 

Cardinal's Residence, Baltimore. 

"Rev. Geo. W. King, Dear Sir:— In reply to your 
favor I beg to say that your aspirations for the reunion of 
Christendom are worthy of all praise. 

"This reunion would be only fragmentary if the Catholic 
church were excluded. 

"It would also be impossible; for there can be no 
union possible without a solid Scriptural basis, and that is 
found in the recognition of Peter and his successor as the 
visible head of the church. 

"There can be no stable government without a head, 
either in civil, military or ecclesiastical life. Every State 
must have its governor, and every town must have its 
mayor or municipal chief with some title. 

"If the churches of the world look for a head, where 
will they find one with the standard of authority or prescription 
except the Bishop of Rome?— not in Canterbury or 
Constantinople. 

"As for the terms of reunion, they would be easier 
than is commonly imagined. The Catholic church holds 
to all the positive doctrines of all the Protestant churches, 
and the acknowledgment of the Pope's judicial supremacy 
would make the way easy for accepting her other doctrines. 
You are nearer to us than you imagine. Many doctrines 
are ascribed to the church which she repudiates. 

Faithfully yours in Christ, J. Card. Gibbons." 

To this the following was sent in reply and by consent 
of both gentlemen the letters were made public in the interest 
of the union desired. 

"Dear Cardinal: Your reply has been read with much 
interest. May I not now inquire if it would not be a wise 
and valuable thing for the Catholic church to set forth to 
the Protestant churches a possible basis of union (describing 
the matter in sufficient detail) somewhat after the order 
of the Chicago Lambeth propositions of the Episcopal 
church? I know how much the Methodist church, and indeed 
the entire Christian church, is misunderstood by many, 



and I conceive it more than possible, inevitably, that the 
Catholic church should likewise be misunderstood and misjudged 
in many things. Cannot the Catholic church correct 
this misunderstanding on the part of Protestants to a 
large degree at least, and would not this hasten the desired 
reunion? 

"I believe the present divided condition of Christendom 
to be full of folly, shame and disgrace, and have no 
objection to a central authority under certain conditions of 
limitation or restraint. 

Sincerely yours, Geo. W. King." 

ROMAN CATHOLIC VIEW OF PROTESTANTISM. 



The Roman Catholic view of Protestantism, and its 
present tendency Romeward, is commented upon by the 
Catholic Mirror in a manner that speaks for itself of the 
"Mother's" (Rev. 17:5) view of her wayward "daughters," 
and their inability to keep house unless they more 
closely pattern after her crafty methods. They will not 
return to her, however, but they will unite themselves and 
more independently follow her deceitful policy. The Mirror 
says:— 

"In a recent article under the title of 'Religious Fads' 
the writer endeavored to show that the intelligent minds 
of the day are drifting from Protestantism into any new 
phase of belief which may claim their allegiance as satisfying 
the moral and intellectual cravings. 

"Upon consideration, the subject broadens its scope, 
taking in not only the large percentage of gifted men, but 
all the rank and file, the mediocre intelligence and the illiterate 
that go to make up the Demos— the masses. 

"Sociology has become the leading study of the age 
as well as its controversy. Before it the apparent conflict 
of religion and science fades into insignificance. As a 
writer in the Westminster Review has put it: 

'"The arena has changed from the professor's chair 
to the Trades-union, the Socialist club, the Anarchist den. 
The whole social body is gravitating toward the scene of 
strife. The pace of the whole thing is quickening till sober 
judgment and cool measures become almost impossible. It 
is a battle between Briareus and the gods. Briareus, the 
many-headed and many-handed giant of Labor, and the 
gods of Plutocracy.' 

'"Can religion nerve and deliver this generation, face 
to face with dangers so threatening?' 

"This many-handed and many-headed giant [the 
labor problem] has risen to such a degree of prominence 
in the social world that its voice must be heard. This age 
is essentially the age of the people, and the wage-earners 
and bread-winners constitute a very large percentage of the 
people as compared with the owners of capital. 

"Each succeeding year witnesses new troubles and 
disasters growing out of the conflict of labor with capital, 



some of the most harrowing results of which are the destruction 
of life and property. The State is called upon 
to suppress violence; punishment is justly meted out to the 
offenders, but the trouble has not ended. Arbitration is 
resorted to, and the difficulties are presumably settled. 
Would to God that so easy a solution were possible! The 
wound is only partially healed, it is bleeding beneath, for 
the cause of the evil has not been eradicated. 

"In this dissatisfied and discontented condition, led 
on by the counsel of malignant men, the sons of toil band 
together and meditate the overthrow of all good order and 
of society. 

WHO SHALL LEAD THEM? 

"From the history of the past, it is not difficult to 
understand which has the greater hold upon the masses, 
Protestantism or Catholicism. 

R1764:page31 

"Not many years ago all England was aroused by one 
of the greatest labor troubles the world has witnessed. In 
vain did the State exercise its power to suppress it. The 
giant was increasing in proportions day by day. The 
ministers and bishops of the established church lifted their 
voices in protest— they were unheard. The saintly archbishop 
of Westminster, Cardinal Manning, left the quiet 
of his retired life, and going among the people, many of 
whom were not of his flock, he spoke to the excited multitudes, 
condoled with their misfortunes, gave of his scanty 
means to their immediate relief, and counseled temperance 
and patience. The result was instantaneous. The people 
who had shortly before threatened destruction to the 
nation, who were bringing upon themselves endless woe 
and misfortune, retired peacefully to their homes and the 
trouble subsided as quickly as it had originated. 

R1765 : page 31 

"Witness again not later than last summer in our own 
land the enormous proportions of the railroad strike, and 
the prominent part which the Catholic clergy took in influencing 
the sons of toil to desist from unlawful acts. 
Will it be said that force of arms had greater power than 
the timely admonition of God's anointed? 

"Has Protestantism produced a treatise upon the labor 
problem which from a purely ethical and social standpoint 
can compare with the now celebrated Encyclical of 
our holy Father, Pope Leo XIII. , in which he, the head of millions 
of people over the whole face of the globe, comprising 
alike the rich and the poor, capitalists and laboring men, 
sets forth in incontrovertible terms the individual rights of 
each, the principles which must guide them in seeking the 
desired results, and the evils which will certainly follow 
from the rejection of the said principles. Truly it is the 



Catholic church who is the mother of them all. 

"The day-star of Protestantism is waning. She has 
lost her hold upon the foremost intellects of the day 
who seek refuge in some of the numerous fads of the time. 
She has lost her hold upon the masses by her indifference 
to their wants and social grievances. 

"With the lapse of a generation, or perhaps sooner, 
who shall say but that Protestantism is a thing of the past, 
buried without epitaph or memorial other than the sad 
recollection of the once unprofitable existence?" 

Without offering either denials or excuses for Protestantism 
we can assure the laboring classes and the capitalists 
in the light of history past and present that the policy of 
the church of Rome is thoroughly selfish. She squeezes 
large sums from the rich, but craftily remembers that the 
pennies and dimes wrung from the poorest millions of the 
civilized world amount in the aggregate to more than the 
larger sums from the fewer wealthy. She now as always 
stands aloof from both classes, offering the one class immunity 
from present difficulties and the other quicker release 
from purgatorial pains upon condition that they fill her 
coffers and recognize her authority. She prefers the position 
of Arbitrator, because there she can hold control of 
all parties and manipulate matters the better in her own 
interest. 

Papacy, with Satanic cunning, balances herself upon 
every great public question, so that she can speak for either 
capital or labor, government or people as may seem best 
policy at the moment, to keep herself in favor with the 
majority. She builds orphanages and hospitals wherever 
they will pay, by giving her not only a reputation for 
charity, but by drawing from the public treasury large sums 
of money for their support,— and for other uses. 

If we want to see evidences of her love for the poor 
and the ignorant we must look to Italy, Spain, Portugal, 
Austria, Hungary, Poland, Western Ireland, Mexico and 
all of Central and South America. She loves them so 
much that she keeps them poor and ignorant. And it is 
the millions of these, her blinded dupes, that chiefly threaten 
society, and the control of whom the Catholic priesthood 
frequently use to their own advantage as above cited. A 
leading iron manufacturer (a Lutheran) told the Editor 
that his firm always contributed liberally to the support of 
the Catholic church in the neighborhood of his mill; because 
"no one else can control those ignorant Catholic 
laborers, who necessarily form a large part of the employees 
at every mill." 

In Mexico and Brazil the government has had to interfere 
and stop the priests from robbing the poor benighted 
laboring people who, after selling their produce, 
would give liberally for Masses to get their relatives out of 
Purgatory and to secure for themselves Indulgences and 
then get drunk and squander the remainder amongst storekeepers 
until they could not pay their government taxes. 
The poorest servant girl is required to go regularly to 
Masses and would be insulted and refused a seat if she did 



not put at least ten cents into the treasury. 

This is the good "Mother," and these are her good 
methods for holding down the masses by the screws of ignorance 
and superstition which she will teach Protestants 
to copy so as to bring back the peace of ignorance. 

THE ROMAN CHRISTIANS PROTESTANTS DESIRE TO 
EMBRACE. 



The saloon business, which is spreading poverty, disease 
and discontent throughout the whole world, yields 
large revenues to the Catholic treasury. Saloon keepers 
generally belong to the communion of saints to which 
Protestants are turning with longing eyes. On this point, 
under the head of "Birds of a Feather," the Omaha Christian 
Advocate says: 

"It has often been said that if the Roman Catholic 
church would take a stand against the saloon it would do 
more good than all the efforts that are now making to 
abolish that nuisance. But this church is going to do nothing 
of the kind, for the simple reason that a vast deal of its 
revenues are derived from the unholy traffic in intoxicating 
liquors. The following figures showing the relation of the 
Roman Catholics to the saloon business in the city of Philadelphia 
are furnished by a reliable correspondent with the 
assurance that they can be depended upon. They make 
very interesting reading.' 

"Sixty-five per cent of the manufacturers of alcoholic 
liquors for beverage in the city of Philadelphia are Roman 
Catholics, and of the brewers 75 per cent are Roman Catholic 
communicants and pay revenue to the Roman Catholic 
church. 

"In the same city there are 8,034 persons in the retail 
liquor business, selling liquor over the bar for drinks, as 
follows: 

R1765 : page 32 

2 Chinamen Not Roman Catholics. 

2 Jews Not Roman Catholics. 

18 Italians All Roman Catholics. 

140 Spaniards All Roman Catholics. 

265 Negroes 200 of them Roman Catholics. 

160 Welsh 125 of them Roman Catholics. 

285 French All Roman Catholics. 

497 Scotch 435 of them Roman Catholics. 

568 English 543 of them Roman Catholics. 

2,179 Germans All Roman Catholics. 

3,041 Irish All Roman Catholics. 

205 Americans They commune nowhere: 

a majority of them are of Roman Catholic parentage. 

Of this number, 3,696 are women, all foreigners but 
one, as follows: 
German 1,104, All Roman Catholics. 



Irish 2,558, All Roman Catholics. 

Of the 8,034 total, 6,418 have been arraigned for crimes." 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



The strike in Brooklyn, of the motormen and conductors 
of the electric street-car lines, against what they 
consider unreasonable arrangements respecting hours and 
pay, has the attention of the civilized world. We sympathize 
with the employees in that the conditions were 
unreasonable; but we cannot sympathize with their rioting, 
destruction of property and injury of others who even less 
favorably situated were glad to get the work they used their 
liberty to refuse. 

Such questions are difficult to adjust while the rule 
governing all is selfishness. But since the car lines are 
corporations created by the state, they are properly subject 
to state regulation— which might include a provision respecting 
minimum wages and maximum hours. But no such 
arrangement having been made, the employees probably see 
no relief except by the exercise of brute force. 

The brutal conduct of the exasperated mob, including 
the strikers' friends, male and female, in the use of sticks, 
stones, firearms, red pepper and horrible curses, shows that 
the veneer of civilization is very thin, and indicates to a 
slight extent what may be expected when the great trouble 
shall have increased the despair, venom and frenzy. The 
Scriptures point us to the French Revolution and the destruction 
of Jerusalem, A.D. 70, as inferior illustrations. 



Although the strike is practically ended, Judge Gaynor's 
just and wise opinion will be of interest to 
all. He holds that the street railroads are chartered 
by the State as public servants, and that to hold their 
charters they must accommodate the public, regardless of 
profits and dividends. They may bargain with men for 
hours and wages as much to their own advantage as possible, 
but must not stop, nor run less cars than public convenience 
requires. They must pay wages required by their 
employees until they have found others willing and able to 
do the work for less, so as to avoid stoppages, etc. 

The effect of this decision will undoubtedly be to make 
the railways and all chartered public servants more careful 
and moderate in their dealings with their employees. 

Selfishness caused the unreasonable terms, selfishness 
fought them and caused the strike, and selfishness, on the 
part of the public, leads to a decision modifying the conditions. 
It is difficult, and always would be, for selfishness 
to bring any satisfactory conclusion to any question. It is 
insatiable. We long and hope for the time when "A King 
[Christ, and the Church, his body] shall reign in righteousness, 
and princes [the overcomers of the former dispensation] 



shall execute judgment;" and we pray, Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as in heaven, O Lord. 



The resignation of the President of France created quite 
a stir; but the prompt election of his successor, without 
commotion or bloodshed, gave evidence that the present 
social order is not as near its conflagration and wreck as 
many have surmised. The Scriptural dates will be found 

R1766 : page 32 

consistent with the facts. A.D. 1914 will be soon enough 
to expect complete collapse; although radical changes from 
the present order, experiments with various impractical 
social theories, etc., may be expected six or eight years 
sooner. 

"TO WAGE WAR ON INFIDELITY. 



"CATHOLIC AND PROTESTANT UNION AT BAY CITY, MICH. 
FOR THE EXTERMINATION OF BIGOTRY. 

"Special to the Chicago Record. 

"Bay City, Mich., Jan. 16— Something of a sensation 
has been caused here by the union of Catholic priests and 
Protestant ministers in a movement for the extermination 
of religious intolerance and bigotry. A memorial declaring 
the principles of the compact has been signed by five 
priests and ten Protestant preachers. After several preliminary 
meetings a general invitation was extended to the 
clergy of both cities, and a representative body met at St. 
James' rectory, at which the situation was freely discussed, 
and all admitted that much moral energy was lost through 
prejudice and in consequence the cause of Christianity was 
weakened. 

"It was acknowledged that all those who believe in 
the divine mission of Jesus Christ should direct their 
united force against the common foes, infidelity and immorality. 
The memorial declares that it is unnatural that 
the members of the same body should tear one another to 
pieces. They should protect and assist one another. The 
means to attain this end are declared to be of two kinds: 
Fraternal meetings of the ministers of the different churches, 
with a view to becoming better acquainted and for devising 
means whereby to carry on our mutual work; public 
lectures on 'Christian Unity,' 'Christian Tolerance,' 
'Christian Charity,' and kindred subjects, the lectures to 
be delivered alternately by priest and minister.' It is said 
that this union is without precedent in this country. 

The above is in full harmony with what we have been 
expecting. Its lesson is two fold. First, it shows how ready 
are the two ends of the ecclesiastical heavens— Catholicism 



and Protestantism— to "roll together as a scroll." (Isa. 34:4; 
Rev. 6:14.) Second, it shows that all not disposed 
to unite with either side of the "scroll" are not only liable, 
but likely, to be classed as "Infidels," not only by unionists, 
but also by the worldly. How evidently the time is 

R1766 : page 33 

hastening on when a religious, social, political and financial 
"boycott" will be waged against all who will refuse to 
worship either the "beast" or his Protestant "image." 
(Rev. 13:15-17.) But those who already feel some of the 
boycott, and those who soon will feel still more of it, may 
take comfort in the Lord's appreciation of their fidelity as 
expressed in the promise of Rev. 20:4,— that of such are 
the heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ in the Kingdom 
soon to be established for the blessing of mankind, 
the restitution of all things. 

And yet those who will have to do with the "boycott" 
will doubtless be as ignorant of the parts they are really 
playing in the great drama as was Saul of Tarsus who, when 
persecuting the true saints, verily thought that he was doing 
God service. Such as are as honest as he will doubtless 
be stopped in the way and see the great light of the Millennial 
morning: but the vast majority, "blind leaders of 
the blind," will fall into the Adversary's snare, fight against 
God and share the "plagues" and great trouble coming 
upon Babylon. (Rev. 18:2,4.) "For this cause God 
shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe 
a lie, that they all might be judged [openly condemned] 
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in injustice." 
-2 Thes. 2:11,12. 

INTERNATIONAL PROTESTANT FEDERATION. 



Rev. Dr. Henry Lunn, an English clergyman, has just 
come to the United States "to interest American clergymen 
of almost all denominations in the International 
Movement for a federation of all Protestant churches." 
This movement has "grown out of the now famous Grindewald 
Conference." Dr. Lunn arrived on Jan. 19, and 
brings with him "the cordial indorsement of Archdeacon 
Farrar and a number of other English clergymen of note." 
Dr. Lyman Abbott, of the Plymouth church, Brooklyn, 
among other clergymen had been notified of his coming. 
Dr. Lunn's first explanation of the proposed scheme is fixed 
for Jan. 27, from Mr. Beecher's old pulpit. 

From this it will be noted that our suggestion of some 
time ago that the coming union will not be an amalgamation, 
but a federation is holding good. Mr. Lunn is the 
first (aside from the TOWER) to use the word "federation," 
in connection with this Union movement, so far as we have 
observed. 



R1766 : page 33 

ONLY THE HUMBLE SHALL SHARE THE KINGDOM. 



FEB. 10, MATT. 18:1-14. (Mark 9:33-50; Luke 9:46-50.) 

Golden Text— "It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, 
that one of these little ones should perish." 

THE subject of this lesson is one worthy of the most 
careful and prayerful consideration of every child 
of God, and especially of all those who are in any way 
tempted to ambition and rivalry or vain glory in the Lord's 
service. While the humility of the Lord's apostles is very 
marked in their subsequent career, in the beginning of their 
course they were all to some extent influenced by old ideas 
which it was the object of Christ's teaching gradually to 
eradicate. 

After the peculiar experiences on the Mount of the 
Transfiguration and the selection by the Lord of three of 
their number for that notable occasion, the question of relative 
prominence in the Kingdom was naturally suggested 
to their minds, and apparently it led to a dispute which 
manifested some selfishness. It was to correct this disposition, 
and to show its antagonism to the spirit which must 
prevail in the Kingdom of God, that our Lord sought an opportunity 
to converse with them on the subject. (Verse 1 and 
Mark 9:33,34.) "And he came to Capernaum, and being 
in the house, he asked them, What was it that ye disputed 
among yourselves by the way? But they held their peace 
[certainly not indefinitely, for that would have been showing 
disrespect to the Master; but there was a brief silence 
which indicated some embarrassment]; for by the way they 
had disputed among themselves who should be greatest." 
By and by one of them inquired, "Who is [to be] greatest 
in the Kingdom of heaven?" Then followed the lesson, 
so important to the apostles, who were subsequently to be 
specially exposed to great temptations to ambition and 
rivalry among themselves for the chief place in the estimation 
and in the hearts of the people of God— the Kingdom 
in embryo— among whom they were all to be leaders and 
teachers— chosen witnesses of God. And the Lord would 
have them be not only witnesses of his truth but exponents 
also of the power of his spirit in transforming the heart and 
moulding the character into graceful conformity to the divine 
will. But if the lesson was thus important to the 
apostles in their position as leaders, it is also important to 
the whole Church, all of whom are, to a greater or less extent, 
exposed to temptations to rivalry and ambition. 

Verses 2-4; Mark 9:35. "And he sat down, and 
called the twelve, and saith unto them, If any man desire 
to be first [i.e., if he manifest the spirit of rivalry], the 



same shall be last of all, and servant of all." The spirit 
of rivalry being the very opposite of the spirit of love and 
meekness which must characterize all who shall be counted 
worthy of the Kingdom, this statement is seen to be the 
logical sequence of such a course; for if such a one shall 
ever enter the Kingdom he must first have that disposition 
thoroughly eradicated; and if it be deep seated or long 
cultivated, it may take considerable time and discipline to 
accomplish it, while, meantime, others, not so afflicted, may 
be engaged in the more rapid development of those graces 
of character and of mind which fit them more and more for 
extended usefulness and exalted service, thus necessarily 
leaving the one under discipline to be the last and least instead 
of the first and foremost. Thus viewed, the saying, 
He that humbleth himself shall be exalted; and he that 
exalteth himself shall be abased (Luke 14:1 1), is seen to be 
the statement of a philosophical principle of divine law. 
Let us, therefore, as the Apostle Peter urges (1 Pet. 5:6), 
humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, that he 
may exalt us in due time. 

"And he took a child and set him in the midst of 
them, and when he had taken him in his arms, he said unto 
them, Verily, I say unto you [the manner is impressive 

R1766 : page 34 

and solemn: it is as though he would say, I want you to 
take this lesson to heart and ponder it well], Except ye be 
converted [i.e., unless ye turn away entirely from this self-seeking 
spirit of rivalry], and become as little children, ye 
shall not [even] enter into [much less be greatest in] the 
Kingdom of heaven. Whosoever, therefore, shall humble 
himself as this little child, the same is greatest in the 
Kingdom of heaven." The special characteristics of a 
little child are simplicity of heart, meekness, truthfulness, 
freedom from ambition and rivalry, faith, confiding trust, 
love, obedience, teachableness, indifference to social distinctions 
and popular opinions, and guilelessness. 

The maintenance of such a spirit after the dormant 
powers of childhood have expanded and brought the world, 
with all its attractions, allurements, ambitions, hopes, etc., 
within the mental grasp of the man, after the intellect has 
been quickened by the pulsations of life until he begins to 
realize that he is the peer of his fellows, and that he has 

R1767 : page 34 

advanced in the acquirement of knowledge and the development 
of skill and ability even beyond many other men, 
is indeed the evidence of that self-control and self-discipline 
which invariably bespeak a noble character. 

The possession of such a spirit indicates (1) That the 
man is not overestimating himself. Though, in comparison 
with the ignorance of his childhood, he may have made 
considerable progress in the acquirement of knowledge and 
the development of his faculties, perhaps beyond the majority 



of his fellow men, he sensibly considers that he is 
still only on the shore of a boundless sea of truth, and that 
if he has outstripped the speed of some of his fellows it is 
only because of some superior advantages of birth or education 
of which his benevolent soul would gladly see all men 
partakers. He views himself as God sees him— as a very 
imperfect man, striving in much weakness to measure up 
to the standard of a perfect man, and realizing that his best 
efforts still leave him far short of the mark of perfection. 
And so he is humbled, in consideration of his failures, 
rather than puffed up, by comparing himself with those of 
still lower attainments. 

(2) It indicates a tender consideration and love for 
other men which cannot vaunt itself or behave unseemly 
toward them. It regards inferior learning and lack of intellectual 
development with that gracious sympathy and 
helpfulness which seek rather to supplement what the illiterate 
have, and to conceal their lack or deformity, than 
to expose their ignorance; while it cheerfully recognizes 
moral and intellectual equals, and pays due deference to 
superior attainments. It has nothing to do with the false 
standards of excellence which the world sets up, but, measuring 
self by the divine standards, it lives apart from, and 
far above, the spirit of the world— above its strifes, ambitions, 
bickerings, envies and selfishness; and, in the language 
of Paul, it has learned that whatsoever things are 
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are 
just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, 
whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any 
virtue, and if there be any praise, to think on these things 
(Phil. 4:8), and not to think of self too highly, but to 
think soberly.— Rom. 12:3. 

Such, our Lord declares, must be the spirit of all who 
will be permitted to enter into the Kingdom of heaven; 
and he who cultivates it most will be the greatest; not, 
however, by any arbitrary law of retribution, but on the 
philosophical principle that humility leads to greatness, and 
is of itself a great achievement. It is just such loving 
generosity and meekness as this that will be necessary on the 
part of the "royal priesthood" of the Millennial age, to 
cooperate with Christ in the great work of lifting up the 
fallen to the high privileges of perfect manhood. 

Verse 5. "And whoso shall receive [recognize and 
show kindness to] one such little child [the least and humblest 
of God's children] in my name [because he is 
mine], receiveth me." That is the Lord's valuation of 
even the least and humblest. How it helps even the least 
of us to realize his love! 

Verse 6. "But whosoever shall insnare [beguile and 
lead astray— from the truth, the spirit of the truth, or holiness 
of life] one of the least of these who believe in me, it 
would be better for him that a millstone were hanged about 
his neck and that he were sunk in the depth of the sea." 

Such a warning needs no comment: if any one should 
find in his own heart the least intimation of such a disposition, 
let him quickly halt in his erring way and earnestly 



pray God to renew a right spirit within him. 

Verse 7. "Woe ["great tribulation"— "a time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation"— is 
coming] unto the world because of [wilful] offences [offences 
against sufficiency of light to avoid them]; for it 
must needs be that offences come [because men's hearts are 
not right], but woe to that man [that wilful sinner] by 
whom the offence cometh." 

Verses 8,9. See our issue of February, '93. 

Verse 10. "Take heed that ye despise not [that ye 
do not hate or in any way persecute] one of these little ones; 
for I say unto you that in heaven their angels do always 
behold the face of my Father which is in heaven." ("Are 
they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister to 
them that shall be the heirs of salvation?") And (verse 14), 
"It is not the will of your Father which is in heaven, that 
one of these little ones should perish." The intimation is 
plain that any persecution or ensnarement of these will 
surely be observed by the Lord, and the evil-doers will in 
due time be brought to justice. Though the Lord may 
permit persecutions to severely try his saints, it shall only 
accomplish their purification; for "all things shall work 
together for good to them that love God, to them who are 
the called according to his purpose." 

Verses 11-13 tell of the loving zeal of our good Shepherd 
in seeking and caring for his sheep. Let us rejoice in 
his care and diligently hearken to his voice. 



R1767 : page 34 

THE GOOD SAMARITAN. 

-FEB. 17, LUKE 10:25-37.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt love thy 
neighbor as thyself."— Lev. 19:18. 

THE question introduced in this lesson is the great 
question which should enlist the most serious attention 
of every man— "What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" 
The one who here propounded it was an Israelite, to 
whom pertained the promises of God for eternal life, on 
condition of perfect obedience to the divine law. He was 
one also who, with the rest of his nation, was vainly trusting 
in the law for salvation, and opposing the new and 
only way of life through Christ. Consequently, the Lord, 
to whom the query was addressed, referred the inquirer to 
the law for the answer. "He said unto him, What is written 
in the law? How readest thou?" As a recognized 

R1767 : page 35 

theologian and public teacher he must have some understanding 
of so important a matter. The answer was politely 



deferential to the office of the inquirer, and at the same 

time very adroitly put; for the lawyer was not a sincere inquirer, 

but one anxious only to lead the Lord into an entangling 

argument and to make him appear before the 

people as an opposer of the divine law. 

The answer quoted from the law was a correct one, 
including the two great commandments on which hang all 
the law and the prophets (Matt. 22:36-40); viz., "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all 
thy soul, and with all thy mind," and "Thou shalt 
love thy neighbor as thyself." True, according to the law, 
those were the conditions of eternal life; but neither the 
lawyer nor any other man, except the perfect man Christ 
Jesus, was able to fulfil the conditions, though not until 
convinced of his inability to do so would the man be ready 
to accept God's way of salvation through Christ, who, 
by his great sacrifice, once for all, was about to blot out 
for believers the handwriting of ordinances which was against 
all Israel; viz., the condemnation of the law— nailing it to 
his cross.— Col. 2:14. 

Seeing that the man's heart was not in the right attitude, 
the Lord did not proceed to preach to him the gospel of 
salvation, but, seizing the opportunity which his second inquiry 
offered,— "And who is my neighbor?"— he sought 
to lead him and those who stood by to the realization that 
every man is neighbor to every other man; that the whole 
human family is linked together by the ties of brotherhood, 
and therefore, every man should have a brother's sympathy, 
love and benevolence. 

This simple truth, the Lord showed by a forcible illustration, 
was not one of those things hard to be understood, 
unless the heart had grown selfish instead of benevolent 
and kind. The simple, unpretentious Samaritan had comprehended 
it and had acted the neighborly part, while the 
ostentatious priest and Levite, with all their loud professions 
of piety, ignored it, though their effort to evade the 
responsibility by passing by on the other side of the roadway 
proved that they understood the neighborly obligation, 
of human brotherhood, which, in their selfishness, they 
vainly sought to shirk. 

Commending thus the neighborly spirit of love, pity 
and benevolent generosity manifested to so large a degree 
in the Samaritan, the Lord's final answer was, "Go, and 
do thou likewise." Go, thou, and seek a change of heart— 
from hard, unpitying selfishness disguised under the flimsy 
robes of showy profession, to simple brotherly kindness and 
charity, which, operating toward a brother-man, a creature 
of God, whom thou hast seen, will thus the better enable 
thee to love supremely the righteous God whom thou 
hast not seen. "If a man say, I love God, and hateth his 
brother, he is a liar; for he that loveth not his brother 
whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath 
not seen?"— 1 John 4:20. 

There are several important lessons to be drawn from 
this incident— (1) We note how, in meekness, the Lord instructed 
those that opposed themselves. (2 Tim. 2:24-26.) 



He did not bluntly say to his insincere inquirer, Your heart 
is not right, you have an evil mind and are full of pride, 
hypocrisy and conceit, and have no ear for the truth on 
this subject; but rather he sought carefully and wisely to 

R1768 : page 35 

lead his opposer to this realization and to consequent 
repentance. 

(2) We observe how the Lord endeavored to make 
known and recognized truths stepping stones from which 
to advance to higher truths— to lead gradually and logically 
from the known to the unknown, and to gently push 
aside prejudices and overcome them, rather than to rudely 
jostle them and harden the heart to increased opposition. 

(3) We see that he did not make the truth obtrusive, 
but that his words were always words in season. 

(4) Finally, we note the special teaching of the lesson 
—that love, which operates benevolently and kindly, i.e., 
Neighborly, toward all men, recognizing the obligations of 
human brotherhood, and the golden rule to do unto others 
as we would have them do to us, and which regards God, 
the fountain of all goodness, with supreme reverence, is the 
only condition of heart that can ever inherit eternal life. 
But the further lesson, which the unbelieving lawyer did 
not get, because he was not ready to receive it, was that, 
though he could not, in his fallen condition, meet the full 
requirements of God's law, there was provision made for 
his weaknesses and shortcomings through Christ if he 
would accept such provision. 

Let us mark these valuable lessons, heeding our Lord's 
instructions and carefully noting and copying his methods 
in all our dealings with each other and with fellow-men. 



R1768 : page 35 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS 



DEAR BROTHER:-I am glad that I am able to inform 
you that we are still strong in the faith, and growing in 
grace: we have good meetings, without strife or contention. 
Our only regret is, that there are so few of us. 

There is a point on which we would like further advice 
from you. You advise us to mingle with other Christians, 
in their churches, at prayer meetings and revivals, and to 
take part with them. 

Now, if, as we understand, the nominal church of to-day 
is in much the same condition that the Jewish church 
was in at the time of Christ, is it not wrong to help them, 
knowing as we do that they do a great many things that 
they ought not to do, if so be it increase their denominational 
greatness, and that every one that they convert to 



their way of thinking is being led that much farther from 
the truth? 

The church here (Methodist) will not listen to even a 
hint about future probation, and would not even allow me 
to attempt to show whether a certain passage was figurative 
or literal. 

Your brother in the race, J. N. SHOEMAKER. 

[REPLY. The spirit of our advice is that we do not 
hold ourselves aloof from our fellows who profess to love 
the Lord and to respect his Word, whatever denominational 
names they may have erroneously adopted or whatever 
creed-fences they may have been deluded into putting 
around them. We know, from our own experiences, that 
they need just what we have— "the bread of life" and "the 
water of life"— the Truth; and this we long to give them. 

But our love and zeal must not lead us to intrude upon 
these blinded friends, if they refuse to make us welcome, 
or to hear our loving message; nor to ignore the truth and 
remain silent where error is free and where truth is bound 
hand and foot; we must find other more willing ears or 

R1768 : page 36 

adopt other methods. Above all we must not misrepresent 
our Lord and his Word and our own honor by professing 
what we do not believe in the form of a Church creed or 
confession. "He that is ashamed of me and my Word, 
...of him will I also be ashamed before my Father 
and his holy angels."— EDITOR.] 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I know you are always busy, 
and for that reason I would not trouble you unnecessarily; 
but I feel that it would be of great benefit to the Church 
here and in the vicinity, if you would give your opinion upon 
a point about which there has existed a difference, and 
which has come to the surface. 

The question is, "How are we begotten by the Spirit 
of God? Does the new life come to us as individuals direct 
from God, or through Jesus Christ, who is "Head over all 
things to the Church?" 

A brother recently made this sweeping statement in 
public: "The Lord Jesus has nothing whatever to do with 
the selection of the Bride." Another brother, when I asked 
him whether he believed that we could deal directly with 
God apart from Christ said, Most assuredly; and said in 
plain terms that this favor was something that the Father 
gave to each individual after justification by faith, and we 
were begotten of God independently of the Lord. 

Now I cannot see why there should be this difference 
in view of the plain Scripture teaching. My understanding 
of the matter is that we have our relations to the 
Father as sons, only because we are in Christ; and if we 
were out of Christ, we should be in condemnation (Rom. 6); 



that we are anointed in Him by God (2 Cor. 1:21); and 

that the anointing with the Spirit of adoption comes to us 

from God through Christ the Lord. "He (God) saved us 

...according to his own mercy, through the bath of regeneration, 

and a renovation of the holy Spirit, which he 

poured out on us richly through Jesus Christ, our Savior." 

-Tit. 3:5,6. 

Referring to the type of anointing the High Priest, of 
which the Church are members, we find in Tabernacle 
Shadows, p. 23:— "This oil typified the holy Spirit of 
adoption whereby we, the real Royal Priesthood, are 
sealed;" and (p. 32), "As Aaron had the holy oil poured 
upon his head, so our Head, the Lord Jesus, was anointed 
with the antitypical oil— the holy Spirit... The anointing 
oil was poured only upon the head. The under-priests 
were not anointed individually." 

Many similar explanations occur in the Tabernacle 
Shadows, one other of which I quote (p. 54):— 

"Just as soon as the sacrifice of Jesus on behalf of his 
'Body' and 'house' was complete and presented before 
the Father, after his ascension, came the evidence of his 
acceptance in the Pentecostal baptism upon the representatives 
of the Church, his body and his house. And this 
anointing (symbolized by the oil), which came upon the 
Church, continues ever since on all the living members of 
the High Priest's body. This impartation of the divine 
mind to those consecrated ones was the energy in them 
which killed each as the Lord's goat. This coming of the 
holy Spirit, the Lord's power or 'hand' at Pentecost, was 
shown in the type by the High Priest coming to the door 
of the Tabernacle and laying hands upon the Lord's (Jehovah's) 
goat and killing it. Just as the Spirit of the Father 
enabled Jesus to sacrifice himself, represented by the killing 
of the bullock, so it is the same spirit or influence of 
the truth, through Christ, upon the Lord's goat' class, which 
enables them to crucify themselves as men— to kill the 
goat— in hope of the promised glory, honor and immortality 
of the divine nature." 

The manner in which the members receive life from 
the body, the branches from the vine, also illustrates how 
the supply of God's spirit reaches the members of the 
Church. Our sacrifices and death are acceptable only because 
reckoned in with his perfect offering. Our death and 
resurrection are part of his. We will be raised by the 
power of God which raised Jesus, but the power will be 
exercised by "the Lord Jesus Christ, who will transform 
the Body of our humiliation into a conformity with his 
glorious body, according to the energy (God given) by 
which he is able even to subject all things to himself." 
(Phil. 3:21.) It is through him that the Father leads forth 
those who sleep in Jesus at his coming.— 1 Thes. 4:14. 

It seems to me that we ought to be very guarded 
in making radical statements which may not be in touch 
with the truth at all points. There is danger of stumbling 
some at the very threshold of present knowledge, by appearing 
to ignore or detract from the all-sufficiency of the 



blessed Lord. "You are in the anointed Jesus, who became 
our wisdom from God, righteousness also, and sanctification 
and redemption [deliverance]; that as it has been written, 
Let him who boasts, boast in the Lord."— 1 Cor. 1:30-31. 

Yours in the one spirit, E. C. MOTT. 

P.S. Please explain in the same connection Col. 3:23,24. 

REPLY BY THE EDITOR:-It is well that we keep clearly 
in view the facts, that the world during the Millennium 
will recognize Christ as their Life-giver or Father (the 
"Everlasting Father"), and will have no introduction to 
Jehovah until the close of the Millennium, when those only 
who shall have reached perfection and been found worthy 
of everlasting life will be presented. But the Church, the 
"Bride," the "Brethren," the "joint-heirs" of Christ are 
granted fellowship with the Father Jehovah from the time 
of their begetting of the spirit, when they consecrate themselves, 
being previously "justified by faith." 

This, undoubtedly, is the point which the Brethren 
mentioned have in mind. However, they should not forget 
that our standings, both as justified men and afterward 
as sanctified new creatures, are not actual, but merely 
reckoned standings, before Jehovah. We can maintain the 
reckoned acceptance only by abiding in Christ. "No man 
cometh unto the Father but by me;" and "He that abideth 
in me and I in him, the same bringeth forth much 
fruit; for without me ye can do nothing. If a man abide 

R1769 : page 36 

not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered." 

To reject the continual necessity for the covering of 
Christ's robe of imputed righteousness would be to attempt 
to stand judgment before God's bar in our own filthy rags 
of unrighteousness— an impossibility, an absurdity. "It is 
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." 
(Heb. 10:31.) He has provided a shelter for us in Christ 
which covers our unwilful weaknesses and imperfections; 
and to reject it first or last would be to do despite to the 
favor of God therein extended to us. 

We commend all that you have said above, dear Bro. 
Mott, and are glad that you see the subject so clearly. We 
would add to the texts you have cited just three more; 
viz., Acts 2:33; John 5:23 and Eph. 1:6. 

Col. 3:23,24 is in agreement with all this. "One is 
your Master [Lord], even Christ." Of him we shall receive 
the inheritance, even as of him we received the foretaste 
of it. He received from his Father and our Father, 
his God and our God, all that he has given or will give to 
us. (John 20:17.) And so fully is the will of Christ the Father's 
will, that to serve the one is to serve the other also. 



page 37 



VOL. XVI. FEBRUARY 15, 1895. No. 4. 



CONTENTS. 



Items— Tracts, etc 38 

Views from the Tower— 39 

The Social View 39 

The Religious View 40 

A Proposed Pan-American Congress 41 

Against So-called Higher Criticism 41 

A Reflective M.E. Minister 41 

The King's Highway 42 

Bible Study: Christ, and the Blind Man 46 

Bible Study: Awakening of Lazarus 47 

Bible Study: What Lack I Yet? 47 

page 38 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1750 : page 38 
SPECIAL ITEMS. 

THE "DO YOU KNOW?" TRACT is doing good service. It suits 
all classes. Many already praise the Lord for the light which it as an 
entering wedge has introduced.— English, German, Swedish. 

"THE ONLY NAME" (Tract No. 24), a criticism of Bp. Foster's new 
gospel-excellent for Christians of all denominations, especially Methodists. 

What an opportunity is put within the reach of all who desire to 
honor God and bless the Church and the world by these and our other 
tracts. Those who can do so gladly supply the means for their publication, 
so that every TOWER reader can enjoy the privilege of handing out 
personally and by mail these crumbs from the Master's table,— tastes of 
the feast of fat things, now as meat in due season, provided for the 
household of faith. Remember that every TOWER subscription includes 
a subscription to these quarterly tracts; and every subscriber is privileged 



to order as many extra copies as he may please for distribution. 

Do not be discouraged if you do not see immediate results from 
your service. The hundreds of thousands of tracts and papers which 
you and we are, jointly with the Lord, and as his servants, sending out 
to his other servants are noiselessly working and gradually transforming 
the judgment of some who as yet are our open opponents. Eventually 
victory shall be ours, for "Truth is mighty and shall prevail." It is 
ours to use the opportunities granted us as wisely and efficiently as possible. 
It is God's part to overrule the work and bring ultimate victory 
and blessing to the worthy. 



R1769 : page 39 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



THE indications are that Russia has gained considerable 
in the new Czar. Already he manifests a statesman-like 
liberality of thought which has pleasantly surprised the 
world. It is related that recently in examining papers 
bearing upon some official appointments the Czar struck 
out with his pen the sentences relating to the religious beliefs 
of the applicants, remarking to the effect that their 
religious views were their own private matter and had no 
bearing upon their suitability for political office. It is 
hoped from this that religious liberty may soon be granted 
to a degree not enjoyed for centuries in Russia. Such a 
policy would be welcomed by Roman Catholics, Greek 
Catholics and Protestants, no less than by the Jews. 
In harmony with this view we note the removal of 
Gen. Gourko, Governor-General of Warsaw, and of Count 
Ignatieff, Governor-General of Kieff. Both of these men 
were noted for their anti-Jewish proclivities; and the latter 
had only recently instituted the severe persecutions of the 
Stundists mentioned in our issue of Jan. 15. The Czar's 
uncle, the Prince of Wales, visited him at the time of his 
father's funeral and doubtless lent encouragement to his 
more liberal views respecting government. 



The Lord-Mayor of Liverpool created a sensation a 
few days ago in a speech before the Commercial Travelers' 
Association. Speaking of the need of a higher technical 
and intellectual culture amongst English workmen, he went 
on to say that if they did all they could to produce 
British goods he believed that in two or three years there 
would not be an idle man in Great Britain. But he feared 
an unwillingness to acquire this culture and skill, and a 



disposition rather to do as little work and for as few hours 
as possible and in a careless manner. "He was afraid there 
was nothing for it, but to let them (the English workmen) 
go to the devil." 

The gentleman no doubt spoke out boldly what many 
others have thought, but have not uttered. He says, truly, 
that his method would give employment to the idle; but he 
seems not to see what so many overlook; viz., that if the 
workmen of Liverpool or of all England became more efficient 
than other workmen the world over, and drew the 
world's business to themselves by fine work at low prices, 
it would mean the stoppage of factories elsewhere and 
idleness of their employees, until they had reached a similar 
or greater skill and lower prices and should reclaim their 
trade. Meantime, the constant increase of machinery, population 
and skill would shortly make matters even worse 
than now, for the unemployed in Liverpool and throughout 
the world would be intellectually cultured workingmen who 
would suffer under deprivations more than at present. 
This very sort of thing has been in progress for the past 
twenty years. 

No, the Lord-Mayor sees not the real cause of the present 
social distress. It is but the natural travail and labor 
incident to the birth of a new order of things, incident to 
the liberating and enlightenment of the race as a whole and 
the development of inventions, all of which are but preparations 
for "the day of Christ"— the Millennial Kingdom. 



The recent "bread riot" in Montreal, Canada, and on 
the same day eight mass-meetings of thousands of unemployed 
men in Berlin, Germany, demanding employment, 
tell us how wide spread is the present financial depression. 
Capital refuses to be risked except with profits in 

R1769 : page 40 

prospect; Labor refuses to be used on any less favorable 
terms than at present, realizing that each step lower would 
not only be permanent, but would lead still lower. The 
only help is that suggested in the Lord's prayer— "Thy 
Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth, as it is in 
heaven." Look up yourself, and lift up the eyes and hearts 
of others, to the dawn of the Millennium. Through all 
the present mists behold with the eye of faith the first rays 
of the promised Sun of Righteousness arising with healing 
in his beams. 

THE RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



Zion Associations of Jews are being organized in Great 
Britain as well as in the United States, their central thought 
being a National Movement— the re-establishment of a 



Jewish Kingdom in Palestine. Jewish journals long silent 

on this subject, if not opposed to the project, are now devoting 

space in almost every issue to its consideration. We 

are glad to see this. It is a "straw," pointing in the direction 

indicated by prophecy. Trust in the Lord and 

wait patiently for him, and he will bring to pass all that he 

has promised. But do not expect it before his time, his 

fixed time. While the time to favor Zion began in 1878, 

the treading down of the Gentiles will not be at an end 

until 1914 A.D. The interim, however, will be more and 

more a time of turning away of blindness from Israel;— 

the blindness which happened unto all Israel except the 

elect remnant, after they as a nation and individually rejected 

Christ. -See Rom. 9:27-33; 10:1-3; 

11:1,7-11,25-32. 



The Pope, desirous of devising some scheme for a basis 
of agreement between the church of Rome and the church 
of England, summoned Cardinal Vaughan from England 
to Rome for conference. The Cardinal gave little encouragement 
to the proposition, even advising that such efforts 
would be fruitless; but the Pope is not yet satisfied, and 
proposes a conference with the Catholic Bishops of Salford, 
Nottingham and Southwark, whose sentiments are understood 
to be more in harmony with the pope's sentiments. 

One effect will be to draw some of the high-churchmen 
of England Romeward, while the low-church party will unite 
with other Protestants in the coming Protestant Federation, 
from which, however, the word "protestant" will probably 
be dropped. 

The Pope's long expected Encyclical, or General Message, 
to the Roman church in the United States, has just 
been made public. Its items of chief interest to us are: 
(1) It definitely declares Mgr. Satolli the Pope's representative 
—the United States' Pope. (2) It refers to Protestants 
here, desires their conversion to Romanism and suggests 
that Roman Catholics in general win them over by their 
examples in living the Christian virtues. This is surely a 
hint in the right direction: Protestants in general would 
be glad to see some better exhibition of Christian virtues 
amongst their Romanist neighbors. Should the Pope's advice 
operate energetically, it would immediately close about 
three-fourths of the saloons, breweries and distilleries, and vacate 
about the same proportion of all the jails and penitentiaries 
of our land. The Pope is right: such an "example" 
would convert many Protestants, who would gladly forget 
the shameful history of the past. But Papacy does not 
possess the truth which sanctifies, and the few real saints 
who in past centuries belonged to her communion did not 
really belong to her faith. The Encyclical says:— 

"How solicitous we are of their salvation.... 
Surely we ought not to desert them nor leave them to their 
fancies; but, with mildness and charity, draw them to us, 
using every means of persuasion to induce them to examine 



closely every part of the Catholic doctrine, and to free 
themselves from preconceived notions. 

"Great is the force of example, particularly with those 
who are earnestly seeking the truth and who, from a certain 
inborn virtuous disposition, are striving to live an honorable 

R1770 : page 40 

and upright life; to which class very many of your fellow 
citizens belong. If the spectacle of Christian virtues exerted 
a powerful influence over the heathens, shall we think 
it powerless to eradicate error in the case of those who have 
been initiated into the Christian religion?" 

(3) It congratulates the church upon its prosperity 
in the United States, but intimates that liberty is not all 
that it desires, but, in addition, public patronage, etc. The 
Encyclical says:— 

"For the church among you, unopposed by the constitution 
and government of your Nation, fettered by no 
hostile legislation, protected against violence by the common 
laws and the impartiality of the tribunals, is free to 
live and act without hindrance. Yet, though all this is true, 
it would be very erroneous to draw the conclusion that in 
America is to be sought the type of the most desirable 
status of the church, or that it would be universally lawful 
or expedient for State and church to be, as in America, 
dissevered and divorced. The fact that Catholicity with 
you is in good condition, nay, is even enjoying a prosperous 
growth, is by all means to be attributed to the fecundity 
with which God has endowed his church, in virtue of 
which, unless men and circumstances interfere, she spontaneously 
expands and propagates herself. But she would 
bring forth more abundant fruits, if, in addition to liberty, 
she enjoyed the favor of the laws and the patronage of the 
public authority." 

This would be to make matters stand here as they 
stood in Europe, during the "dark ages," which Papacy 
recognizes as its Millennium, the present period of progress 
and civilization under Protestant influences being recognized 
by them as the "little season" of Rev. 20:7 in which 
the devil is loosed in the form of Protestantism. 

Many Protestants, while unwilling to return to religious 
serfdom to Papacy, are convinced that liberty and enlightenment 
are not always conducive to contentment amongst 
the masses and would be quite willing to be identified with 
a Protestant "image of the beast" with sufficient show of 
strength and authority to awe not only the masses, but also 
to hold its own against the papal (leopard) "beast,"— still 
feared even while fellowshiped and fraternized. 

But the Lord's program included a new order of things 
entirely,— "a new heavens and new earth," a new ecclesiastical 

R1770 : page 41 

system and a new social system. The present enlightenment 
of the people and their incidental discontent 



are merely means toward the great end he has in view, outlined 
in the Scriptures. "He shall not fail nor be discouraged 
until he have established justice in the earth."— 
Isa. 42:4. 

A PROPOSED PAN-AMERICAN CONGRESS OF RELIGION 
AND EDUCATION. 



Steps are being taken to hold a general convention of 
Catholics, Protestants and Hebrews during the coming 
Summer. The date has not yet been fixed, but July is suggested. 
It is to last one week and to have two general 
sessions daily, and ten sectional meetings each afternoon. 
Seven cities are reported as competing for the privilege of 
entertaining the convention. 

Rev. S. G. Smith, D.D., of Minneapolis, is the President 
and Mr. S. Sherwin is Secretary. They, with Rev. 
Dr. Edwards of Chicago, Rev. Dr. Bennett of Akron, O., 
Rev. Dr. Burrill of New York City, constitute a special committee 
to decide upon the most desirable time and place. 
"Secretary Sherwin has started a systematic plan of organization 
which will be carried out in every state and country 
by counties." The Congress will invite representatives 
from Central and South America and Canada. Among 
those who have promised most hearty cooperation are Archbishop 
Ireland (Roman Catholic), Bishop Mahlin (Episcopalian), 
Bishops J. H. Vincent, J. H. Hurst and C. H. 
Fowler (Methodist Episcopal), and President of the Chicago 
University, W. F. Harper (Baptist). 

How rapidly matters are moving ! It certainly seems 
probable that the Protestant Federation will be an accomplished 
fact within six years. It will be a fellow with Papacy 
though distinct from it, as the Scriptures clearly show. 
The time is short wherein to serve the truth. 

AGAINST SO-CALLED HIGHER CRITICISM. 



The Bishops of the Protestant Episcopal church have issued 
a Pastoral Letter to their people, warning them against 
"seductions to lawlessness," and against the so-called 
"higher criticism" of our day which threatens to wreck 
all faith in the Scriptures on the part of those who are misled 
thereby. The Pastoral has its good points. We quote 
extracts:— 

"We, your Bishops, having been assembled to take 
order, under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, for the extension 
of the kingdom of God, have availed ourselves of 
the opportunity to meet in council to consider our duty in 
view of certain novelties of opinion and expression, which 
have seemed to us to be subversive of the fundamental verities 
of Christ's religion. It has come to our knowledge 
that the minds of many of the faithful clergy and laity are 



disturbed and distressed by these things; and we desire to 
comfort them by the firm assurance that the episcopate of 
the church, to which, in a peculiar manner, the deposit of 
faith has been entrusted, is not unfaithful to that sacred 
charge, but will guard and keep it with all diligence, as 
men who shall hereafter give account to God.... 

"The minute and reverent study of the divine Word 
must always be necessary and will always be profitable. 
The time will never come when men will not be obliged to 
combine the separate portions of God's Word, to study the 
fashions in which they were given, and to consider the 
operation of the Holy Spirit, both in and through the sacred 
writers; and the time will never come when the honest 
student of God's Word will not require and will not welcome 
every critical appliance which the providence of God 
may furnish, to cast new light on the sacred page. It would 
be faithless to think that the Christian religion has anything 
to fear from the critical study of the holy Scriptures. 

"We devoutly thank God for the light and truth which 
have come to us through the earnest labors of devout critics 
of the sacred text. What we deprecate and rebuke is the 
irreverent rashness and unscientific method of many professed 
critics, and the presumptuous superciliousness with 
which they vaunt erroneous theories of the day as established 
results of criticism. From this fault professedly Christian 
critics are not always exempt; and by Christian critics we 
mean those who, both by theory and practice, recognize 
the inspiration of God as the controlling element of holy 
Scripture." 

After asserting that no discovery of modern research, 
positively ascertained, is of a character to unsettle a Christian's 
faith in any particular, the letter continues: 

"Any instruction or any study which makes any part 
of the Bible less authoritative than it really is, which weakens 
faith in its inspiration, which tends to eliminate Christ 
from the utterances of the Prophets, or which leads a man 
to think of miracles with a half-suppressed skepticism, is a 
pernicious instruction and a pernicious study." 

The sound logic of such "Pastorals" will appeal very 
favorably to a large class of Protestants; and, not having the 
correct view of the subject, the feeling will arise, would that 
we had a Pope or a Council of Bishops whose letters to the 
church would come with apostolic authority. And as the 
Scriptures show, by and by this desire will result in the 
general union of Protestants to which the supposed power 
and authority of the bishops of the Episcopal church will 
be added as "life to the image." 

A REFLECTIVE M.E. MINISTER. 



At the January monthly gathering of the M.E. Ministers 
of Brooklyn, the Rev. J. Rippere of the DeKalb Ave. 
church astonished the others by the following truthful observation, 
the force of which seems not to have dawned 



upon the minds of ministers in general. He said:— 

"If the standards of the Methodist church are right, 
then nine out of ten members are going to hell. We 
preach and are taught to preach that without holiness and 
purity no man shall see God. Put that standard up and 
you must have a Purgatory. Our funeral orations are at 
war with our theology. Our philosophizing cuts the nerve 
of our conviction." 

We are glad that the brother's eyes are opening a little. 
Although the first effect of the light of reason is to 
shock and stagger him, it may do him good eventually, by 
directing him to the discrepancy between the teachings of 
his Methodist standards and the true standard— the Word 
of God. 

R1770 : page 42 

The effect of the error upon a thoughtful mind is 
toward one of two things;— to look about for a Purgatory, 
or to reduce the meaning of the word "holiness" to a level 
which would permit everyone not an out-and-out criminal 
to be considered holy. Such seems to be the effect upon 
the majority of ministers; for their funeral orations generally 
send "the ring-streaked and speckled" Christians (as 
Bp. Foster styles them) to glory and to "see the Lord," 
and exclude only the blackest of the black goats. As a 
consequence holiness is at a discount in all the churches, 
and those who profess to be of the "sanctified in Christ 
Jesus" are sneered at as Pharisees who would raise the 
heavenly standard so as to exclude the unsanctified. One 
of the ministers at the above meeting (Rev. Dr. Poulson) 
evidently took a very lax view of holiness; for in replying 
to the above he said, "We may differ as to the meaning of 
sanctification." But, we inquire, is there any room for 
difference of opinion on the meaning of such simple English 
words as holiness and sanctification? And are not the 
Greek words which they represent of equally fixed meaning? 
Only such an emergency would lead intelligent men 
to quibble about the meaning of such simple words, to the 

R1771 : page 42 

confusion of themselves and their flocks. 

We trust that the Rev. Rippere's eyes may yet open 
wide enough to see that while only the holy will ever see 
the Lord, the others will not, as the Methodist standards 
teach, be roasted and toasted for ever in hell; but that the 
Millennial age will be the great Purgatory in which with 
many and few stripes the Lord will "thresh the heathen" 
and bring all to a clear knowledge of himself, to a correct 
appreciation of holiness, and to a grand opportunity for 
reconciliation through the precious blood and for return 
to God and to perfection by the "highway of holiness" 
then to be opened up for "whosoever will," who has not 
had a full opportunity in the present life. 

While this subject is fresh in the minds of the Brooklyn 



Methodists, we think it would be well for the brethren 
there to see that all the churches are supplied with tracts 
on the subject-PURGATORY (No. 17), A REPLY TO BP. 
FOSTER'S NEW GOSPEL (No. 25), and DO YOU KNOW? 
(No. 21). The Tract Society will supply the tracts freely. 
Let the light shine! 



R1771 : page 42 

THE KING'S HIGHWAY. 



UNDER the reign of Sin and Death there is now a 
"broad road," in which, under the tendency 
of the world, the flesh and the devil, almost all mankind 
are walking in a greater or less degree of selfishness and 
gratification of the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye 
and the pride of life. Its grade is downward and away 
from God. Its end is death, in just harmony with the 
original sentence of sin in Eden. On it none can retrace 
his steps so as to return to God. He may stop for a 
time, or even attempt to return, but the grade is too steep, 
and the influence and pressure of the crowd irresistible; 
and soon he is on the downward course again— moving 
slowly or swiftly. 

But there is a way of life, into which the pilgrim may 
turn. Of it our Lord said, "I am the way, the truth and the 
life." There is consequently only one way of return- 
through acceptance of Christ and obedience testifying thereto. 
Its gate is Faith, and at present it is a very difficult 
road to travel, even after it has been found. This gate and 
way have been open for nearly nineteen centuries. (John 14:6.) 
Comparatively few of the race have ever seen or 
known of this path; for we are authoritatively informed that 
"few there be that find it." And the reason for this is 
given,— "the god of this world [Satan] hath blinded the 
minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious 
gospel of Christ should shine unto them."— 2 Cor. 4:4. 

Here is a marvelous thing! Why does the God of 
love make the gate to the way of life so obscure that only 
a small portion of the race have any opportunity of even 
knowing of it?— and so narrow and rugged that when found 
many are so discouraged with the prospect that they make 
but little effort to walk therein, and gradually drift back 
again into the general current of the broad road? 

From the ordinary standpoint— the world's standpoint 
of ignorance and human speculation— there is no reasonable 
answer to this question. But from the standpoint of 
the divine plan of the ages, as revealed in the Scriptures, 
there is a very satisfactory answer. 

The answer is, that God's purpose of mercy respecting 
the world (which entered the "broad road" through 
Adam's transgression and sentence) is to deal with it as a 



whole;— to let all have an experience with the wages of 
Sin (death), and then through Christ to end the reign of 
Sin and Death under Satan, and inaugurate a reign of 
Righteousness and Life under Christ,— the Kingdom of 
God. Thus seen, the "narrow way" now open (which 
only a few see, and in which but a "little flock" walk in 
faithfully when they do find it), is not meant to be the 
way of life for the race in general. It is provided only for 
a special class, called variously in Scripture— "the Church 
of Christ," "the Bride," "the Temple of the Living 
God," "the Elect" or Select, "the Body of Christ," 
the "little flock" to which it is "the Father's good pleasure 
to give the Kingdom." The gate of Faith is made 
obscure to insure that those who enter shall be faith-full. 
The way is rugged and difficult to insure that all who continue 
in that way faithful to the end shall be "overcomers," 
—shall be of strong character. The special service for 
which these are being selected demands that they shall be 
tried as gold is purified, in the furnace of discipline, that 
they may be found vessels unto honor and meet for the 
Master's use, when his time shall come for them, with their 

R1771 : page 43 

Lord and Redeemer, as "the Seed of Abraham" to extend 
the blessing of God to all the families of the earth (the 
dead as well as the living) (Gal. 3:16,29) and when they 
with him shall be the Kings and priests unto God who 
shall reign on the earth during the Millennial age, to bind 
Satan's power (Rev. 5:10; 20:1) and to open the eyes of 
those whom he has so long blinded and deceived. By these 
God will prepare a favorable way for all.— Isa. 62:10. 

WHEN CHRIST IS KING-WHAT THEN? 



When our Redeemer shall have taken to himself his 
great power and established his Kingdom,— after the last 
member of "the Church which is his body" shall have 
been perfected and glorified with the Head upon the throne 
(Rev. 11:17; 3:21),— after the great "time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation" shall have swept 
away present institutions and humbled the pride of man in 
the dust and brought the world into a teachable attitude, 
then the Broad-road to death will be abolished and instead 
the way to death (Second Death) thereafter will be hedged 
about and made narrow and difficult, by reason of the speedy 
and just retribution which then will promptly follow every 
attempted violation of Immanuel's laws. The Narrow way 
to immortal life will also have terminated, having served its 
purpose by selecting the "little flock," the "Royal Priesthood," 
through persecution for godliness and fierce oppositions 
from the world, the flesh and the devil. Then Satan 
will be "bound" (restrained from deceiving mankind) and 
"the world" will be forced to respect at least outwardly 



the laws and Kingdom of God. The "flesh," the weaknesses 

men labor under as the result of the fall, will alone 

stand between men and perfect happiness,— and full arrangements 

are provided by the Mediator-King for assisting 

the fallen flesh back to perfection. The way of life will 

then be a Highway, cleared of every impediment— the 

Highway of Holiness. 

The various arrangements of the Millennial Kingdom 
will at first make the road to death difficult (to insure that 
only the wilful shall go by it into the Second Death); 
and the same Kingdom arrangements will make the way to 
life easy of access. Its gate of faithful obedience will be 
clearly seen and easily accessible to all; and its name correspondingly 
will no longer be the Narrow way, but the 
King's Highway of Holiness, leading to life everlasting, 
and open to all who desire righteousness.— John 10:16. 

As the Prince of Darkness (Satan) rules now over the 
Broad Road and its blinded millions whom he leads downward 
to death, so there the Prince of Light (Christ, head 
and body) will rule over mankind, for whom he will open 
up the Highway of Holiness, upon which millions will go 
upward to Life eternal. It is as a means to this end that 
he is selecting his Church, is causing the great trouble to 
come upon the world, and will shortly bind Satan for the 
thousand years of his reign. And, more than this, he will 
open the blinded eyes that all may see the light of the 
knowledge of the goodness of God as it shines in the face 
of Jesus Christ our Lord.— 2 Cor. 4:6. 

When Satan no longer has power to deceive men and to 
put good for evil and evil for good; when the eyes of their 
understandings have been opened to see and appreciate 
"the True Light,"— until "every man that cometh into the 
world" has been thus enlightened (John 1:9; 1 Tim. 2:6); 
when the knowledge of the Lord fills the whole earth as the 
waters cover the depths of the sea (all covered, but some 
more deeply than others); when there shall no longer be 
necessity to teach, every man his neighbor, saying, "Know 
the Lord," because all shall know the Lord from the 
least to the greatest (Jer. 31:34); when the Lord's Kingdom 
shall have come and his will is done on earth as it is 
done in heaven— instead of the message of the gospel being 
limited to a few, all will know the plan of God; and 
the evidences of its truth will be so clear and convincing 
that none will have excuse for disbelief; for the conditions 
will be such that doubt would be more difficult than is belief 
at present. Nevertheless a personal acceptance of "the 
way" (Christ) and of the conditions of the New Covenant 
will be required of each individual thus enlightened. 

Not only will men learn unquestionably that Christ 
died for our sins, the just for the unjust, that he might 
bring us to God; but more, they will see and feel the restitution 
work begun, in themselves and in their fellows. 
(Acts 3:19-21; Ezek. 16:48-50,53-55,60-63.) They 
will see Righteousness ruling the world unto or toward Life, 
instead of as now Sin reigning and all of its influences 
tending unto death. They will see great changes in the 



climate of the earth because "he that hath the power of 

death, that is the devil" (Heb. 2:14), will no longer be 

"the prince [ruler] of the power of the air" (Eph. 2:2), 

and "the wilderness and the solitary place shall rejoice" 

and "the earth shall yield her increase" (Isa. 35; Ezek. 34:27); 

for the microbes of destruction and disease shall 

be restrained and "nothing shall hurt nor destroy" in all 

God's holy Kingdom.— Isa. 11:9. 

R1772:page43 

Sickness and pain and all diseases will yield to the 
power of the Great Physician upon the throne; and he 
will not permit death to befall any except those who shall 
intelligently and willfully refuse his offers of full restitution, 
by rejecting the terms of obedience required under 
the New Covenant then open to all. And even these shall 
be liberally dealt with; for our Lord willeth not the death 
of him that dieth, but would rather that all should turn unto 
him and live. Accordingly, while all will be forced to 
"bow," in at least outward recognition of that Kingdom 
and to "confess" it a blessed improvement upon the reign 
of Sin unto death (Rom. 5:21; 1 Cor. 15:26), yet their will 
must remain their own and their progress in restitution beyond 
the common advantages will depend upon their willingness 
or unwillingness to come into accord with that 
Kingdom and its righteous arrangements. Concerning these 
we are expressly told by the Prophet, that if still sinners 
when a hundred years old they will be cut off (in the Second 

R1772 : page 44 

Death— destruction— from which there is to be no ransom 
and no resurrection); but that to die at that age then, 
would be like a death in infancy now;— because the smoking 
flax he will not quench, nor break the bruised reed; 
and all who shall then show any evidence of love and 
consecration to the Lord may continue to enjoy the Kingdom 
blessings at least until the close of that Millennial 
age.— Isa. 65:20. 

As the Lord now sends seed-time and harvest, sun and 
rain, upon the just and unjust, so then, to a certain extent 
(i.e., for one hundred years each), the restitution blessings, 
that is, the equitable laws and other public arrangements for 
the education and uplifting of the masses, and the climatic 
conditions more favorable to health, will be common to all 
men. But, although plenteous in mercy, the Lord "will 
not [continue] always [to] chide [correct]; he will not 
keep [hold back] his anger [his righteous indignation against 
wilful sin and sinners] forever." "Every soul which will not 
hear [obey] that Prophet [Teacher] shall be destroyed 
from among the people."— Acts 3:23. 

But although the condition of things in the Millennial age 
will differ greatly from present conditions so as to be almost 
the reverse, yet the laws of God, like himself, change 
not: it is merely the conditions that will have changed. 



God's law, when exercised by our Lord Jesus and his Church 
("Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world?" 
1 Cor. 6:2), and tempered with mercy (because of man's 
fallen condition for which as Redeemer our Lord paid the 
price in his own death) will be the same law in every particular 
that it always has been. It cannot change, for the 
same reason that God himself cannot change;— because it 
is perfect, and to change it in any degree would be to make 
it imperfect. 

That law is Love. Full obedience to it means perfect 
love— controlling every thought, word and deed; partial 
obedience means a measure of love. At the beginning of 
that new era the world in general will be loveless as at 
present— controlled instead by selfishness; for the heart of 
the natural [fallen] man is enmity against this law of God 
which represents God's character. When present-day selfishness 
shall have blossomed and gone to seed in the great 
time of trouble now impending, it will become apparent to 
all that, however selfish their hearts may be, their deeds 
must thereafter conform more closely to the principle of 
love— doing to others as they would have others do to 
them. It will thus be with a practical lesson that the new 
King will introduce the Law of his Kingdom. Then loving 
deeds and words will be made compulsory upon all, 
though their hearts (wills) may still be tainted with selfishness; 
for God does not now, and never will, force the wills 
of his creatures. But those who at end of the hundred years' 
of trial remain obstinate in heart, and only obedient outwardly, 
under compulsion, shall be judged hopeless "sinners," 
and will be cut off from all further trial for life; for 
the principle will still hold that, "He that believeth on the 
Son hath everlasting life: and he that believeth not the 
Son shall not see life; but the wrath of God abideth on 
him."— 1 John 3:36. 

"In that day" an intellectual unbelief in Christ and 
the offer of salvation will be an impossibility (Isa. 11:9); 
for "even the devils believe and tremble;" but belief, in 
the sense of acceptance of Christ as the Lord who bought 
us, and hearty obedience to the letter and spirit of his 
requirements, will be the condition upon which any may 
obtain everlasting life— provided and intended only for 
those who love God; which implies a love of his character 
and his laws.— Isa. 47:14-21. 

But perfect love and obedience in letter and spirit will 
not be realized by the world then on trial, until the close 
of the Millennial age; for perfection of being is necessary 
to a perfection of obedience; and that entire age will be 
necessary to the full restitution or bringing back of such 
as accept the Son to the perfection and divine fellowship lost 
six thousand years ago. And as from the first moment of 
the death-sentence Adam and the race were no longer fully 
alive, but dying, so, although the reign or Kingdom of Life 
will continue during the entire age to lift the obedient out 
of death toward life, yet perfection of life will not be attained 
until the end of the process of uplifting or restitution;* 
and none will get that grand gift of God except 



such as are perfected in love— not only in word and deed, 
but also in the very deepest thoughts and intents of their 
hearts. Such as thus believe the Son, accept of his grace 
and are conformed to his image, and such only, shall see 
life, in the full and absolute sense, and be presented unto the 
Father perfect and unreprovable in love, when Christ shall 
deliver up the Kingdom, having thus accomplished the 
work begun by him nearly three thousand years before, when 
he bought the world with his own life, that he might give 
life unto all them that obey him. 

But while the giving of everlasting life to the worthy 
ones of the world will be at the close of the Millennial age, 
and in the nature of a reward of obedience in the school 
of Christ, in fashioning themselves after the pattern of the 
Redeemer's character, yet that everlasting life will be 
reckoned to each one who accepts of Christ and comes to 
any degree of heart-harmony with his requirements, from 
the moment that he thus accepts the terms of the New 
Covenant. 

The various temperaments and various degrees of degradation 
of fallen men guarantee that their hearty acceptance 
of Christ and his regulations for their blessing will 
differ, as is now the case with those who come to the 
knowledge of the truth. Some will respond quickly, some 



*Thus it will be seen that the statement of Rev. 20:5, "The rest 
of the dead [aside from those associated with Christ in the Kingdom 
at the beginning of the Millennium] lived not again until the thousand 
years are finished," is a true enough statement when life is properly 
understood to mean their perfection in life and their acceptance to 
eternal life by the Father at the close of the Millennium. The fact 
remains, however, that this clause of Rev. 20:5 is not found in any 
Greek MS. of earlier date than the Fifth Century;— nor is it found in 
the ancient Syriac. 

R1772 : page 45 

slowly, some not at all. But the Lord's provision, that 
all shall have at least a hundred years of opportunity under 
the clear light of "the Sun of Righteousness" (Mai. 4:2; 
Luke 1:78,79), guarantees against the loss of any for whom 
there could be any hope that they would develop characters 
fit for an eternity of fellowship with God. Nor will it be 
merely those who promptly and fully accept the Lord that 
will be continued beyond the first hundred years of 
trial, for we are assured that "the bruised reed he will not 
break, and smoking flax he will not quench." That is, if 
there is any tendency to hold on, to appreciate and to make 
use of the divine favors, if there is even a smouldering 
spark of love toward God and righteousness, the Lord will 
not break off such a one, but will fan the spark if perchance 
it might become a blaze of love which would purify the 
heart and eventually bring every thought into captivity to 
the will of God. He will pursue this course until "he 



shall bring forth judgment unto truth."— Isa. 42:3. 

Those who most quickly and most fully accept the 
new conditions will more quickly and more fully taste the 
joys of salvation and the Lord's favor, and have the peace 
of God rule in their hearts. Thus the measure of "light" 
sinned against in the present life determines not only the 
amount of heart-hardening, but also the time and the 
amount of difficulty the person will experience in getting 
his heart softened again.* 

Those who will be "cut off" during the Millennium 
will be such as when given full opportunity to enter upon 
the King's Highway of Holiness will refuse to "go up thereon." 
Satan's Broad Road of the present time is a downward 
one, but the King's Highway in the Millennium will have 
an upward grade. Now, men can go downward to death 
almost without effort; but to reach the prize of life at the 
end of the Highway will require effort. That "Highway," 
however, will require less effort and overcoming than does 
the "Narrow way" of the present age. It will be less steep, 
for several centuries may be had for gradually developing 
character in likeness to the Lord's, whereas now the development 
must be effected in much less time to constitute the 
pilgrim an "overcomer" and a worthy associate with the 
Lord in the throne. Now, there are "stumbling stones" 
to faith in the "Narrow way," to test the faithful in trust 
and endurance, and there are "lions" of opposition to 
threaten, and to turn back discouraged, all except the "peculiar" 
people whom the Lord is now selecting for the peculiar 
work of the future, as his Bride; but of the King's 
Highway it is declared, "No lion shall be there, nor any 
ravenous beast;" and the stumbling stones shall all be gathered 
out, and mountains of difficulty shall be leveled, and 
valleys of despair and discouragement shall be filled up, 
that the King's Highway may be most favorable;— that all 
the Redeemed of the Lord (who will accept the gift of life 
upon the conditions of its offer) may go up thereon to perfection. 



*See "The Retributive Character of Divine Law," June 1, '94. 
R1773 : page 45 

-Isa. 35:8-10; 62:10; 40:4,5. 

It must not, however, be supposed that progress along 
that easy "Highway," with everything to aid in the development 
of character, and with nothing like opposition or 
temptation to test its strength, would be sufficient evidence 
of heart loyalty to God and his laws to prove that all who 
will reach the end of that age, are worthy of everlasting 
life; even though in the use of its elixirs of life,— its pure 
air, nutritious foods, inspired skill and conformity to its divine 
laws and regulations— they shall have attained human 
perfection,— physical, mental and moral. 

The testings of the present "Narrow way" are step by 
step; but the testings of the King's Highway will be specially 



two— at the beginning and at the end: first, as to who will 
start to go upward on it and keep on going upward; and finally 
a test of all who shall have gone up that Highway to its 
farther end— to the end of the Millennium. Such will then 
be tested or proved as to their fitness for everlasting life. 
(1) Those who, when all the conditions of knowledge and 
obedience are so favorable (as God has promised they shall 
be— so that the conditions in general shall make the road to 
life a Highway), will make no effort upward will be cut off 
after one hundred years of opportunity and testings and reproof, 
as unworthy of further testing or further Millennial 
privileges. (Isa. 65:20.) (2) The object of the test of those 
who shall have gone up the Highway to its farther end will 
not be to prove which are sinners, either open or covert; 
for none of them will be transgressors of God's law, the evil 
doers having been cut off long before, at the end of a hundred 
years trial; and no doubt it will surprise many of them 
when they learn that God has purposed their trial at all. 
What! Test those who for hundreds of years have been living 
in harmony with God's law, and constantly blessed by 
it? Are not those centuries of obedience a sufficient proof 
of loyalty to God? Can any further test be required? And 
if so, for what purpose? 

We answer that their obedience for centuries had its 
corresponding reward of blessings and enjoyments experienced 
during those centuries. They are still God's debtors. 
God does not owe them everlasting life. Everlasting life 
is a gift of God through Christ: it is one of the things, 
however, prepared for those who love God, and the test at 
the end of the Millennial age will be a test of love;— to 
prove the degree of love and consecration that has been 
developed as a character in those who have seen and enjoyed 
so many of God's favors. Not outward perfection merely, 
but inward perfection will be the test; and that some who 
will have reached outward perfection will not have developed 
the inward perfection of heart or will, even with every 
favorable opportunity, is evident from the results of the test. 
(Rev. 20:9.) So, too, Adam was perfect before his trial in 
Eden, but he had not developed a consecrated will or character 
fully submitted to the Lord. Satan was perfect as an angel 
of God, but he developed a character or will antagonistic 
to God's. And God's purpose is that the trial or judgment 
both of angels and men shall be so thorough, so complete, 
that not a single creature who is not in absolute heart-harmony 

R1773 : page 46 

with God and his laws shall receive everlasting 
life and pass into the ages of eternity beyond the Millennium. 
All not possessed of characters (wills) in full, absolute 
harmony with God's will, must die the Second Death. 
And yet they will have enjoyed much, and will have much 
for which to be thankful. 

In no other way could the Lord continue his creatures 
in his own likeness as free moral agents, and yet guarantee 
that when the Millennial reign of Christ shall have caused 



the former things of sin to pass away, "there shall be no 
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there 
be any more pain." 

Praise God for the lengths and breadths of his great 
and gracious plan of salvation through Christ;— for the 
Narrow way of the present with its severe trials and temptations 
and its great prize of life in joint-heirship with our 
Lord the Redeemer; and praise him too for the great Highway 
of Holiness which by and by shall be prepared and 
opened by the Christ to all the redeemed, that whosoever 
will may not perish, but have the gift of God, eternal life. 

The test at the close of the Millennium is symbolically 
represented in Rev. 20:7-10. Satan will be permitted to 
attempt to deceive all, whose number will then be as the 
sand, but what proportion he will succeed in leading astray 
is not stated. 

The Lord's Word does not indicate the nature of the 
movement, but we do not suppose that Satan and his followers 
will go up and surround the beloved city (the capital of the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom) with any thought of war, or 
with intent to use physical force. They could not be so 
foolish, after so long an experience with the power of God's 
Kingdom. We surmise that they will err in their calculation 
of when the thousand years of Christ's autocratic Kingdom 
will end, and when the dominion of earth will be 
restored to mankind in general to be exercised as a Republic 
—in full harmony with the divine law. Miscalculating 
the time, they may feel that the rulers of that time (Abraham, 
Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets) are prolonging 
their rule unwarrantedly. And the surrounding of 
the beloved city may signify a "demonstration," or appeal 
for their rights, such as has often been made by present-day 
workmen— surrounding Parliament or council chambers 
with remonstrances against infringements of their claimed 
rights. Such peaceful remonstrances in the present time 
against wrongs or oppressions are not sins, but such a demonstration 
on the part of perfect men after centuries of benefits 
and blessings at God's hands would indicate that their 
hearts were not fully submitted to the Lord; for the right 
hearted would say to such an invitation,— No: we may have 
been mistaken in our understanding of the Lord's word, or 
in our calculations of the time;— but if God sees best to 
continue us as "servants" rather than to grant us the full liberties 
and privileges of "sons" (Rom. 8:21), we will trust 
the wisdom, love and power which have so abundantly provided 
for us thus far— even while we were yet sinners— and 
will not even harbor in our hearts a wish to change any of 
the Lord's arrangements, much less would we join in any 
demonstration or protest against the Lord's arrangements. 

Only those who under such a test would manifest heart-harmony 
with God are of the class for whom everlasting life 
has been prepared as a gift of God. Such will be received 
and blessed after the test; but the others will be cut off in the 
second death. If it be objected that these committed no 
great crime, we answer, neither was the transgression of the 
perfect Adam a gross crime; but the eating of the forbidden 



fruit was a disobedience; and disobedience and transgression 
on the part of perfect beings is a just cause for a refusal to 
grant such the great boon of life everlasting. 



R1773 : page 46 

CHRIST, AND THE MAN BORN BLIND. 

-FEB. 24, John 9:1-11.- 

Golden Text— "I am the light of the world." 

THE question of the Lord's disciples (verse 2) was the 
expression of a common opinion among many of the 
Jews, and one also entertained by Job's friends,— that all 
suffering is the direct penal result of some personal sin. But 
this man, having been born blind, they reasoned, must have 
been so afflicted on account of some sins of his parents. 

The Lord, both in this instance and on another occasion 
(see Luke 13:1-5), clearly disclaimed the idea. While 
it is true that some afflictions are the direct results of personal 
sins and are the promptly administered penalties designed 
for the warning and correction of the offender, such 
is not always the case. This is the age of the triumph of 
evil and the persecution of righteousness. (See Mai. 3:15; 
Psa. 73:2-17; 1 Tim. 5:24,25.) Afflictions often come 
upon the Lord's most devoted saints to try them and prove 
them, to test their loyalty, zeal and faithfulness, and to 
refine and cultivate the Christian graces and establish 
character. 

In the particular instance of this lesson, the affliction 
is said to have been permitted for the special purpose of 
manifesting the power of God through Christ in his recovery. 
He was raised up blind for this purpose, just as Pharaoh, 
being a suitable character in which to manifest the power 
of God in another way, was raised up to the throne of 
Egypt. 

In this illustration of the giving of sight to the blind 
we have a sample of the great work of restitution to be performed 
in the Millennial age. Then not only will the 
blind eyes be opened, but the deaf ears will be unstopped, 
and the lame man shall leap as a hart and the tongue of the 
dumb shall sing; and even all that are in the graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of man and shall come forth. 
(Isa. 35:5,6; John 5:28,29.) And not only will the 
bodies of men be thus blessed, but their minds and hearts 
will be similarly liberated from the fetters of ignorance, 
superstition and sin. This is the work of God to be accomplished 
when the Kingdom shall be established in the 
earth under the dominion of his anointed Son and Heir. 

That great work of his future reign the Lord on this 
and various occasions illustrated, that through such illustrations 
the faith of his disciples in this age might be 
confirmed. 



R1773 : page 47 

The statement of verse 4 calls to mind also the statement 
of the Prophet Isaiah (21:12), to which the Lord 
evidently referred. The coming night would be one when 
"no man can work;" and it behooved the Lord and all the 

R1774 : page 47 

members of his body, the Church, to make use of the opportunities 

in hand for doing that portion of the Father's 

work which is to be accomplished in the present age, before 

the foretold night cometh.— "The morning [the Millennial 

morning] cometh, and also the night [the dark night of 

great tribulation which shall immediately precede the 

dawning of the glorious day]." 

Jesus said (verse 5), "As long as I am in the world, I 
am the light of the world;" and to his disciples, who were 
to continue his work after he should leave the world, he 
said (Matt. 5:14), "Ye are the light of the world." Thus 
through Christ and the Church the light would continue to 
shine in the world in the midst of its darkness until the predicted 
night would come, when the world that has loved 
darkness rather than light shall be overwhelmed by it, and, 
in the midst of its shadows, reap the fruit of its own sowing. 

The means which the Lord used to effect the cure of 
the blind man had no intrinsic healing virtue, but they 
served to fix the attention and to test the faith of the man 
in the great teacher. Had he had no confidence in Jesus 
he might have despised the means and ridiculed the idea that 
the anointing with clay and the washing in the pool of 
Siloam would accomplish such a miracle as the giving of 
sight to one born blind, and so never have been healed. 
But the spirit of faith and meekness led him rather to hope 
and obedience and the blessed result of vision. 

Then followed his grateful testimony. How different 
from the caviling, dishonest disposition of the opposers that 
stood by. The account of the noble testimony of this 
healed one fills our hearts with warmest admiration. He 
bravely faced the opposition, reasoned with the opposers, 
boldly affirmed his own most reasonable faith, and took the 
consequences, being cast out of the synagogue. 

It was then— in the time of his persecution for righteousness' 
sake— that the Lord again found him and established 
and confirmed his faith in himself as the Son of God, the 
long-promised Messiah. Thus it is ever with those who 
faithfully endure hardness as good soldiers of the Lord 
Jesus. The reward of his presence and loving approval is 
ever with them. 



R1774 : page 47 

THE AWAKENING OF LAZARUS. 



-MARCH 3, JOHN 11:30-45.- 

Golden Text— "I am the resurrection and the life."— Verse 25. 

IN this lesson is brought before us the glorious doctrine 

of the resurrection— a doctrine which finds no place 

in any religious system except Christianity, nor in any religious 

standards of authority save the Bible. While the 

doctrine of redemption is the central doctrine of the Christian 

system, the doctrine of the resurrection is the end of 

our faith, our glorious hope through Christ. Eliminate 

this doctrine from the Bible, and the Apostle tells us our 

faith is vain.— 1 Cor. 15:14. 

And yet, strange to say, Christians in general have almost 
lost sight of this doctrine, as the natural consequence 
of several popular errors. As the Prophet Isaiah (28: 15) 
expresses it, they have made a covenant with death, and 
with the grave they are at agreement. Instead of regarding 
death as the Word of God presents it— as the "enemy" 
of our race, "the wages of sin," they have come to regard 
it as "the angel God hath sent to carry mortals home," 
and as a step in a process of evolution to higher conditions. 
With the idea that the destinies of both the good and the 
evil are fixed and entered upon unalterably and everlastingly 
at the moment of death, they have no use for a resurrection, 
even though they know that the Scriptures teach 
it and even though a majority of them profess to believe it. 

But what saith the Scriptures? Hear the Prophet 
Isaiah (28: 18): "Your covenant with death shall be disannulled, 
and your agreement with [sheol] the grave shall 
not stand;. ..the hail [hard, forcible truth] shall 
sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters [of prevailing 
truth] shall overflow the hiding place [of error]." Even 
so shall it be in this harvest time of judgment upon 
"Christendom." 

The awakening of Lazarus from the "sleep" of death 
was but a foreshadowing of the power and purpose of God 
for the liberating of all the prisoners of Sin and Death in 
his own appointed time, through Christ and his Kingdom. 

When Jesus wept at the tomb of Lazarus it was in 
sympathy, not only with his bereaved friends, but also with 
the many similar scenes of sorrow which must thus afflict 
mankind before the dawning of the then far distant glorious 
day of resurrection. 

For a fuller exposition of the Bible's teaching concerning 
Resurrection— "the first resurrection," the general 
resurrection, the character and the object of each, see our 
issues of April 1 and Oct. 15, 1893. 



R1774 : page 47 
WHAT LACK I YET? 



-MARCH 10, MARK 10:17-27. (MATT. 19:16-30; LUKE 18:18-30). 

Golden Text— "Seek ye first the Kingdom of God."— Matt. 6:33. 

WE have in this lesson an illustration of the great 
difficulty of getting a full, fair view of one's self. 
Hence the value of every applied test of character. These 
tests open our eyes to our real condition of heart as we 
could not otherwise realize them. Sometimes the test 
comes in the shape of a searching question which leads the 
thoughtful to a close scanning of his ways— as, for instance, 
the Lord's repeated question to Peter— "Lovest thou me?" 
Sometimes it is a direct showing of the line of duty through 
difficulties and dangers from which the flesh shrinks; and 
sometimes it comes in tempests and storms of persecution 
which prove the heart's loyalty to God and its powers of 
endurance. But in whatever shape the tests of character 
are applied to us we have reason to be thankful for their 
good office in the better acquainting us with our own hearts. 

This young man who came to Jesus inquiring, What 
lack I yet? was, evidently, one who was in many respects 
very exemplary. From his youth up he had carefully observed 
the divine law, and had sought scrupulously to 
fashion his character in conformity to its precepts. And 

R1774:page48 

now he had heard the teachings of the Galilean claimant 
to the Messiahship and had observed the testimony of his 
miracle— the power of God witnessing to the truth of his 
claims. And, notwithstanding the persecuting spirit of the 
rulers and teachers in Israel against the Lord and all who 
believed in the validity of his claims, he came to him 
openly, saluted him with that reverence due to so great a 
teacher, and sincerely inquired what he should do to inherit 
eternal life. 

The inquiry, especially under these circumstances, indicated 
most commendable candor, thoughtful consideration, 
and realization that by the deeds of the law no flesh had 
yet gained the life it promised for obedience, and faith in 
the new and wonderful teacher to show him more perfectly 
the way of life. All of these were most promising indications 
of discipleship. "Then Jesus, beholding him, loved 
him." A life of moral purity, sincerity, thoughtfulness and 
truth had left no marks of degradation but had given to the 
countenance that frankness and nobility which always accompanies 
a transparent character. 

The Lord's reference to the law brought the quick 
response, "All these things have I kept from my youth up: 
what lack I yet?" He was anxious for a perfect conformity 
to the will of God; and so anxious that he manifested 
his willingness to bear reproach for it in thus coming to 
Jesus. That was a long step in the direction of full consecration 
to God. His heart was very nearly right; but 
still there was a lack; his attitude, although he did not 
realize it, was not that of entire consecration to the will of 



God; and in answer to his sincere inquiry the Lord sought 
to show him wherein he lacked, what was the weak spot in 
his character. 

This he did by applying a test which instantly discovered 
to him the fact that he loved self more than either 
God or his neighbor; consequently that he had failed to 
keep the law in those two important principles upon which 
hang all the law and the prophets— viz., supreme love to 
God, which manifests itself in singleness of purpose to do 
his will and please him; and love to the neighbor as to 
self, which in the present age implies self-sacrifice and daily 
cross-bearing in imitation of Christ. 

"And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved; 
for he had great possessions." No doubt the heart of 
Jesus was sad also when he saw the blight of selfishness and 
self-will attacking that promising half-blown rose of character. 
A crisis had come in the young man's life which he 
failed to pass successfully, and thenceforth the beauty of 
character so far attained must surely decline. We hear 
nothing of his subsequent conversion, but in all probability 
he remained in sympathy with the Jewish teachers and partook 
more and more of their spirit of opposition to Christ 
and his teaching. 

"And Jesus. ..saith unto his disciples, ...How 

R1775 : page 48 

hardly shall they that have riches enter into the Kingdom 
of God!" He had been showing the way into the Kingdom 
—the way, not for this young man only, but for every 
man who would lay up the treasure of such a hope. Every 
aspirant to the Kingdom must travel this narrow way of 
sacrifice, and with one motive of supreme love to God and 
desire to bless his neighbor as himself. He must go, and 
sell all that he has and give to the poor, and take up his 
cross daily and follow Christ. The simple significance of this 
to all of us is a life of loving devotion to the good of others, 
along the lines of God's plan and prompted primarily by 
love to him. "Go, sell all that thou hast"— all thy possessions, 
all thy time, all thy reputation, all that hitherto has 
been dear to thee; and then, having dropped all the weights 
of earthly ambition, take up thy cross and follow Christ; 
for the labor of love and sacrifice for others will not bring 
its due reward of gratitude in this age, but, on the contrary, 
it will bring ingratitude and even persecution, as it 
did to our Master. But, no matter, "the servant is not 
above his lord:" like the apostles who followed closely in 
his footsteps, we should be able to say, "Being reviled, we 
bless; being defamed, we entreat; being persecuted, we 
suffer it." 

It should be considered also that to follow Christ is 
not to make unwise disposition of our possessions and talents, 
but, as wise and faithful stewards, to use them to the 
best possible advantage in his service. To feed the poor 
would not necessarily mean to feed the hungry with the 
bread that perisheth, but first, rather, to feed the spiritually 



hungry with the bread of life. In a word, it signifies to 
spend self for the highest good of others, not looking for 
any present reward, except a sense of the Master's approval. 

The Lord indicates that though it is very difficult for 
the rich to enter into the Kingdom, it is not impossible. 
With men, it might seem impossible that a man could have 
riches and use them conscientiously;— be a sacrificer. Riches 
of any kind— whether of money, or reputation, or friends, or 
anything upon which the heart has been set, form such barriers 
to the formation of truly noble characters— after God's own 
heart— that the natural man, unaided by divine grace, cannot 
surmount them. But, nevertheless, however insufficient we 
may feel in ourselves, we need only to remember that "our 
sufficiency is of God:" it is 
"When thy weakness leaneth 
On his might, all seems light." 

No matter how heavy may seem the cross, how severe 
the trial, or how weak we feel in consideration of it, if we 
simply and sincerely surrender ourselves to God, he will 
carry us through: with him, with his grace and guidance, 
it is possible for the weakest and the most severely tempted 
and tried to make their calling and election sure. He will 
infuse courage into fainting souls; he will apply the balm 
of his consolation to wounded hearts; he will grant wisdom 
to him that asketh it; and he will furnish the armor 
of God to every true soldier of the cross. O blessed promise! 
With God it is possible to enable even those tempted 
with the subtle influences of riches of any kind to run the 
race of self-sacrifice with diligence and patience to the end. 

Then let the sincere inquiry of every child of God be, 
"What lack I yet?" Surely there is none so perfect that 
he lacks nothing. And when in answer to our inquiring 
prayer the Lord applies some test to prove our standing 
before him, let us bravely determine that by his grace we 
will not draw back; for it is written, "If any man draw 
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him;" and again, 
"No man having put his hand to the plow and looking back 
is fit for the Kingdom of God."-Heb. 10:38; Luke 9:62. 



"You cannot manufacture a conscience out of expediency, 
the voice of conscience says not. It is better not to 
do so; but— Thou shaltnot." 

"It is the crushed olive that yields the oil, the pressed 
grape that gives forth the wine; and it was the smitten rock 
that gave the people water. So it is the broken, contrite heart 
that is most rich in holiness and most fragrant in grace." 

"We have two ears and but one tongue, that we may 
hear much and talk little." 

"We are in hot haste to set the world right and to order 
all its affairs. The Lord hath the leisure of conscious power 
and unerring wisdom, and it is well for us to learn to wait." 



page 49 

VOL. XVI. MARCH 1, 1895. (16 PAGES.) No. 5. 



CONTENTS. 



Items— The Memorial Supper— 50 

The German Quarterly 50 

Views from the Tower— 51 

The Religious View 51 

The Social View 52 

Christian Common Sense 53 

God Is Not the Author of Confusion 53 

God's Supervision of All Things 56 

"Shall there be Evil in a City?" 58 

Bible Study: Zaccheus the Publican 61 

Encouraging Letters 63 

page 50 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1775 : page 50 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

THE ANNIVERSARY OF OUR LORD'S DEATH. 

The Lord's people, scattered abroad, who trust for salvation in the 
value of his ransom-sacrifice at Calvary, will take pleasure in celebrating 
on its anniversary the great sin-offering made once for all. The time 
this year will be Sunday, April 7, after six o'clock, P.M.— answering, 
according to the Jewish calendar, to the hour at which our Lord instituted 
the memorial, in "the same night in which he was betrayed." 

The church at Allegheny will celebrate the Memorial as usual at 
8 P.M.; but no arrangements have been made for a general gathering, 
nor for subsequent meetings. Indeed, we believe that those who would 



attend can generally do more good by meeting with the little groups in 
their own neighborhoods, and contributing what they can to the interest 
and spirit of those smaller gatherings. 



TRACTS NOS. 1 and 22 may now be ordered sparingly; we will 
soon have a good supply. A sample of No. 26 (DO YOU KNOW?— in 
Swedish) has been sent to all our readers. Those who have Swedish 
friends should order them freely. In the English the run is now being 
made upon No. 25 for use amongst mature Christians, especially Methodists. 
Order all you can and will use judiciously,— we have plenty of 
them— free. Nos. 14 and 21 are for general circulation, to all classes; 
they can always be had in any quantity. 

page 50 

THE GERMAN QUARTERLY. 

Whether because our proposition was not understood, or because 
your friends can mostly read English, our proposition for a German 
Quarterly was responded to by few. We will restate the matter a little 
differently. 

A small German Quarterly is proposed, whose columns shall contain 
select translations from ZION'S WATCH TOWER, by Bro. O. A. Kotitz. 
These papers will be chiefly to introduce the Truth to Germans and to 
prepare them for MILLENNIAL DAWN. Those who want any will 
probably want many of them quarterly; hence the following low prices, 
based upon large issues. 

For 10 copies, quarterly (40 copies during the year) 50 

" 50 " " (200 " " " " ) 1.50 

" 100 " " (400 " " " " ) 2.50 

" 500 " " (2000 " " " " ) 10.00 

All interested will please send a postal card at once stating how 
many they would desire at these prices. 



R1775 : page 51 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



THE Roman Catholic priest, Rev. A. P. Doyle, representing 

the Order of the Paulist Fathers, will be 

remembered as the one who not long since delivered an address 

to the students and faculty of Union Theological Seminary, 

—introduced by Prof. C. A. Briggs, of "higher criticism" 

notoriety. 

"Father Doyle" and his colleagues have for some time 
been holding a Roman Catholic "mission" in the Church 



of St. Paul, New York City, and upon its termination a 
"mission for Protestants" was started and held for a 
week, closing Feb. 10th. Of the latter the New York 
World says,— 

"The mission has been successful far beyond the expectations 
of the priests. There were about 500 non-Catholics 
present. A space near the pulpit had been reserved for 
them. The question box was well patronized, and the answers 
given each evening appeared satisfactory, judging 
from the fact that about fifty persons expressed their desire 
to be enrolled as converts. This is the first time anything 
of this kind has been tried in this city, though Father Doyle 
has met with much success through the West." 

It should be noticed that the reapproachment between 
Catholics and Protestants is wholly to the disadvantage of 
Protestants. They are willing to conciliate Rome in almost 
every way;— they retract the statements of the past, that the 
Church of Rome is the scarlet woman of Rev. 17:4, or the 
Antichrist of 2 Thes. 2:3-10; 1 John 2:18; 1 Tim. 4:1, 
and they even apologize for their name Protestant and are 
ashamed of it. They would not think of proselyting Catholics, 
and are abandoning foreign mission fields where Catholics 
are at work, so as not to conflict. Catholics, on the 
contrary, consistently, make no doctrinal concessions, but 
advance their "missions," etc., as Protestants retreat. 

The fact is that, while Papacy holds all her old errors 
of doctrine and is, therefore, as much as ever the Antichrist* 
of Scripture, she has been forced to more civilized 
methods during the past century. Protestants have had considerable 
less to learn of civilization, but, as for doctrines, 
they have lost almost all those which distinguished them 
from Romanists, and now hold but little that conflicts. 
The main distinction or ground of original protest was respecting 
the sacrifice of Christ. Papacy held that Christ's 
sacrifice at Calvary was for past sins, original sin, and that 
it not only should be commemorated yearly on Good Friday, 
but also that it could and should be repeated by the priests, 
for the special sins of individuals, congregations, etc. Protestants 
held that there could be but one sacrifice for sins 
forever (Heb. 7:27; 9:28; 10:10; 1 Pet. 3:18), and that 
while it was proper to commemorate that one sacrifice it was 
as impossible as it was unnecessary to repeat it; and that faith 
in the one sacrifice, and not repeated sacrifices, is the true 
basis of forgiveness of sins. They accordingly protested 
against this false doctrine as blasphemous, and properly applied 
to Papacy the names, symbols and denunciations 
of Antichrist, given in the Scriptures. 

Papacy still holds her original position, and is therefore 
as worthy as ever of all the denunciations of Holy Writ 
and the protests of God's faithful people. But leading Protestants 
are abandoning faith in any sacrifice for sins, and 
hence are not disposed to quibble more with those who claim 
that every priest may repeatedly re-create the Lord and repeat 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. 9. 

R1776 : page 51 

the sacrifice, than with those who faithfully hold the 
"one sacrifice for all." They hold that no sacrifice was 
needed; that our sins were not paid for by our Lord's death; 
that our lives were not bought with the price of his life;— 

R1776 : page 52 

that he merely suffered as a martyr for the cause of truth, 
as many others suffered before and since. Thus the Protestant 
doctrine of justification by faith in the precious blood 
of Christ once shed has been abandoned. 

We do not say that all Protestants have thus abandoned 
the Lord, denied that the Lord bought them, and "counted 
the blood of the New Covenant wherewith they were 
sanctified an ordinary or common thing, like that of other 
martyrs; but we do say that nearly all the "great" ones 
have already done so, that more than one-half of the ministers 
and prominent laymen are already on that side of the 
question, even if they do not always express themselves boldly, 
and that in a very little while, under the lead of such 
men as Prof. Chas. A. Briggs, Prof. W. R. Harper, Prof. 
Henry Drummond, Dr. Lyman Abbott and others, Protestants 
generally will soon be as much a part of the Antichrist, 
denying the ransom entirely, as are the laity of 
Papacy, who, while admitting the ransom merely claim that 
it was insufficient and needs supplementing with fresh masses 
or sacrifices. 

In view of these facts, is it any wonder that intelligent 
men who reject the gospel of the ransom, and accept instead 
the evolution theory, are willing and anxious to destroy the 
evidences of their former faith, by dropping the name Protestant 
and by withdrawing from Papacy the charge of being 
Antichrist? 

"My soul be on thy guard, ten thousand foes arise; 
The hosts of sin are pressing hard to draw thee from the prize.' 



A sharp contrast between the attitude of Roman Catholics 
toward Protestants and that of so-called Protestants 
toward Roman Catholics is shown in the telegraphic news 
of the day, as follows: 

On the evening of Feb. 26, an ex -priest, named Slattery, 
and his wife, an escaped nun, were lecturing at the Masonic 
Temple in Savannah, Ga., telling what they knew of the 
under- workings of Papacy, etc., etc., when a mob surrounded 
the building, breaking the windows with bricks, sticks 
and stones, and threatening the lives of those within. The 
Mayor of the city, a Jew, did what he could with the police 
at his command to restore order, but without avail. The 
militia had to be called out and, after charging the mob 
with fixed bayonets, it was dispersed, the Protestants attending 



the lecture were liberated and the lecturers were escorted 
under military protection to their hotel, which in turn 
had to be closed and guarded. 

Almost at the same hour a very different scene occurred 
at Columbus, O. There the Roman Catholic Bishop, 
by special invitation, addressed the Young Men's Christian 
Association. He had a large, enthusiastic and applauding 
audience, which seemed to specially appreciate the Bishop's 
declaration of his patriotism, and love of liberty and respect 
for the laws of the land, which he declared to be Roman 
Catholic teaching. (He little knew how quickly his words 
would be belied by the conduct of those taught by his 
church for years— their disregard for the liberty and rights 
of others, and their lack of respect for all laws.) His audience 
evidently relished the fact that this was the first occasion 
on which a Y.M.C.A. had ever protested against 
Protestantism in this style. 

The laity of Rome evidently have not yet generally 
learned that the crafty Pope Leo has inaugurated a new 
method of capturing Protestants— who he wisely sees are 
retrograding, doctrinally at least— that sticks and stones 
and curses and massacres and faggots are to be discarded, 
at least temporarily, and Protestants are to be caught with 
guile. And possibly the ecclesiastics do not so much mind 
it, if occasionally the laws of the country as well as the laws 
of liberty and decency are violated in squelching some one 
who has the temerity to expose some of the holy (?) things 
done by them in secret behind convent walls and away from 
the public eye and ear.— Eph. 5:12. 

These are important signs of the times corroborative 
of the Scripture teachings voiced in these columns. 

SOCIAL VIEW. 



The Pope's last Encyclical, condemning secret societies, 
is regarded oppositely by two parties amongst the Archbishops. 
The party unfavorable to secret societies accepted 
it promptly as the Pope's ultimatum on the subject and 
promptly published it as such to those under their jurisdiction. 
The other party, headed by Cardinal Gibbons, contends 
that the infallible Leo merely "submitted" the letter 
as a suggestion on which he wishes their criticisms before 
pronouncing infallibly on the subject. 



We noted some time ago the decline of Trades Unionism 
in Great Britain, and now note the same tendency in 
the United States. The reports of several labor societies 
show heavy declines in membership, particularly the Knights 
of Labor. Scarcity of money for dues and distrust of 
leaders and officers are potent factors, but additionally so is 
the growing conviction that the power of these societies is 
very limited, and that the questions to be solved must be 



treated from a higher and broader platform— the interests 

of the masses must be considered, not merely in provinces 

and states, but continentally, if not indeed universally; for 

the telegraph and the steam engine have practically annihilated 

distance and brought the labor of the whole world 

into direct competition. 

The look of hope is now more toward various vague 
Socialistic theories, all of which must soon prove vain and 
delusive. The true hope of "the groaning creation" as 
expressed by St. Paul is the Church, the sons of God glorified. 
(Rom. 8:21,22.) It is the Kingdom of God (Dan. 2:44,45; 
7:13,14,18,27), for which our Redeemer himself 
taught us to watch and pray, saying, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
It is the same for which St. James tells us to wait patiently, 
saying, "Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the presence 
of the Lord." But at the same time he intimates that connected 
with the presence will be judgments and vengeance 
upon many; especially does he prognosticate dire trouble 
upon the rich in connection with the righting of the affairs 
of earth. -Jas. 5:1-8; Dan. 12:1. 



On Feb. 25th a member of the German Reichstag proposed 
an amendment to the Anti-Socialist Bill, to make it a 
crime for anyone to deny the Deity or the Immortality of 
the Soul, publicly, in speech or in print; prescribing a 
penalty of a fine and two years' imprisonment. Since Deity 
is generally understood to mean Trinity, to deny the latter 
might eventually bring the penalty. 

We have no thought that the suggestion will become a 
law,— not yet; but it shows the reaction of sentiment now 
in progress, which will surely creep into the laws of "Christendom" 
before long, probably within ten years. Germany 
had the honor of a leading part in the Great Reformation. 
Can it be that she will dishonor herself by taking a leading 
part in the Great Retrogression? 



R1776 : page 53 

CHRISTIAN COMMON SENSE. 



"Wherefore, be ye not unwise, but understanding what the will of the 
Lord is. ...Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because 
of these things cometh the wrath of God upon the children of 
disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them; for ye 
were formerly darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord: walk 
as children of light (for the fruit of the spirit is in all goodness 
and righteousness and truth), proving what is 
acceptable unto the Lord."— Eph. 5:17,6-10. 



COMMON SENSE is the homely designation of a 
mental product which ought to be, and is, very 
generally appreciated among men. It simply signifies good 
mental perception. It is valuable to the man in business, 
to the woman in the home, to the farmer, the mechanic, 
the lawyer, the doctor, the teacher, the pupil— to all men 
and all women in every station in life. 

Common sense takes cognizance of facts, conditions 
and circumstances, notes general principles, conceives ideas 
of utility and propriety, notes the worthy objects of aspiration 
and ambition, and shapes its course of action accordingly. 
It is a common name for Wisdom; but as to whether 
it is truly wise depends, not alone upon a good balancing 
of the mental faculties, but even more upon the right condition 
of the heart. 

There is, however, what the Bible terms worldly wisdom 
(1 Cor. 3:19), which is simply foolishness with God; 
for it wilfully closes its eyes to the broadest principles 
of righteousness and truth whose effects reach on into eternity, 
and with childish indifference to futurity, and even 
to the highest present interests, operates only for the fleeting 
present gratification, regardless alike of the interests 
of others and the highest interests of self. 

It is not this "foolish," worldly common sense, however, 

R1777 : page 53 

that we wish to consider, but Christian common sense 
—that kind of common sense, which, under the searchlight 
of God's Word, has discovered its human weakness 
and imperfection and has come to God for "the spirit of a 
sound mind," assured by the promise of his Word— "If any 
of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God who giveth to all 
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him." 
—2 Tim. 1:7; James 1:5. 

Christian common sense, then, is good mental perception 
under the control of a heart in harmony with truth 
and righteousness, which notes the principles and precepts 
of the divine law and purpose, accepts God's wisdom 
as to utility and propriety, and from this high standpoint 
judges of truth and righteousness, and acts accordingly. If 
a particular course of action be proposed, Christian common 
sense perceives its merits or demerits according to the principles 
and teachings of God's Word; and so, likewise, if a 
doctrine be announced as divine truth, Christian common 
sense applies to it the tests of the inspired law and testimony 
and decides upon its truth or falsity accordingly. 

It is the exercise of this faculty that the Apostle, in 
the above text, is urging upon the Church for her protection 
against errors of doctrine and of conduct; for all 
through the age they were to beset her path, and she must 
wisely discriminate between the false and the true, the bad 
and the good. Nor does he in any way indicate that such 
discrimination may be exercised by the Church representatively 
in the person of a single individual, or of a number 
of individuals in the capacity of councils, synods, conferences, 



etc. This has been the mistake— the worldly wisdom 
—of the great nominal Church, Papal and Protestant. 
But individually, every man in Christ is expected to have 
and to use his own Christian common sense, and for its 
right use he is accountable directly to God.— See 1 Thes. 5:21; 
Gal. 6:4. 

"Wherefore," Christian brethren, "be ye not unwise, 
but understanding what the will of the Lord is." We have 
before us the open book of the divine revelation, and never 
in the Church's history has God left his people without 
teachers— helps, index-fingers to point his flock to the principles 
and precepts of his Word, and to help them to compare 
scripture with scripture. But side by side with the 
true teachers there have always been the false; and side by 
side with the truth they place the error; and it is your 
individual Christian common sense that must decide the 
matter for yourself— "prove all things and hold fast that 
which is good." "Let every man prove his own work, and 
then shall he have rejoicing in himself, and not in another." 
And thus himself rejoicing in the truth, he may become an 
aid to others to bring them to the same conviction and rejoicing. 
Indeed, as we have seen, it is the mission of all 
in Christ thus to build one another up in the most holy 
faith and character. 

"GOD IS NOT THE AUTHOR OF CONFUSION." 



And now for some proving— some exercise of Christian 
common sense upon a proposition which is publicly 
presented for the acceptance of Christian people. It is the 
preposterous and blasphemous assumption that all of the 
sin and iniquity of the whole world is directly chargeable 
to God, and not to men. Upon this hypothesis is built up 
"another gospel (which is not another)"— a theory of salvation 
on the score of justice (?), to take the place of the 
gospel of God's grace which we have received, which is on 
the principle of love and mercy, as taught by all the holy 
apostles and prophets. The line of reasoning, briefly stated, 
is that God is the author and instigator of all things, evil 
as well as good, sinful as well as righteous;— that he alone 
is responsible for all the sin and iniquity that is in the 
world, and for all the misery incident to and resulting upon 
mankind. They thus delude themselves, contrary to all 
Christian common sense and Scripture teaching, for a purpose: 
that they may introduce their own theory of salvation. 
For instance, they say, God having caused all the sin will 
be bound in simple justice to abolish it eventually; and 
when God wills that men shall not sin, then, say they, there 
will be an end to sin. Thus God is made out to be the only 
sinner, the wilful sinner, and man is represented as his tool 

R1777 : page 54 

or puppet— now influenced toward and compelled to do 



sin, and by and by to be influenced toward and compelled 
to do righteousness. 

Of course this theory has no use for a ransom. It puts 
the precious blood of Christ, which the Bible declares was 
shed for the remission of sins, at a large discount— it is "a 
common thing," of no more value than that of any other 
man. Indeed, in this view the ransom doctrine would be 
a stupendous fraud on God's part; for why punish men for 
sin which He had compelled, or why accept a ransom for 
his own sin. Rather, these claim, God will be bound in 
justice to change his course and release mankind, both 
from sin and from degradation and the death to which it 
has subjected them. 

The proposition seems so preposterous and blasphemous 
to Christian common sense, that a refutation would 
appear quite unnecessary were it not for the fact that the 
suggestions are so artfully covered with disquisitions on the 
wonderful love and providence of God, that some are 
caught by the bait and held in the snare,— because they fail 
to use their Christian common sense. 

The scripture upon the wresting of which this "new 
gospel" is built is part of 2 Cor. 5:18— "And all things are 
of God." Upon this the following daring exegesis was 
offered some time ago by one A. P. Adams, and is still 
urged upon Christians as "New Light." 

"When you think of it seriously, it seems that Paul 
was rather unguarded and careless in his language; it would 
seem as though he ought to have modified and limited his 
statement somewhat; say, for instance, all good things are of 
God. But no, the apostle makes the sweeping, unqualified 
statement— All things are of (literally, out of) God;' and 
so important did he consider this truth that he repeats it 
no less than seven distinct times. See Rom. 11:36; 1 Cor. 8:6; 
11:12; 2 Cor. 5:18; Eph. 1:11; Heb. 2:10. 

"Now, was the Apostle careless and a little too bold 
in these utterances, or did he mean just what he said, and 
are they true absolutely? I say unhesitatingly, Yes, to 
the latter questions. The more we learn of God's works 
and ways the more we shall understand that, in a sense, absolutely 
all things are of God, or, as some put it, God is in 
everything. This is the doctrine of God's universal, all-pervading, 
ever constant Providence. 'His tender mercies 
are over all his works.' 'He worketh all things after the 
counsel of his own will.' 

"This doctrine of God's providence is a most positive 
and important one; there is no doctrine of Scripture that 
is more plainly supported, by the most emphatic statements, 
repeated over and over again, as referred to above; and no 
Christian would think of doubting it, were it not for the 
fact that its full acceptance leads to some very startling 
and, to some, even shocking conclusions. 'What!' they 
say, 'all things are of God? absolutely all things? the bad 
things as well as the good? all the crime, and sin, and 
wickedness? Surely it is blasphemous to say that such 
things are of God! Paul never could have meant that we 
should take him absolutely; we must use our own judgment 



and reason in such matters, and correct these sweeping 
statements, for it cannot mean that absolutely all things 
are of God.' And yet that is the way the apostle puts it, 
over and over again. Was he ignorant and careless? No, 
he was neither; he was right, and the Scriptures and experience 
and observation fully bear him out in his statements, 
strange and startling as they may seem." 

Now, let Christian common sense get to work on this 
proposition. Its very first appearance, as the writer himself 
suggests, is startling— unpleasantly so, even shocking; 
and this first premonition of evil bids us beware and carefully 
prove what is the testimony of the inspired Word 
upon the subject. We find this expression, "all things," 
over eighty times in the Apostle Paul's epistles; and 
if it must be taken in an absolute, unqualified sense in the 
above instance, it would be equally necessary to so consider 
it in every other case, which course would lead us to some 
very strange and indeed absurd conclusions. For instance, 
the following— 

2 Cor. 4:15— "All things are for your sakes." What? 
"absolutely all things"— all the bad things and all the good 
things, all the wickedness and crime and sin and misery 
and degradation, and all the wealth and wisdom and honor 
of this world? This would be all things absolutely and 
without qualification— a manifest absurdity. The Apostle's 
reference is to the fact that all the arrangements of the divine 
plan and their harmonious operation through Christ 
are working together for our sakes— that the abundant grace 
of God bestowed upon us through Christ Jesus, might, 
through the thanksgiving of many [of the world to be 
blessed by our exaltation], redound to the glory of God. 

1 Cor. 8:6— "But to us there is one God, the Father, 
of whom are all things, ...and one Lord, Jesus Christ, 
by whom are all things." The statement here is as sweeping 
in one case as in the other. If "absolutely all things" 
—good, bad and indifferent— are "of God" (inspired or 
instigated by him), then it is just as true that "absolutely 
all things" (all the wicked and all the good things) are "by 
(performed by) Jesus Christ." Can Christian common sense 
accept that? 

1 Cor. 13:7— "Charity believeth all things, hopeth all 
things."— "Absolutely all things?" Does charity love or 
believe all falsehood, hypocrisy and deceit? and does she 
hope for more and more untruth and every deceivableness 
of unrighteousness? And is this the nature of that attribute 
which the Scriptures accredit to God, saying, "God 
is love?" 

1 Cor. 6:12— "All things are lawful unto me." What! 

R1778 : page 54 

"absolutely all things?" Is it lawful for me to cheat, to 
steal, to bear false witness, to kill, or to do evil that good 
might come? The Apostle Paul (Rom. 3:8) resents this 
latter charge brought against him, and calls it slander. 
Evidently he did not consider that "absolutely all things" 



were lawful unto him; nor did he suppose that any sane 

man would so interpret him. The matter under consideration 

was that of the brethren in Christ going to law with 

one another. This the Apostle Paul is opposing, not however 

on the ground that it is unlawful to do so, but that it 

is inexpedient, in that its tendency is to bring the cause of 

Christ into disrepute. "All things [that is, all the advantages 

of civil law, said he], are lawful unto me [I have as 

R1778 : page 55 

much right to its protection, etc., as any other man], but 

all things are not expedient [for the cause of Christ and for 

my personal influence as a representative of that cause]." 

"Why," then, he inquired, "do ye not rather take wrong 

...and suffer yourselves to be defrauded?" etc. The 

Apostle presupposed some common sense on the part of 

his readers; as, for instance, in 1 Cor. 15:27— "He [Jehovah] 

hath put all things under his [Christ's] feet." The 

statement is obviously not literal, but symbolic of the subjection 

of all authority and power to Christ. Common sense 

sees this; and another thing the Apostle Paul indicates 

which common sense ought to see is that his sweeping assertion 

that Jehovah hath put all things under Christ, is to 

be understood with that degree of allowance which would 

exclude Jehovah himself, who did put all things under him. 

This he says is "manifest:" it is manifest to that Christian 

common sense, which, instructed of God in the principles 

and purposes of his plan, recognizes Jehovah as God over all. 

Take another illustration: "One believeth that he may 
eat all things." (Rom. 14:2.) Shall we suppose that some in 
the Apostle's day believed in eating "absolutely all things?" 
—all the cattle and horses and men and houses and trees 
and mountains?— absolutely all things? Or shall we use a 
grain of sense and read the connections and find out that 
the Apostle was speaking by way of contrast of some whom 
he calls weak brethren, who would eat nothing but vegetables 
["herbs"], while others had no such conscientious scruples 
and, as we would say, "ate anything and everything." 

This same common sense, with even a very slight acquaintance 
with the principles and teachings of God's Word 
and with only a small measure of his spirit, should be able to 
see the blasphemy of this teaching and the absurdity of its 
application to the above scriptures. The Apostle James (1:13) 
says, "Let no man say when he is tempted, I am 
tempted of God; for God cannot be tempted with evil, 
neither tempteth he any man." And Isaiah (5:20,21) adds, 
"Woe unto them that call evil good [as they do who say 
that the evil in man is the working of God in him], and 
good evil [imputing evil to God whose "work is perfect" 
—only good]; that put darkness for light and light for 
darkness; that put bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter! 
Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes and prudent 
in their own sight!" It is indeed a serious thing to wrest 
the Scriptures. The Apostle Peter indicates that many who 
do so, do it to their own destruction.— 2 Pet. 3:16. 



But it is specially affirmed of 2 Cor. 5:18, that there 
at least the term "all things" is absolute and unqualified, 
—"And all things are of God who hath reconciled us to 
himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry 
of reconciliation." 

Surely nothing in the context affords ground for the 
supposition that the Apostle would charge God with the 
wickedness and sin of the world. On the contrary, he is 
showing our new standing in Christ, who "died for all" 
(verse 14), but would have us note that while the work of 
redemption was done by our Lord Jesus, it was planned by 
the Father himself. All the features of our redemption 
are of God himself, who reconciled us to himself by Christ 
Jesus. Christian common sense can see clearly enough 
that the various features of our salvation are the all things 
of which the Apostle writes: "All [these] things are of 
God." The statement of 1 Cor. 8:6,— "To us there is 
but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in 
him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, 
and we by him"— is a repetition of the same thought. 

The significance of 1 Cor. 11:12— "For as the woman 
is of the man, even so is the man also by the woman, but 
all things are of God"— is that neither is independent of 
the other, but both are dependent upon God, the Creator 
of both.— Verse 11. 

Eph. 1:9,10— "God hath purposed in himself that 
in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather 
together in one [under one head] all things in Christ, both 
which are in heaven, and which are on earth, even in him." 
This is parallel to the statement of 1 Cor. 15:27— "all 
things" in both cases signifying the whole intelligent creation, 
human and spiritual. Nor should this be understood 
to mean absolutely all men and all angels, for the Lord 
through the pen of the same writer has elsewhere shown us 
that only all who submit themselves to Christ willingly, 
and in harmony with the New Covenant, will be granted 
any place under Christ in the great eternity before us. All 
others, as unworthy, will be cut off from life in the Second 
Death. (Acts 3:23.) It is for this very reason that "the 
judgment of the great day"— the Millennial day— has been 
arranged,— to judge who are worthy and who unworthy of 
eternal life under Christ. Hence here the sense is, "that 
he might gather together all things [worthy] under Christ." 

The "all things" of the succeeding verse signifies, all 
the conditions and circumstances of the present and past, 
which, under God's overruling providence, are made to 
work together for the final accomplishment of the divine 
purpose. He is "operating all things according to the 
counsel of his own will." Even the wrath of men and devils 
while not in any sense of God shall thus be operated or 
controlled by God's providence and made to praise him; 
and the remainder, which would in any way thwart his ultimate 
purposes, he will restrain.— Psa. 76:10. 

Heb. 2:10 (Rotherham translation)— "For it was becoming 
in him for the sake of whom [are] the all things, 
and through means of whom [are] the all things, when many 



sons to glory he would lead, that the Princely Leader of 
their salvation he should through sufferings make complete." 
Nothing could be farther from the sense of this passage than 
to suppose that the Apostle meant "all the sin and crime 
and wickedness" of the world are for the sake of God and 
through the means of God. The thought, on the contrary, 
is that all things as they shall ultimately be re-united under 
Christ in God, are to be so for God's sake, because such has 
been his purpose, his pleasure; and that all will be thus 
brought to perfection and harmony by his means— his plan 
and his power carrying that plan to completeness through 

R1778 : page 56 

Christ Jesus, our Lord. Having such a plan, a part of 

which was the high exaltation of the Church to the divine 

nature, it was proper that he should thoroughly test the 

obedience of all so exalted. Even our Lord Jesus, always 

loyal and faithful, should be no less an overcomer, and no 

less proved, than the sons of glory of whom he is the Princely 

Leader. Wherefore God's arrangement included him 

also (as well as the many being brought under his leadership), 

that all who would attain to the grand perfection of 

the divine nature must be proved worthy through their endurance 

of suffering and resistance of sin. 

Rom. 1 1:36— "For of him, and through him, and 
to him, are all things." A glance at the preceding verses 
shows that the Apostle is not teaching that all 
sin, wickedness and crime are of and through and to the 
Lord; but, on the contrary, he refers to certain blessings 
and favors which are yet to come upon Israel. (Verses 25-27.) 
Though they sinned and with wicked hands slew the 
Lord of life and glory, and brought upon themselves God's 
wrath and indignation, which were manifest in their national 
rejection, trouble and overthrow, yet, after all, God 
has a way for bringing a blessing upon them, as well as 
upon all mankind, through Christ and his Church glorified 
(verses 30,31) who, during the Millennium, will extend 
mercy and full salvation to all, opening the blind eyes and 
unstopping the deaf ears. Such a view of God's wisdom 
and goodness leads the Apostle to the exclamation of verses 33-36 
which conclude with the assertion that this plan is 
not of human device, nor even by human assistance; for 
no man would have dreamed of such a wonderful blending 
of justice and mercy. But all this was planned of God, 
and is by him being carried out through Christ, and shall, 
when completed, be to his praise. 

The above passages, then, do not teach what the writings 
we criticise claim, but are in perfect harmony with 
every principle of truth and righteousness expressed in 
God's Word. 

GOD'S SUPERVISION OF ALL THINGS. 



That the eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding 
the evil and the good, is unquestionable. "The Word of 
God is a discerner of [even] the thoughts and intents of 
the heart: neither is there any creature that is not manifest 
in his sight, but all things are naked and opened unto the 
eyes of him with whom we have to do." (Prov. 15:3; Heb. 4:12,13.) 
That God could interfere with and stop all 
forms of evil is undoubtedly true; but that he has not yet 
so interfered is manifest; and that the time will come when 
all evil shall be fully restrained is his distinct promise. 
Hence it is as proper to say that God permits sin, wickedness 
and crime, as it would be false and slanderous to say 
that he causes, creates, instigates or is in any sense the 
author of such things. 

R1779 : page 56 

"Let no man say, when he is tempted, I am tempted 
of God; for God tempteth no man. ...Every man 
is tempted when he is drawn away of his own desires [for 
wealth, power, revenge, etc.] and enticed.. ..Do 
not err, my beloved brethren. Every good gift and every 
perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father 
of lights, with whom there is no change or the least variation. 
...For the wrath of man worketh not the 
righteousness [right will or mind] of God." (Jas. 1:13-20.) 
Nevertheless, God has repeatedly shown us how even 
the wrath of man has been overruled by him to accomplish 
his good purposes. 

The declaration of the Prophet (Psa. 76:9,10), which 
assures us that in the great time of trouble, when the Lord 
shall arise to judgment and to save all the meek of the 
earth, he will cause the wrath of man to praise him and 
the remainder, which would not praise him, shall be restrained, 
is only, we may believe, the expression of what 
has been the principle of God's dealing throughout all the 
past, since sin, wickedness and crime began. The truth 
is, that so far from creating sin or inciting to wickedness 
and crime, God's actions, where he has interfered at all, 
have been toward the restraint of sin. The deluge was for 
the restraint of sin; so also the destruction of Sodom, the 
destruction of Korah and his band, the destruction of the 
Canaanites; and the captivities, famines, etc., permitted to 
come upon Israel were designed to have the same effect. 

And in almost every instance the cause is stated. At 
the time of the deluge the whole world, except Noah and 
his family, had become corrupt, and their thoughts were 
evil continually. Of Sodom it is declared that the sin 
thereof was great, and God "took them away as he saw 
good." (Ezek. 16:50.) His way was good for two reasons: 
first, in that it made an example of them for the restraint 
of those who should afterward live ungodly (Jude 7; 2 Pet. 2:6); 
and second, because God's "due time" for bringing 
them to a knowledge of his gracious provision for them 
and for all under the New Covenant (sealed, or made of 
force, by the precious blood of Christ) had not yet come. 



Besides, in his due time, during the Millennium, they shall 
be awakened, when they and all shall be under the restraints 
of Christ's Kingdom, and have a full opportunity for attaining 
life everlasting.-See Ezek. 16:48-50,53-55,60-63. 

THE DESTRUCTION OF THE CANAANITES. 



In connection with the destruction of the Canaanitish 
nations (the Amorites, Hittites, Jebusites, etc.), we are told 
that the Lord would not bring Israel into their land, but left 
his people in Egypt (where they learned valuable lessons in 
humility), because the iniquity of the Canaanites was not 
yet come to the full. (Gen. 15:16.) Each nation, seemingly, 
was permitted to go only so far in sin and there was stopped. 
And the stopping of sin furnished repeated illustrations, 
types, suggestions, and outline hints of God's general plan 
for the final destruction of evil and the permanent establishment 
of righteousness in the world. 

Thus the due time for Israel's release from the bondage 
of Egypt (which fitly typified the bondage of Sin) was 
also the due time for a chastisement of Egypt, and the 

R1779 : page 57 

Lord made use of the opportunity to show his power both 

for the deliverance of his covenant people and for the overcoming 

of all opposition. Hence he "raised up" to the 

throne of Egypt that member of the royal family who was 

most bold and defiant, and who would resist God's plan 

the most and the longest, in order to make of him and his 

army a type of Satan and his evil servants ever seeking to 

enslave and hold in bondage those who desire to make a 

covenant with God. The deliverance of the one class by 

God's power and the overthrow of the other class were not 

only in harmony with principles of righteousness then, but 

they were also exemplifications of a fuller work of division 

and separation to be made in God's due time between him 

that serveth God and him that serveth him not— Mai. 3:18. 

So, too, the entrance of Canaan by Israel and the overthrow 
of the Canaanites, whose iniquity was come to the 
full, was not only a righteous act, but it was also a type of 
how, when the real land of promise (the earth— during the 
Millennial age) is reached, all the old sinful ways and institutions 
must be eradicated; and these things are typical 
also of the case of the Christ of to-day,— of how, when he 
by faith leaves the world, Egypt, and enters into possession 
of God's promises, he must wage a war of extermination 
against the old sinful propensities of his fallen nature. 

When thinking of God's course in permitting sin for 
a time, we should remember that the heart of fallen man is 
prone to sin— malice, envy, pride, strife, hatred, lasciviousness, 
and that the sinful propensities are ever ready to take 
advantage of any opportunity. That God has permitted 
opportunities for evil is, therefore, true; but that he inspires 



sinful thoughts, desires and deeds is utterly false. 

Let us glance at some illustrations cited as proof that 
God inspires sinful deeds. 

JOSEPH'S EXPERIENCES. 



Joseph's brethren sold him into slavery, and when they 
afterward found him the lord of all Egypt, they feared 
greatly the punishment of their crime. But to quiet their 
fears Joseph said, "Be not grieved nor angry with yourselves, 
that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before 
you to preserve life." (Gen. 45:5.) But, we answer, no 
ground is found here for charging the crime of Joseph's 
brethren upon the Almighty. Stephen, filled with the holy 
spirit, declared (Acts 7:9) that their course was not inspired 
by God, but by their own envy; which fully agrees with 
James 1:13,16. 

Shall we then say that Joseph made a mistake in the 
statement he made? No; both Joseph's and Stephen's 
statements are correct. Joseph's brethren were full of envy 
and they premeditated his murder, but God caused fear to 
operate upon the mind of one of them, through whose suggestion 
the envious brethren took a different course of action 
and sold Joseph for a slave. Thus God's part in no sense 
altered the moral responsibilities of Joseph's brethren; nor 
did it inspire an evil thought. It merely turned the evil 
thought into another channel (to sell, instead of to murder 
him), which would not conflict with God's plan in reference 
to Joseph, his servant. It is merely an illustration of 
God's power to overrule without interfering with the moral 
character of men. 

So, too, with all the other affairs of Joseph. Because 
Joseph was taken from prison to Pharaoh's throne, it is 
not to be argued that God was the inspiring cause of the 
criminal charge of Potiphar's wife, on account of which 
Joseph was sent to prison. On the contrary, God could 
have brought Joseph to the throne of Egypt in a hundred 
different ways wholly aside from Potiphar's wife and Joseph's 
envious brethren. The way adopted was the natural course 
of events which God overruled and turned; so that without 
interfering with the wills of any, His will for good was carried 
out. 

Thus it is that God causes even the wrath of man (the 
disposition of the sinful fallen race) to praise him, while 
the remainder which would interfere with his plans he restrains. 
When, in the future, it shall be made clearly 
manifest to all that the efforts of evil men against God and 
against his children were all overruled and used of God for 
some testing or other expedient blessing toward those who 
love and serve him, then the present wrath of men will 
begin to praise the Lord by showing his wisdom and 
goodness. 

JOB'S TRIAL AND INTEGRITY. 



It is claimed, but equally without foundation, that Job's 
case is another proof that God is the author of "all sin, 
wickedness and crime." The account given in the first and 
second chapters of the Book of Job, which represents Jehovah 
and Satan communing together relative to Job should 
be regarded as a dressing of facts in figurative language for 
the purpose of giving certain lessons with clearness. God 
would teach us that we are not to attribute our calamities 
to him, to evil or viciousness on his part; that they are 
merely permitted to come upon us for our testing, and 
ultimately for the good of all whose faithfulness and integrity 
toward him are proved thereby. 

How much Satan has to do with calamities of the present 
time (the storms, earthquakes, etc.), aside from his 
general precipitation of all these upon man through his 
leading of mother Eve into sin, is not clearly shown in the 
Scriptures.* But though it is intimated that he has much 
to do with all of man's calamities, both indirectly and directly, 
the lesson furnished in Job's case shows that, in 



*For this reason we cannot give to Heb. 2:14 the full force implied 
in our common version. Had Satan the power of death fully in 
his control, we may be sure that the saints of God would have perished 
from the earth long ago. However great a power he may exercise over 
the world, we know that his power does not extend to the Church. 
(John 7:30; 13:1; Phil. 1:25; Matt. 10:27-31.) In this instance 
it seems evident that the word translated power would have been better 
translated dominion. Satan's dominion is the dominion of death— i.e., 
death is the sure result to all who serve and obey him. 

See "Is Death a Penalty or a Consequence?" in our issue of 
Aug. 1, '94. 

R1779 : page 58 

the case of God's people at least, Satan's power is limited. 
He cannot destroy them at his will; he cannot touch them 
with adversity except as their God permits.* And we 
have the blessed assurance that he will permit only such 
calamities as will serve to develop us, and to test our trust 
and obedience. 

As Job said (chap. 2:10), so may all of God's people 
say under affliction: Shall we receive blessings of the Lord's 
hand and refuse chastisements and painful experiences if he 
sees best to permit them? Shall we not rather trust the 
Lord and patiently accept whatever experiences may come 



*See "Special Divine Providence," Aug. 1, '93; "The Book of 
Job," Mar. 15, '93. 



R1780 : page 58 

to us, knowing that he could interfere and protect us, and 
that whatever he permits must be for our good if we are 
rightly exercised under it?— Heb. 12:5-11. 

"SHALL THERE BE EVIL IN A CITY AND GOD HATH 
NOT DONE IT?" 



This text is also misused to prove that God is the instigator 
of all things, good and bad, including "sin, crime 
and wickedness." It is found in Amos 3:6. 

A literal rendering of it reads, Shall there be calamity 
in a city and the Lord have naught to do with it? Another 
similar text quoted in evidence is Isa. 45:7— "I make 
peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things." 

To comprehend these two texts, two things must be 
borne in mind: (1) the proper significance of the word 
"evil," and (2) the special covenant relationship of Israel 
to God. 

First, the primary signification of the word "evil" is, 
according to Webster, "Anything that directly or remotely 
causes suffering." Its synonyms are injury, mischief, harm, 
calamity. "Moral badness" is a secondary definition of the 
word "evil," by the same authority. 

This secondary meaning grows out of the first as a 
matter of course: all badness is evil, whether it implies 
moral perception and accountability or not. The decay or 
badness at the heart of an apple is evil, just as truly as the 
decay of morals at the heart of a man. The one is a physical 
evil implying no moral quality or responsibility; the 
other is a moral evil and does imply moral responsibility. 

How any one could from a good motive pass by the 
evident sense of the word "evil" in these texts of Scripture, 
and attempt to prove that the Almighty inspires all the 
sin, crime and wickedness of every city and time it is 
difficult to conjecture. It looks like a deliberate wresting 
of scripture to support a blasphemous theory. 

In this text the word "evil" stands in opposition to 
the word "peace," and hence carries the thought of trouble, 
war or some similar evil opposed to peace. If moral badness 
were meant, the contrasting word would be righteousness 
or goodness. This is a rule of language. 

Second, when we consider that these words of Jehovah 
relate specially to Israel, his typical and covenant people, we 
have a clear light thrown upon them. As God has a special 
interest in and care over all his Spiritual Israel, bound 
to him by the ties of the New Covenant, so he had a special 
care over Fleshly Israel as a nation, under the conditions 
of their Law Covenant, while that covenant was in force 
and before they as a people were cast off from his favor. 
Under the New Covenant each individual son of God is a 
subject of special supervision, chastisement and correction, 
while under their Law Covenant Israel as a nation was corrected 



and chastised. 

A reference to the terms of the covenant between God 
and the nation of Israel will show this. The Lord's declaration 
or promise to them was that, if they as a nation 
would observe the laws which he gave them, he would be 
their God, and their shield and defender from all evils, 
wars, pestilences, famines, etc., and would bless them with 
peace, prosperity and plenty. But if they should neglect 
God's statutes, and should become idolaters and promoters 
of evil like the nations about them, God declared, as a 
part of his covenant with them, that they should be afflicted 
with sicknesses, famines and pestilences, and be delivered 
into the hand of their enemies. See the particular description 
of the blessings promised and the evils threatened 
in Lev. 26:3-25; Deut. 11:13-28; 28:1-8,15-23,36-49. 

Although the Lord had so particularly warned Israel 
what to expect, they seem to have gotten the idea that their 
blessings and calamities were matters of chance and circumstance, 
as with the godless nations about them; and in the 
above text (Amos 3:6) God points out to them that, according 
to his covenant with them, their calamities could not 
come without his knowledge, nor without his permission. 
This is clear also from the context (verses 1-3): "Hear 
this word that the Lord hath spoken against you, O children 
of Israel— against the whole family which I brought 
up from the land of Egypt, saying, You only have I known 
[recognized, covenanted with] of all the families of the 
earth: therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities." 

Instead, therefore, of this passage teaching that Jehovah 
is the great sinner, the inspirer of all "wickedness, crime 
and sin" in every city, it teaches the very reverse of this— 
that the evils mentioned were calamities which God would 
permit or bring upon Israel because of their iniquities. 

The lesson of Isa. 45:7 is similar. The Lord, having 
chastened Israel by seventy years' captivity in Babylon, points 
out that the circumstances leading to their return to their 
own land are no less remarkable, none the less of him and 
by him, because accomplished through Cyrus, the heathen 
warrior. The spirit of war and the lust for power and gold 
which hold sway among men and nations are not inspired 
of God; but when the time for Israel's deliverance came, 
God permitted the hosts of the Medes and Persians to come 
against Babylon and prospered the way of the more noble 
and benevolent Cyrus to the seat of power, at the proper 
time to permit him to decree the restoration of Israel to 
their own land at the termination of the predicted seventy 
years of its desolation. 

R1780 : page 59 

In this case, as in others, no room is found for charging 
the Almighty with "sin, crime and wickedness." He in no 
degree interfered with the moral sense of Cyrus or of Israel, 
but, as always, merely took advantage of the aims and desires 
of carnal men and overruled their courses (not their 
motives) to the accomplishment of his plans to bless and 



heal his people, whom he had previously, according to his 
covenant, permitted Babylon to conquer and captivate. 
We assert on the foregoing evidence that God's Word 
conscientiously interpreted is a full vindication of the divine 
character; that even the texts cited to sustain the 
blasphemy clearly and emphatically contradict it; and we 
warn all to beware of theories— their own or other men's— 
which make necessary a defamation of the divine character 
for their support; that charge God with being the instigator 
and author of "all the sin and wickedness and crime" 
of the world, in order to prove that he must by and by retract 
and work righteousness in all, and preserve all everlastingly, 
and that without a ransom. Let God be true 
though it make every man a liar. 

GOD THE OMNIPOTENT. 



As surely as all men are fallen and imperfect, so surely 
their reasoning faculties are unsound, except as guided by 
the Lord's Word— "the spirit of a sound mind." But a certain 
class of thinkers, neglecting to use reason inside the 
bounds of God's revelation, entangle themselves in their 
own unsound reasonings. 

They ask: (1) Is not God all-wise? Certainly, we 
answer. (2) Is he not all-powerful? Assuredly, we reply. 
Well, then, say they, (3) if he be all-wise and all-powerful, 
can any thing occur in the world contrary to his will or 
contrary to his power? Must we not settle down to the 
conviction, held for many centuries past by people called 
Fatalists, that whatever happens, from a mosquito bite to 
an epidemic, or from a snowflake's fall to an earthquake 
or a tornado, is of God; and that all nature is fulfilling 
his will? Must we not surmise, too, that all the thoughts 
and deeds of men, both good and bad, are inspired 
of God? And if these arguments be admitted, are not all 
mankind like so much clay in Jehovah's hands, which he 
can and does fashion one way for good or the other way 
for evil? And if so, are not all our efforts for good or for 
evil futile? Since God is all powerful, who can resist his 
will for good or for ill? Is it not, therefore, the only wise 
course to stop all effort for good or for evil, and merely 
follow the good or bad impulses which arise within us? 

We answer that this is simply reasoning in a circle and 
without reference to God's revelation of his character and 
plan. To take such a view as the one we are criticizing 
was bad enough in the darkness of the remote past for those 
to whom Jehovah had offered no revelation concerning his 
will and plan, and his attitude toward sin and righteousness; 
but such a leaning to pure conjecture, totally ignoring 
Jehovah's own statement of his exercise of his power, 
is inexcusable among Christians to-day. 

While it is true that Jehovah has all power, and that 
none can resist his will, yet it is also true that he is not now 
exercising his power in every matter, nor compelling his 



will to be done in all things. 

Jehovah assures us that sin is rebellion against him and 
his just provision for our good; that though he has the 
power to destroy the sinners, he has a more gracious plan 
with reference to them, to be accomplished through Christ; 
and that though he could have made men otherwise, he preferred 
to give them the noble quality of intelligent beings, 
namely, free moral agency, or the power of choice between 
sin and righteousness. 

This quality of free moral agency thus inherent in the 
race must of necessity be brought to the test of choice, by 
the presentation of the alternatives of obedience or disobedience 
to the Lord; and for a wise purpose this test came 
first to our first progenitor, in whom we all were; and when 
he fell into sin and incurred its condemnation, St. Paul 
tells us that the sentence of death passed upon us all; for 
"who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one." 
(Rom. 5:12; Job 14:4.) Thus the whole human creation 
was made subject to frailty (to the inherent taint of sin and 
its condemnation to death), not willingly (for both the 

R1781 : page 59 

taint of sin and the condemnation passed upon them all before 
they were born), but by reason of him (Jehovah) who 
(by permitting the temptation and the fall in the beginning) 
hath subjected the same in hope (not hope on God's part, 
for he has knowledge,— but in subjecting man to frailty 
God, in his arrangements, gave man a basis for hope for a 
future deliverance from bondage to sin and death), that, 
as by the one man condemnation passed upon all men unto 
death, so also the free gift of pardon and life by one, Jesus 
Christ, might abound unto all (who would accept it in faith 
and obedience) and thus the whole creation (all the willing 
and obedient) shall (through Christ) be delivered from the 
bondage of corruption (death), into the glorious liberty of 
the children of God (freedom from sin and death). 

In permitting sin and its consequences for a time, God 
has subordinated his love of righteousness, his good pleasure, 
temporarily for man's experience and instruction in the 
principles of righteousness which underlie his government. 

During the present time, that we may see how the 
course of sin would result, the Lord ignores much that is 
abominable in his sight and does not swiftly mete out the 
deserved punishments. But he declares that "He will not 
always chide [reprove], neither will he keep [hold back, 
restrain] his anger forever." (Psa. 103:9.) Though it may 
at present appear as though the Lord is slack in the fulfilment 
of his promises, in regard to both well-doers and 
evil-doers, such is not the case. The Lord is not slack, as 
men count slackness, says the Apostle (2 Pet. 3:9), but is 
plenteous in mercy, not desiring that any should perish, 
but that all should turn unto him and live. Nevertheless, 
every good deed shall in due time be remembered and rewarded, 
and every malicious deed punished: "Vengeance 
is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord." 



R1781 : page 60 

God is merely biding his time, letting his will and 
word and character be misunderstood by some and misrepresented 
by others, letting men have an experience with 
doing their own wills and trying their own plans and theories, 
that thus the lesson of sin and its tendencies and results 
may be clearly seen and appreciated both by angels 
and by men. Then the Lord will arise and through his 
Anointed Son will display his power and make known his 
will. He will lay righteousness to the line and justice to 
the plummet and will sweep away every refuge of lies. (Isa. 28: 17.) 
His will shall then be done on earth as it is done 
in heaven. (Matt. 6:10.) A knowledge of and experience 
with righteousness will be forced upon men by Christ's 
Millennial reign; all shall come to a knowledge of the 
truth; all shall see the effects of righteousness clearly 
contrasted with their former experiences under sin and 
selfishness.* 

God has an object in thus permitting man to try rebellion 
and selfishness, and afterward under the Millennial 
reign of Christ forcing all to have an experience with the 
different results, when his will is done on earth as it is done 
in heaven. It is to select from among his creatures those 
who, after receiving full knowledge of righteousness, will 
love the good, the right, the pure, the holy, and abhor the 
sinful. God seeketh such to worship him; for they can and 
will worship him in spirit and in truth. After they have been 
fully proven, it is his good pleasure that they shall live forever, 
and he promises them everlasting life and communion with 
himself. All others he will cut off from life in the Second 
Death, because he has no pleasure in them that love evil: 
"Evil doers shall be cut off, but those that wait upon 
the Lord, they shall inherit the earth; for yet a little while, 
and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shalt diligently 
consider his place and it shall not be. But the meek shall 
inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance 
of peace."— Psa. 37:9-11. 

Thus we see the fallacy of the circle-reasoning of those 
who would judge the Lord merely by their own weaknesses 
and not by his Word. How grand the view which 
the Scriptures present— that Jehovah and his will and all 
his works are wholly on the side of purity, justice and truth, 
and that he is in no sense practicing or endorsing sin, or 
causing others to practice it, or in the slightest degree 
favoring it; but that, on the contrary, while reproving it and 
explaining its tendency and results, he for a time restrains his 
indignation and justice and permits men to work out their 
wilful, sinful plans, and to learn, if they will, from experience 
the lesson that sin is ever an evil, and to be shunned. 

GOD'S STATEMENT OF HIS WILL AND GOOD 
PLEASURE. 



Let us now permit God's Word to tell us the things 
which he brings to pass, and in which he takes pleasure. 

God has pleasure in uprightness.— 1 Chron. 29:17. 

He has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.— 
Psa. 35:27. 

He takes pleasure in his people who reverence him. 
Psa. 147:11; 149:4. 

It is his good pleasure to give the Kingdom to his little 
flock. -Luke 12:32. 

He called them to this Kingdom honor according to 
the good pleasure of his will.— Eph. 1:5. 

It is his good pleasure to work in those who are fully 
consecrated to him, to guide them both in willing and in 
doing his will.— Phil. 2:13. 

In such as he counts worthy he will fulfil all the good 
pleasure of his goodness.— 2 Thes. 1:11. 

The words, deeds and character of our Lord Jesus illustrated 
to us what pleases God. In him he was well 
pleased.-Matt. 3:17. 

Christ was an example for all who would please God. 
-1 Thes. 4:1. 

The testimony to those who have loved and served 
him in righteousness and truth is, that they pleased God. 
-Heb. 11:5. 

God is pleased with all the painful though joyous sacrifices 
which the "little flock" make in his service, 
following in the footsteps of their Redeemer and Lord. 
With such sacrifices God is well pleased.— Heb. 13:12-16. 

Of his own will begat he us by the Word of truth.— 
Jas. 1:18. 

Our Master declares that whosoever shall do the will 
of the Father is his brother.— Mark 3:35. 

And this is the will of God, even our sanctification. 
-1 Thes. 4:3; 5:14-23. 

Through the fall, we have lost appreciation of God's 
will, and hence are exhorted to study to prove what is that 
good, acceptable and perfect will of God.— Rom. 12:2. 

This is needful if we would stand complete in the will 
of God. -Col. 4:12. 

That we might be willing, if the will of God be so, to 
suffer for righteousness' sake.— 1 Pet. 3:17. 

It is also the will of God that by well-doing ye should 
put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.— 1 Pet. 2:15. 

This to the intent that we should not live henceforth 
according to the desires of men, but according to the will 
ofGod.-lPet. 4:2. 

Because he (and only he) that doeth the will of God 
abideth forever.— 1 John 2:17. 

Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of 
God [for righteousness' sake] commit the keeping of their 
souls in well-doing unto him, as unto a faithful Creator.— 
1 Pet. 4:19. 

And ye have need of patience [during this period in 
which Jehovah permits sin and opposition to his will to 
flourish], that after ye have done the will of God, ye might 



receive the promise.— Heb. 10:36. 

That we may have confidence in him, and respect and 
trust him, he has made known to us the mystery of his will 
(plan) concerning his good pleasure which he purposed in 



*See "The King's Highway"— last issue. 

R1781 : page 61 

himself— that in his due, full time he will subdue all things 
by and under Christ; that evil and sin are permitted to oppose 
his will only for a little season; that shortly the lessons 
because of which evil is now permitted to triumph will be 
learned; and that throughout all the ages to come righteousness, 
his will, shall be done.-Eph. 1:9,10; 2:7. 

This mystery of God's will, though still hidden from 
the world, was to be fully appreciated by his saints during 
this evil day and was to be the ground for their faith, patience 
and endurance. They were to wait for the Lord 
from heaven and to expect deliverance from evil, both for 
themselves and the world, through him who gave himself 
for our sins, that he might deliver us from the evil of this 
present period, according to the will of God our Father. 

Not only were the saints to have this knowledge of 
the coming triumph of Jehovah and righteousness, but they 
were to confess to the Lord in prayer their appreciation of 
the fact that present evil is not of his will, nor of his 
government, and their faith to the contrary that all holy 
desires will be fulfilled when his Kingdom has come and 
when his will is done on earth as it is now done in heaven. 
-Matt. 6:10. 

GOD'S PLEASURE TOWARD THE WORLD. 



God, our Savior, desires all men to be saved and to 
come to an accurate knowledge of the [this] truth.— 1 Tim. 2:4. 
-Diaglott. 

His good desires and plan, however, are all centred in 
Christ; hence he has appointed no other name by which 
we must be saved, and no other condition than faith in his 
blood (in his ransom-sacrifice) and obedience to his precepts 
of righteousness. No man can come unto the Father 
except by him. He that hath the Son hath life, and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not life.— John 14:6. 

To this end, the sympathetic love of Jehovah toward 
all his fallen, disobedient creatures was manifested in the 

R1782:page61 

gift of his Son to be our redemption price— even while we 
were yet sinners. For the same reason, as a part of the 
same will of Jehovah concerning men, he has arranged 



to establish his Kingdom on earth, and that his King and 
representative shall reign to bless men, to bring them to a 
knowledge of his goodness, his perfection, his hatred of sin 
and his desire toward all that they might be saved from 
death and come fully back into harmony with him, and 
of his provision through Christ for them all to do so. 

Yet God is not pleased to accept men without testing 
and proving them as to whether, after full knowledge, 
ability and choice, they will sincerely love the right and 
hate the wrong. Therefore he has been pleased to appoint 
a day [the Millennial Day] in the which he will judge the 
world in righteousness. The Judge of all is to be the 
Christ— Jesus and his Church; and the work shall be so 
thoroughly done that no lover of righteousness shall be 
sentenced to the Second Death, and no lover of evil shall 
escape that sentence.— Acts 3:23. 

The distinction of the incorrigible after the final test 
will be in demonstration of God's unceasing hatred of sin. 
He is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness. (Psa. 5:4.) 
"Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? 
saith the Lord God, and not that he should turn from 
his way and live?" "I have no pleasure in the death of 
him that dieth, saith the Lord God: wherefore turn and 
live ye." "As I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure 
in the death of the wicked; but that the wicked turn 
from his way and live."— Ezek. 18:23,32; 33:11. 

Having thus illustrated the use of Christian common 
sense in proving what the will of the Lord is as expressed 
in his Word, let us again commend to all the exhortation 
of the Apostle quoted above— "Wherefore be ye not unwise; 
...let no man deceive you;. ..walk as children 
of light," etc. And remember always that "the fruit of the 
spirit [of God] is in all goodness and righteousness and 
truth," and let no cunning sophistry of the evil one persuade 
us to ignore our Christian common sense in the study 
of the divine Word; for as the Apostle tells us (1 Tim. 4:1), 
"The spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times 
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing 
spirits and doctrines of devils:" let us not be of them to 
fall with them. Remembering also (1 John 3:8) that "he 
that committeth sin is of the devil," what shall we say of 
that doctrine which ascribes to Jehovah the authorship of 
"all the sin, crime and wickedness" in the world? Surely 
this doctrine is not of him, nor does it find shadow of support 
in his holy Word. 

"As for God, his way is perfect: the Word of the 
Lord is tried; he is a buckler to all those that trust in him." 
"Ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock, his 
work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment: a God of 
truth, and WITHOUT INIQUITY, just and right is he."-Psa. 18:30; 
Deut. 32:4. 



R1783 : page 61 



ZACCHEUS THE PUBLICAN. 

-MARCH 17; LUKE 19:1-10.- 

Golden Text— "The Son of man is come to seek 
and to save that which was lost."— Luke 19:10. 

SEVERAL observations in view of this narrative 
claim our special attention; viz., (1) The desire and 
earnest effort of the publican to learn of Jesus; (2) The 
courage and generous kindness of the Lord in running 
against the popular current of public sentiment to bless an 
outcast from the public favor; (3) The proper attitude of 
heart in coming to Jesus, as illustrated in the publican; and 
(4) The reward of obedient faith. 

Zaccheus was a Jew (verse 9). He was the chief among 
the publicans or gatherers of revenue for the Roman government. 
The taxes levied by the Romans on subject nations 
were farmed out to men of wealth, who, for a specified 
sum, paid at once into the Roman treasury, secured 
the privilege of collecting the taxes of a particular city or 

R1783 : page 62 

province. These contractors in turn engaged other subcontractors 
or tax-gatherers. This system gave the widest 
scope for extortion and justly elicited the general public 
condemnation, as through the abuses of the office the very 
name publican or tax-gatherer came to be associated with 
the idea of dishonesty and extortion. As a class, therefore, 
they were ostracized and despised, though doubtless there 
were some conscientious and upright publicans. 

Among them were many who seemed impressed by the 
Lord's public ministry and who heard him gladly. (See 
Luke 3:12; 5:29; 7:29; 15:1; 18:10.) Being cast off 
from the sympathies and friendship of the Jews in general, 
they were naturally less influenced by their prejudices and 
hence more ready to receive the truth. Zaccheus was so 
anxious to see the Lord that he made considerable effort to 
do so, and that effort was not unnoticed or unappreciated. 
Evidently it was not a lukewarm curiosity. 

(2) The Lord's courage in withstanding erroneous public 
sentiment is very marked. How bravely and how kindly 
he did it! and how heedless was he of the murmuring 
crowd who said, "He is gone to be guest with a man that 

is a sinner." So he would have his followers "mind not high 

things"— popular ideas, methods, etc.,— "but condescend 

to men of low estate"— the despised, the poor and the unpopular. 

He would have us identify ourselves with them 

fearlessly and openly. True Christian fortitude is a grace 

which dignifies and ennobles every soul that cultivates it. 

(3) The attitude of heart which Zaccheus manifested in 
coming to Jesus was that of an earnest seeker after truth and 
righteousness. He freely acknowledged and repented of his 
sins, and expressed his determination, not only to forsake 
them, but proposed also, so far as was in his power, to undo 



any damage done to others by restoring anything he had unjustly 
appropriated, and that with large interest— "four-fold." 
Probably this interest was measured by him by the 
amount of former extortions. 

That was surely a true repentance, and it brought the 
quick response of blessing— "This day is salvation come 
to this house." The additional phrase,— "forasmuch as 
he also is a son of Abraham,"— was in reference to the fact 
that the gospel was to be preached first to the house of Israel 
—"to the Jew first, and afterward to the Gentile." It 
was in keeping with the Lord's statement on another occasion, 
"I am not sent, but to the lost sheep of the house of 
Israel" (Matt. 15:24), and his commission to the apostles 
—"Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city 
of the Samaritans enter ye not." (Matt. 10:5.) The Syro-Phoenician 
woman might eat of the crumbs (of truth) 
that fell from the rich man's (the Jews') table, but it was 
not meet to take the children's meat and give it to the (Gentile) 
dogs (Matt. 15:26); and when the apostles were finally 
sent to preach the gospel to all the world they were told 
to begin at Jerusalem. 

Why? Because the Lord strictly observed the times 
and seasons which were indicated in the Father's plan. A 

R1784:page62 

certain time of special and exclusive favor was determined 
upon Israel (Dan. 9:24-27), and that time must be closely 
observed. So our Lord would have us carefully note the 
times and seasons and all the directions of the divine plan 
if we would be in co-operation with him. Such work is 
the only work that will abide (1 Cor. 3:12-14) and that 
will meet the divine approval. 

Two words in the golden text are very notable— "seek" 
and "save." The Lord was seeking to reach the heart of 
Zaccheus when he (at that time a man distinguished and 
very prominent before the public as a great prophet and teacher) 
offered to be the guest of one popularly despised and 
hated. The gracious offer, together with the tone and manner 
of a perfect gentleman, seemed at once to win his heart. 
Ah, there is a way to many a heart if we seek to find it. 
Blunt, coarse, rough ways are repellant, not winsome; and 
the heart must be won before the soul can be saved; for 
"with the heart man believeth unto righteousness." 

Oh, with what care should we deal with the hearts of men, 
when we know that eternal interests are at stake. We need 
to deal with them carefully, not only to win them for Christ, 
but also to help to hold them for Christ against the strong 
current of temptation from the world, the flesh and the devil. 
And if we need to exercise this care to win men for Christ 
by the manifestation of his spirit of love and kindness in 
us, how much greater is the responsibility of helping to hold 
them for Christ and to speed them onward in the Christian 
life! When the feet of a weak brother have well nigh slipped 
and he is stumbling over the stones of severe trials, how 
disastrous may be the effects of unkindness or impatience 



or any lack of manifestation of the Master's spirit towards 
him; and how great is the responsibility thus incurred! 
Let us imitate the Master's care in seeking the heart; for the 
seeking is more than half the work of saving, so far as the 
will of the individual is concerned. 



R1782:page62 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I read with interest your article, 
"The prize set before us," in TOWER of July 1st, '94. 
There are still features of it, however, which are not clearly 
seen. It is obvious that God's requirements of obedience 
are the same in all ages, whatever the reward may be, 
whether the earthly or the heavenly; but the immortality 
that was "brought to light in the gospel" has not been 
understood during the last eighteen hundred years as we 
now understand it. Many who gave their lives in the service 
of the Master were believers in the innate immortality 
of man, and expected at death to be translated and be as 
the angels. Not dreaming of the high privilege of being 
made partakers of the divine nature, they did not comprehend 
the philosophy of surrendering the human in order 
to obtain the divine, yet virtually did give their lives in 
his service as they understood service, though really propagating 
the errors (as we now see) of immortality, hell fire, 
etc. The question is, did God overlook these errors and 
reckon their intentions as acceptable? and will he grant to 
them that which they never expected? 

[REPLY.— Let us reason out our answer, carefully 
guarding every conclusion by the teachings of the inspired 
Scriptures, that our conclusions be not merely our own 
judgment, but the mind of God on the subject. 

(1) Justification, by faith in Christ as Redeemer, was 
indispensable then as it is now. Whether or not the philosophy 
of the ransom was clearly seen in all its details then 

or now is not the question; but whether or not the FACT is 
accepted, that we are fallen from divine favor into sin and 
under its penalty, death, and that the death of our Lord as 
our ransom-price brings forgiveness and reconciliation to 
all who believe that fact and strive to forsake sin. 

R1782:page63 

(2) God's will for his believing people justified by 
faith in the ransom is still, and always has been, the same, 
as the Apostle stated it; viz., "This is the will of God 
concerning you, even your sanctification." 

(3) To produce this sanctification in believers God 

has given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, 
and declares that it is the truth of his Word that is to 



produce the sanctification of character which is acceptable 
to him. 

(4) The question then is, Did God's people of the 

past have a sufficiency of the truth to produce sanctification 
of character, acceptable to God? 

We answer that the sanctification required by the Lord's 
call in this age is that we be conformed to the image of his 
Son, our Redeemer. We have reason to believe that some 
all the way along these past eighteen centuries have attained 
to this requirement, and hence have been acceptable with 
God. They did not need as much truth to sanctify them 
as they would require if they lived in the present time, 
when the world, the flesh and the devil are quickened by 
knowledge and selfishness into such activity as was never 
before known. Ah! it requires a great deal of truth to 
stand firmly as a soldier of the cross to-day, when Satan is 
spreading snares and traps through "higher criticism," 
falsely so-called; for it is lower criticism from such as are 
mentioned by the Apostle as blind and unable to see afar 
off since they have forgotten that they were purged from 
their old sins— from Adamic condemnation— and instead 
have reached the conclusion that man's fall has been upward 
and that hence he needs no redemption with the 
precious blood of Christ.- 1 Cor. 1:18-20; 2:6-12. 

(5) Therefore the amount of truth now needed and 

supplied to God's household, and necessary to their sanctification 

and protection from the foretold "scoffers" of 

the end of this age, who even deny that the Lord bought 

them (2 Pet. 2:1), is much more than was necessary or 

provided to those in former times equally dear to God, and 

equally acceptable in sanctified character. 

(6) As the apostles declared, the peculiar trials of the 
end of this age necessitate the whole armor of God that 
the man of God may be thoroughly furnished. And now 
to be in darkness, in ignorance of the divine plan, would 
not only mean that we are exposed to attack and liable to 
fall, but furthermore, it would imply that we are not of the 
"brethren" who it is declared will not be in darkness 
now, and that we are not of the "household of faith" 
which it is declared will now be specially fed with "meat 
in due season"— "things new and old."] 

Another question: Those who in their lifetime consecrated 
their lives to God, but who, owing to infirmities 
or environments, were never able to comply fully with their 
consecration,— by what fires are they to be purified? or will 
they simply drop back to the earthly plane (I speak of those 
of the past)? or shall they go into the land of silence? or 
what? It is hard for me to see how these two classes [the 
"little flock" of overcomers and the "great company"] 
have been forming all along during the age since the 
first advent, without the knowledge necessary to fit them 
for either. If you deem it profitable to the "little flock" 
to give us through the TOWER an explanation of the way 
the Lord has been perfecting these classes before the present 
light was seen, please do so. 

[REPLY.— The latter part of this question we will consider 



answered with the previous one; the former part we 
will now consider. 

It seems to us that any who have no opportunity for 
suffering with Christ or rendering service cannot be of those 
"called;" for the terms are distinctly stated in the inspired 
Word,— If we suffer with Him, we shall also reign 
with him; the sufferings of this present time work out for 
us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory 
(2 Tim. 2:12; 2 Cor. 4:17); we are heirs of God and joint-heirs 
with Jesus Christ our Lord, if so be that we suffer 
with him, that we may also be glorified together (Rom. 8:17); 
and as "the spirit testifies beforehand, the sufferings 
of Christ and the glory that should follow," and as in our 
Lord's case it was needful that he should suffer before entering 
his glory, so those whom he redeemed and then 
called to be his joint-heirs must be "partakers of Christ's 
sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed ye may be 
glad also with exceeding joy."— 1 Pet. 1:11; Acts 17:13; 
1 Pet. 4:13. 

These sufferings are not such as are common to humanity 
—sickness, etc., incidental to sin and its penalty death 
—but sufferings for Christ's sake, which means activity in 
Christ's service. Whoever, therefore, can find no opportunity 

R1783 : page 63 

to render service to Christ and to suffer something of 
self-denial, etc., in that service, has no opportunity for 
making a calling and election sure, and hence may consider 
himself as not being one of those "called" to suffer and 
afterward to reign. 

But having drawn these lines sharply, according to the 
apostolic copy, let us note for a moment how many opportunities 
are afforded us for service and suffering. All may 
not suffer in exactly the same way, nor for the same 
cause, although it be still for God's cause. The Apostle 
shows this, saying, "Ye endured a great fight of afflictions, 
partly whilst ye were made a gazingstock both by reproaches 
and afflictions; and partly whilst ye became companions 
of them that were so used." 

Who can not suffer in one or the other of these ways, 
if he be willing? If he have the ability and opportunity 
and will use them in the direct service of the truth— either 
by telling the gospel orally or by circulating the message 
in printed form or by writing of it to his friends, he will surely 
bring upon himself the disfavor of neighbors and friends, 
and persecution open or secret. He will suffer for his faithfulness 
even though he "suffer joyfully." If he have no ability as 
a public speaker, or a private talker, if he cannot write, if he 
be lame or sick, so as to be unable to circulate the printed 
page, he can at least share the reproaches of the truth by 
declaring himself the friend of the Lord and of those 
soldiers of the cross who are publishing the truth and being 
reviled therefor. Thus, at very least, all can suffer who 
will, and all will suffer who have been begotten of the truth 



R1783 : page 64 

and are not ashamed of the Lord, the brethren and the 
truth. And he that is ashamed is not fit for the Kingdom. 

However, let our service and suffering be according to 
wisdom and love— to as good purpose as possible. In our 
services we should be careful not to interfere with the 
liberties of others. "Let none of you suffer as a busybody 
in other men's matters." And let us also be careful not to 
make our sufferings subjects for boasting, as though seeking 
the praise of men, or of continual complainings to 
other members who are themselves perhaps suffering more 
acutely. If we suffer, let it be as unto the Lord. 

But perhaps the question is more respecting the ability 
to comply fully, than the ability to comply at all. 

We answer, if we can comply at all (and we have 
shown that all can comply), then we can comply fully. It 
is not a question of, Can we comply? but of Will we 
comply? and only those who will and do will be classed as 
"overcomers" and win the great "prize of our high calling." 
Such as fail to go on to serve and to suffer in one of 
the ways specified by the Apostle (yet who do not "draw 
back" in the sense of repudiating the precious blood of 
Christ, nor in the sense of returning to "wilful sin" as 
"the sow that was washed to wallowing in the mire"), will 
be of the "great company"* who will come up to life through 
great tribulation, and who will "suffer loss"— the loss of 
the Kingdom glory and divine nature.— 1 Cor. 3:15.] 

A further inquiry: In your judgment, should a man 
be baptized into the death of Christ who is so related 
to his family and to society that his time is necessarily 
taken up with worldly duties and cares, and who is consequently 
unable to do much harvest work, although if his 
own preferences were consulted and it were not for his 
family, he would much prefer to engage in harvest work? 
Has a man who has consecrated himself to his Father's 
business any right to engage in the ordinary duties of life? 
Can he do so and fulfill his baptismal vow? 

Dear Brother, you can imagine how deeply I feel on 
this subject, when I tell you the case is my own. I have 
neglected baptism because I feared to take the vow lest I 
should fail to fulfill its obligations. Oh, that I knew the 
will of God concerning me! If you can help me into the 
light in this matter I shall be glad. 

I send greeting to you and Sister Russell to whom I owe 
so much. May the Lord long spare you to feed the flock. 

REPLY.— It is our selves, dear Brother, our hearts, our 
all (justified by our Redeemer's merit), that we present to the 
Lord in baptism. And it is this that God accepts. Whether 
therefore your all be little or very little, it is your all— all 
that you can render to the Lord, consistent with those obligations 
of life which he recognizes with approval. And 
amongst these are the duties of a husband and father, if you 
have such obligations when the truth reaches you. But 
after having consecrated himself to the Lord it would certainly 
be consistent for one to avoid all provisions for the flesh 



that would war against his own spiritual welfare or hinder 
his opportunities for spending his time and energy in the 
Lord's service, in accordance with his baptismal covenant. 

Thus seen, God's requirements are a "reasonable 
service;" and we advise, dear Brother, that you enter it 
promptly and render such service as you can, earnestly, 
heartily, prayerfully; and if faithful in the little opportunities, 
no doubt God will open to you greater ones.] 

Your humble brother who desires to do the Master's 
will, W. A. 



*Concerning these and the trouble through which they pass, see 
M. DAWN, VOL. I., and "TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES, 
pp. 59-61. 

page 64 

MY DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-In your issue of TOWER 
of January 1st there is an article, "On Trial for Life," 
which has given me no little spiritual confusion. I write 
to see if you can extricate me from the same. 

Do you mean to teach that the saint falling away now 
will receive the Second Death, so that he will have no 
chance with the balance of the world, in the incoming 
Millennium, for restoration to the perfect human nature? 

Brother G , of this place, one of the old time saints, 

as you know, says you do not so teach; but I have read 
the article again and again, and confess freely that I cannot 
understand you otherwise. 

None of us are born of the spirit till we die— then 
we become partakers of the divine nature. If we fail 
in obtaining this prize, or the lower spiritual nature, then 
it seems to me that we ought, at least, to be given equal 
chance with the balance of the world. For instance, I am 
now fifty-five years of age, and have been a member of the 
Missionary Baptist church twenty-six years. Should I fail 
quite to reach the mark, or should I fail entirely in the 
spirit-begotten nature, then to be cut off from any chance, 
with the balance of the world, in the dispensation now 
being ushered in, of obtaining the state of perfect human 
nature, would not only not be Godlike, but it would be 
unreasonable. My position has been, that only those who 
hold out faithfully to the end are the truly regenerate. 

Please explain this, my brother. [Perhaps the answer 
to the above letter will meet your case.— ED] I have learned 
many grand truths from your writings, for which I thank 
God and take courage. I remain sincerely yours, in the 
patience and tribulation of the saints, J. M. C. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Glad to see the TOWER out 
on Dress Parade. It looks nice. I fancy Babylon just over 
the hill under the dark sky being shaken and rent by the 



overruling elements and earthquakes underneath. They 
cannot from there see the sun of righteousness that is visible 
only to those on Zion's Tower. 

The saving of nickels since last remittance reaches only 
80 cents to date, but I supply a sum to make the amount 
of $2.00, herewith enclosed as "Good Hope" fund increase. 

Regarding German Quarterly, I will pledge myself for 
twelve copies. I think it a good suggestion. 

While it is yet day, we should deny ourselves all we 
can and do what we can to hasten the work of our Master. 
It is a blessed privilege, and for every such gift the true 
child of God receives a blessing even in this world, and, I 
believe, will receive a far greater blessing and reward in the 
Kingdom. Out of my little I mean to give yet more from 
this time forth, relying upon the One to help me who has 
so graciously fed me the past three years with the spiritual 
food in due season. I would that all people might read 
and receive from M. DAWNS the same rich blessing. Now 
I can love God as I never could have loved him before. 

I am glad to say the Church here is a unit, in perfect 
harmony with its teachings of what saith the Scripture. 

Yours in Christian love, J. A. BOHNET. 



page 65 

VOL. XVI. MARCH 15, 1895. No. 6. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items— Extra Towers, Calendars, 

Wall Rolls, etc 66 

Views from the Tower— 67 

The Religious View 67 

The Jewish View 70 

Poem: Some Better Things 70 

The Memorial Supper 71 

"Come, My People." 72 

Bible Study: Love the Essence of Divine Law 74 

Bible Study: Review 75 

Encouraging Letters 75 

page 66 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 



MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



"CHRISTIAN COMMON SENSE" in our last issue seems to 
have met the wants of God's people as an answer to the Satanic doctrine 
that God is the instigator and author of "all the sin; wickedness and 
crime of the world." We have an extra supply of the last TOWER and 
will send extra copies free to such as will promise to give or loan them 
amongst Christian people afflicted with this revived theosophic delusion. 

CALENDARS. We have many inquiries for calendars for '95, 
such as we supplied at very low prices for '93 and '94. In reply: We 
failed to secure any for '95 at special prices and hence got none. Those 
who desire can procure them at the retail price through their nearest 
bookseller. 

WALL ROLLS. --We continue to supply the Wall Rolls,-60 
cents each, postage paid by us. Two kinds, "Strength and Sunshine 
for Every Day," and "Precept, Prayer, Promise and Praise." Each presents 
Scripture, etc., for each day— repeating monthly. 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. -Do not forget these. They preach 
the glad tidings in few words wherever they go; to your correspondents, 
as well as to postmen, and others enroute. Price, post-paid, 25 for 10 
cents, 100 for 25 cents. 

TRACTS IN GOOD SUPPLY NOW. Order freely all you 
can and will use judiciously. 

BIBLES AND BIBLE STUDY HELPS at specially low 
prices. Send for catalogue. 



R1784:page67 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



DR. Horton, in the Methodist Times, says:— "On 

the church of England it is impossible to rely. 

She is permeated with the Roman virus. Her clergy denounce 

the Reformation. Whatever love they had for the 

gospel of Nazareth and the Son of Man is dying away. 

They are fascinated by the gospel of Rome and the Vicegerent 

of Christ. The apostasy is not yet complete, but 

its progress is amazing. I venture to say that but for the 

accessions to the church of England from the Nonconformist 

churches at this time Protestantism would be as good as 

dead within her borders. And those accessions cannot continue. 

Presently the Nonconformist churches will claim 

and use their own sons, and will not be able to spare them 

for a Romanised Establishment. The hope of England lies 



in the Free churches, in the homes of the Spirit of Christ 
which have been provided and kept by the Spirit of God 
against this time." 



On Feb. 25, Archbishop Ireland addressed the students 
of the University of Chicago in the chapel,— Subject, 
"Religion, Science and Good Citizenship." 

The Chicago University is under Baptist patronage. 
What Romanism does not know about true "Religion, Science 
and Good Citizenship" would fill many volumes; and, 
judging from the past, a Roman Catholic Arch-bishop should 
make a remarkable instructor upon these subjects!! 

According to an article which has been going the 
rounds of the Press over the signature A. Tyler, this same 
Bishop Ireland on the occasion of his last visit to Rome encouraged 
the Cardinals there in the following (patriotic?) 
words:— 

"We can have America in ten years, and I give three 
points for your consideration— the Indian, the negro, and 
the public schools. The importance of the possession of 
America cannot be overestimated. It is a providential nation. 
The movements of the modern world have their highest 
tension in the United States. The natural order is seen 
here in its best, and here displays its fullest strength. The 
church, unhampered by dictates of government or by despotic 
custom, can, with freedom, choose its arms, and, 
making straight for the opposing foe, bring the contest to a 
speedier close. I am aware there are those among us who 
do not partake of my hopefulness. What can be done, they 
say, in America? Catholics are a handful. What can be 
wanting? Why should we fear or hesitate? We number 
10,000,000— a powerful army, if the forces are well drilled, 
and their latent strength put in action. Catholics in America 
are loyal to the faith, brave in confessing it, self-sacrificing 
in its interests, devoted to their chieftains; when 
combined efforts are called for, ready, and at all times 
prompt to obey when orders are given." 



As a sign of the times we note that the Socialists of 
France are adopting a form of civil baptism for their children. 
In the town of St. Denis, where socialism has quite 
a hold, the Mayor, himself a socialist, recently baptised as 
many as nine children in one day— using a socialist formula, 
with the express statement that the parents desired to 
withdraw them from the guardianship of the church. The 
account says, "The god-parents took a pledge to bring up 
the children 'in the love of labor and liberty and the sentiment 
of fraternity necessary to make them good citizens 
and fervent republicans.'" 

Not only with these, but with many of the "leading 
lights" here, who follow more conservative lines, the idea 
is growing, that "the doctrines of Christ" and "faith 



in his blood" belong to a religion which has been outgrown; 

and that the true religion for the future, and the 

only one that will gain the attention of the masses, is the 

R1784:page68 

gospel of social revolution— humanitarianism and utilitarianism. 
All who see clearly the true gospel of redemption 
through the precious blood and as a result, by and by, the 
offer to all men of restitution (Acts 3:21), and these alone, are 
prepared to point out clearly to the deluded that they have 
mistaken the false, earthly systems of men for the Church 
of God whose names are written in heaven, and that the 
only hope of the groaning creation is described by St. 
James (Chap. 5:7,8) and St. Paul. -Rom. 8:22,21. 

THE HIGHER CRITICS IN BAD COMPANY. 



"It has just leaked out," says Truth, "that at a Baptist 
congress in Detroit lately the Higher Critics got a deserved 
set-back. This is the story. 

"President Harper [of Chicago University] and President 
Andrews, of Brown University, with others, had been 
advocating the methods of modern Higher Criticism, and 
saying that the last twenty-seven chapters of Isaiah were 
written by some other man, when Prof. Howard Osgood of 
Rochester arose in reply. He spoke briefly, completely 
answered the Higher Critics, and then said, I have here 
an article written almost exactly one hundred years ago. I 
will read it and tell you the author.' He read a criticism 
on the Bible, and especially on Isaiah, advocating a double 
authorship of the latter, in almost exactly the language of 
Harper and his friends. He made a few comments upon 
the clearness of the ideas of the author, and showed his 
teachings to be identical with modern Higher Criticism. 
He then exclaimed after a long pause, The author of this 
paper was Thomas Paine.' The effect was wonderful. 
There was a look of surprise on the faces of the critics, and 
then, as the applause rang out, they looked as though they 
would like to escape. ...It was carefully kept out 
of the papers for some reason." 



Prof. Drummond, in his "Natural Law in the Spiritual 
World," after cautiously advancing the doctrine of 
Evolution— so guardedly that many of his readers absorbed 
his suggestions without realizing what they implied of Scripture 
contradiction— has now thrown off the mask and declares 
his anti-Scriptural views in his new book, "The Ascent 
of Man." 

How could we expect this learned gentleman (See Isa. 29:14) 
to be interested in, or to appreciate, the Bible doctrines 
of redemption and restitution from the FALL? (See 



Acts 3:21.) Far easier for him would it be to forget all 
the greatness of the past— the statesmanship of Moses, the 
wisdom of Solomon and Confucius, the logic of Paul and 
Socrates and Plato; the poetry of the Psalmist, Job and 
Shakespeare; the "lost arts" of manufacture, elastic glass, 
tempered copper and Damascus steel; and the musicians 
and sculptors and painters of the past; and to think only 
of the greatness of the present so-called "brain-age." Far 
easier would it be for him to conclude that St. Peter and 
"all the holy prophets since the world began" were mistaken, 
deluded, and that he and all the "higher critics" 
are correct. Because, forsooth, the "times of restitution" 
which Peter and all the holy prophets and apostles hold 

R1785 : page 68 

forth as the hope of the world, would, according to these 
self-styled critics, be a return to ape-hood. Truly the words 
of the Lord are fulfilled— "The wisdom of their wise men 
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men 
shall be hid." 

THE CATHOLIC CHURCH AND THE SOCIAL STRUGGLE. 



"In a recent number of the Forum, Prof. Goldwin 
Smith directed attention to the belief current throughout 
Europe that a wide-reaching and violent social upheaval is 
not distant. Whether the movement will result merely in 
temporary collision and disorder, or in complete revolution, 
depends of course upon the relative strength of the disruptive 
agencies and of the forces arrayed upon the side of the 
existing order. At first sight an immense preponderance 
of material power would be attributed to the upholders of 
the present social system, but the history of the French Revolution 
proves that such preponderance cannot be maintained 
unless there is a corresponding moral power behind 
it. That this moral support must come mainly from the 
Roman Catholic Church is the averment made in an interesting 
article contributed by Mr. Charles Robinson to the 
American Magazine of Civics. 

"It would be, indeed, a mistake to say that no European 
Catholics are infected with socialistic doctrines. A 
wing of the Centrist or Catholic party in Germany has 
evinced considerable sympathy with socialism, and the same 
thing may be said of a section of the Clerical party in Belgium. 
These sporadic phenomena are doubtless explicable 
by the fact that Catholics and Socialists encountered for 
many years in Belgium a common opponent in the liberalism 
of M. Frere-Orban, and in Germany a common oppressor 
in Prince Bismark. Such inclinations, however, to 
fellowship in feeling and action seem destined to be transient, 
for the reason that the causes which produced them 
have ceased to operate. Liberalism of the Frere-Orban 
type is now almost extinct in Belgium, and Bismark made 



the journey to Canossa before he retired from public life. 
Moreover, the head of the Church of Rome, whom every 
Catholic is bound to obey, has declared himself of late in 
the most distinct and authoritative terms on the side of the 
social system which has individualism for its basic principle. 
Catholicism, therefore, is already in theory, and will presently 
become in fact, a unit in resistance to the social solvents 
which range from the collectivism that professes to 
seek the fulfilment of its aims by constitutional means alone, 
to anarchy of the most irrational and malignant type. 

"On the other hand, no Protestant denomination has 
yet taken an unequivocal position with regard to the contest 
between socialism and individualism. Not even in Germany 
have the so-called Christian Socialists, among whom 
Chaplain Stacker has been so conspicuous, received any official 
rebuke from the Lutheran and Evangelical churches. 
Although, too, we might deem it probable that most of the 
Protestant sects will be eventually enlisted among the protective 
forces of society, yet, as Mr. Robinson points out, there 
can be nothing simultaneous, coherent, and effectual in their 
action, owing to their innumerable subdivisions and their 
traditional dissensions. The moral support, then, which is 
indispensable to the retention of material power by the defenders 
of the existing order, must come principally from 
the Church of Rome. In a word, it is not liberalism, as 
Gambetta thought, but socialism that may see in Catholicism 
its chief enemy. 

"Mr. Robinson does not fail to note the striking change 
in the attitude of European statesmen toward the Catholic 

R1785 : page 69 

Church, since they have begun to apprehend the approach 
of a revolutionary epoch. Crispi in Italy and Castelar in 
Spain have publicly acknowledged the necessity of securing 
the cooperation of Catholicism, if the politico-social fabric 
reared on parliamentary institutions and the individual right 
of property is to be upheld. The Opportunists, who formerly 
were the most implacable assailants of the Catholic 
Church in France, are now disposed to welcome the conciliatory 
overtures of Leo XIII. and to form a species of alliance 
with the so-called "rallied" Republicans. In the 
Reichstag only the other day a bill permitting the Jesuits to 
resume educational functions in Germany was passed for the 
second time; and, should it now be sanctioned by the Bundesrath, 
the last vestige of the Falk legislation, aimed against 
Catholics, will have disappeared. These incidents are indications 
of a general awakening to the magnitude of the 
service which the Catholic Church may render, should the 
existing social system be seriously threatened." 
—New York Sun. 



Protestants are rapidly preparing for federative union 
and to take a hand in protecting both the good and the 



bad of the present social structure. The world, especially 

the rich and aristocratic class, is turning to the great religious 

systems for help. And religious people generally are 

and will more and more be inclined to assist, because they 

clearly see that the wreck of society would be a general calamity 

to the poor as well as to the rich; and because they 

believe that it would greatly retard mission work for the 

conversion of the world— which they think to be their special 

commission; and all this because they do not recognize 

the times in which we are living. As with the Jews in the end 

of their age, they "know not the time of their visitation." 

They know not that the Lord's time has come for the 

transfer of the control of earth from the princes and kings 

of the earth (and especially from the great Prince of this 

world, who now worketh in the hearts of the children of 

disobedience— 1 Thes. 5:2-4; 2 Pet. 3:10) to the control 

of Christ, the King of kings and Lord of lords, "whose 

right it is." 

"But ye [faithful, watching], brethren, are not in darkness 
that that day should overtake you as a thief"— although 
it will come upon all others as a thief and a snare.— 
1 Thes. 5:1-5. 

Although you are powerless to rectify the evils of the 
present social order, while numbers and power and influence 
uphold it, you are waiting for God to do this according 
to his promise, and not in vain you pray continually, 
"Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth as it is 
[done] in heaven." You know, too, that the conversion of 
the world under present conditions is hopeless, and you are 
waiting for the King of glory to take full possession and to 
bless all the families of the earth with the knowledge of the 
Lord, which shall fill the whole earth as the waters cover 
the great deep. 

While your influence must always be for godliness, for 
contentment and for peace, yet you may sustain your hearts 
and the hearts of others with the Lord's promises of deliverance. 
And even though the trouble be severe, "such as 
was not since there was a nation," you need fear no evil; 
for the Lord is the refuge and habitation of his people, and 
for them all things shall work together for good. Your 
hearts are sustained by such promises and by the prospect 
of the glory and blessing of the Millennial age which will 
be thus introduced by— 

"The signs and groanings promised 
To precede a second birth." 

"Wait ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that 
I rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather 
[all] the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to 
pour upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce anger: 
for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my 
jealousy [justice, anger]. For then [following this great 
trouble, upon the ruins of present systems, I, the God of 
heaven, will set up my kingdom and] I will turn unto the 
people a pure language [the unadulterated truth], that they 
may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with 
one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 



Evidently Protestants are feeling the jibes of the world, 
that their forces are too scattered to be of much avail in 
the coming "battle of the great day of God Almighty." 
In evidence note the following items. 

EX-PROTESTANTS WORKING FOR CHURCH UNITY. 



"The Rev. Dr. Lunn, editor of The Review of the 
Churches, London, England, and President of the Grindewald 
Conference, has returned to the Murray Hill Hotel, 
after conducting a most successful series of meetings in 
Boston, Toronto, Chicago, Washington, Baltimore and 
Philadelphia. 

"In several of these cities the recommendation of the 
Grindewald Conference, that Whit Sunday in each year 
should be observed as a day of special prayer for unity, and 
as the occasion for each preacher to give a sermon dealing 
with the good qualities of some denomination other than 
his own, has been enthusiastically adopted. 

"The ministers of Chicago, Washington and Baltimore 
all unanimously agreed to observe Whit Sunday in this 
manner, and in Washington an interdenominational association 
has been founded as the result of Dr. Lunn's visit. 

"Dr. Lunn will address a meeting of ministers, and laymen 
on English Movements Toward Christian Unity.'" 
--N. Y. Times. 



"The Ram's Horn, of Chicago, has offered a prize, 
$100 in gold, to anyone who presents the best plan and 
creed to unite the churches of Christendom. It is specified 
that the plan of organization or government or federation 
shall not exceed 500 words, and that the statement of creed 
(which may be in the language of Scripture) shall not exceed 

R1786 : page 69 

500 words. A preliminary examination will select the 
best twelve papers, which will be referred for final award 
to a committee composed of John Henry Barrows, D.D., 
LL.D., George Dana Boardman D.D., LL.D., Bishop 
Samuel Fallows, Bishop John H. Vincent and Joseph 
Cook." 

"Say ye not, a confederacy, to all them to whom this 
people shall say, a confederacy." 

R1786 : page 70 

THE JEWISH VIEW. 



The movement in New York City for the conversion 
of the Jews is at present principally represented in the 
mission work of the converted Jew, Hermann Warszawiak. 
Considerable progress has been made of late, and now it has 
been decided to erect a building specially suited to the 
needs of the work. It will be called, "The Christ's Synagogue," 
and will have a separate entrance to, and special 
apartments for, a Jewish Missionary Training School. A 
library, a gymnasium, etc., will add to its attractions for 
the younger Hebrews. 

We rejoice in every good work, including such efforts 
to turn away blindness from Israel. And this, as we have 
elsewhere shown, is due to come about when the Gospel 
Church has been completed. But we would rather see them 
remain "blind," than see them deluded into the no-ransom 
views of Antichrist. We know not what gospel Mr. Warszawiak 
is preaching, but we trust that it is the old theology, 
of which the cross of Christ is the center. With the Jewish 
mind in its present skeptical state, it would be no difficult 
thing to lead many of them to acknowledge pseudo-Christianity. 
Many will admit that the great Jew, Jesus, 
whose name is claimed and whose character and teachings 
are generally reverenced if not obeyed throughout Christendom, 
was a martyr to Jewish prejudices, etc., if only you 
do not make it a condition that he shall believe that this 
Jesus died for the sins of the Jews and the whole world. 
There "the offense of the cross," mentioned by the Apostle, 
comes in. Leave out the cross, the ransom, and many 
Jews are ready thus to join in what we may be excused for 
calling, "Christian Infidelity." 

But by and by, as soon as the Gospel Church, the 
Bride, has been selected, the true gospel will be preached 
with demonstration to the whole world, and again it will 
be "to the Jew first;" and then, through the Jews, to 
others of the world— the gospel that in Christ the sin-offering 
types of the Jewish law have their fulfilment, and 
that in Christ the promises to Abraham must all be fulfilled. 
(Gal. 3:16,29.) This is the gospel that must ultimately 
open the eyes of the "blind."— Rom. 11:25-31; Isa. 29:18; 
35:5; 42:7,16. 



Urging Jewish scholars to study the New Testament, 
the Jewish Messenger says:— 

"The subject should receive more attention than it 
does in our seminaries; the day is past to regard it as dangerous. 
We Jews have no right to be so self-satisfied as to 
refuse new light, if it be good and wholesome, from any 
source. Perhaps Judaism as it is in the lives of the great 
mass of us would have more depth, beauty, and spirituality 
if we did not shut ourselves in an intellectual ghetto and 
call that process loyalty to religion." 



Miss Barlee, who has been connected with the London 
Jews' Society in Jerusalem for about ten years, thus 
describes the changes which have taken place during her 
residence there:— 

"Innumerable houses have been built outside the city 
walls, and new colonies formed. Rows of new houses are 
to be seen in places where, when I first came, I used to pick 
wild flowers among the rocks and stones. Progress is written 
upon everything. The Jaffa Railway, now an established 
thing, ceases to be an object of wonder to the native population; 
new lines will soon be open in other parts of the 
country; a boat now crosses the Dead Sea, and lately I received 
a letter from Kerak in Moab, where postal communication 
with Jerusalem has been established. In Jerusalem 
itself, civilization has made rapid strides, carriages of every 
description are now flying to and fro in the different new 
roads. It would seem that the Lord's time to favor Zion 
is at hand." 



SOME BETTER THINGS. 



Though wintry wind the yellow leaf displaceth, 
For Spring's sweet harbingers it maketh room; 

Ere long the tender bud the forest graceth, 

New verdure waketh from old Nature's tomb. 

The snowy blossom from the orchard fadeth, 
'Tis then the earnest of fair fruit we find; 

Though morning mist the landscape overshadeth, 
The sunlit mountain-peaks are just behind. 

Lo, in the crimson West the glory dieth, 

And from his throne Day's monarch hath withdrawn! 
Herein the promise of the sunrise lieth— 

Already we are waiting for the dawn. 

O heart bereaved, some better thing remaineth, 

Though God should seem thy treasures to remove; 

Some better thing his gracious hand retaineth, 
He will not fail the children of his love. 

Some better thing! Thy life-joy all departed- 
Its glory trailing sadly in the dust; 

O cleave to Him,— the Savior tender-hearted; 

Thou canst not understand, but thou canst trust. 

Perchance he leads to depths of self-abasement, 
And storms awake, and billows round thee roll. 

Give thanks! Contrition is the open casement 

Through which the Dove of Peace shall reach thy soul. 



O patient heart, thy best, thy brightest bringing, 
With full consent upon His altar lay! 

Some fair new blessing even now is winging, 
All unobserved, its sure and noiseless way. 

Thy purpose crossed, each sunny prospect clouded, 
Still to His changeless promise learn to cling. 

Although His plan may be in darkness shrouded, 
Jehovah hath reserved some better thing ! 
—Lucy A. Bennett. 



R1786 : page 71 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 



WITH Christians generally it is customary to celebrate 
Good Friday as a memorial of our Lord's 

death, and Easter Sunday as a remembrancer of his resurrection. 
But with the early Church every Sunday was a 
remembrancer of our Lord's resurrection, while his death, 
symbolized in the Last Supper eaten the evening before the 
crucifixion, but "in the same day," was celebrated annually, 
as the antitype of the killing of the Jewish Passover 
lamb,— on the fourteenth day of the first month, lunar 
time, as reckoned by the Hebrews. Desiring to return to 
the "old paths," many WATCH TOWER readers, in every 
quarter of the world, adopt and practice this custom of the 
Primitive Church. Its appropriateness is beyond question 
even by those who for one reason or another have seen fit 
to adopt more modern customs and to celebrate it quarterly 
or monthly or weekly or daily,— according to human 
judgment, caprice or theory. 

Only two of these theories claim Scriptural authority, 
and they alone, therefore, require answer. 

(1) Those who hold that the Lord's death should be 
commemorated daily have no other argument than that the 
Apostle declared, "As often as ye do this ye do show forth 
the Lord's death until he come." They forget that three 
or four times a day or even hourly would be more "often," 
and therefore more proper, according to their definition of 
this word "often." The fact is that the stress lay upon 
the words "do this," as our Lord said,— "This do ye, as 
oft as ye drink it [annually], in remembrance of me." 
(1 Cor. 11:25.) The Lord's disciples as Jews were accustomed 
to the killing and eating of the Paschal lamb, at 
a specified time annually, and our Lord wished that henceforth 
they should recognize him as the antitype of that 
lamb,— his death as the antitype of its death and the passing 
over, or justification from death to life, of the Church 
of the Firstborn (Heb. 12:23) as the antitype of the sparing 
of the firstborn of Egypt. 



To "do this,"— i.e., to celebrate the Passover,— was 
the command of the Law to the Jew; but our Lord in setting 
his followers free from the Law Covenant and accepting 
them under the New Covenant did not command them 
to "do this," nor to do anything but "love,"— which he 
declared to be the fulfilling of his law of the New Covenant. 
But he did say, "As oft as ye do this [yearly— never oftener, 

R1787 : page 71 

and never less often did the Jews celebrate their Passover], 
do it [henceforth, not in remembrance of the typical Passover 
and the typical lamb slain and eaten, but] in remembrance 
of me,"— "the Lamb of God which taketh away 
the sin of the world," by whose death and blood of sprinkling 
you are passed over, from death unto life, and by the 
eating of whose flesh (figuratively speaking) ye shall obtain 
strength for the journey out of the Kingdom of darkness, 
sin and oppression, the dominion of Satan (typified by 
Pharaoh) to the heavenly Canaan under the lead of the 
Lord's Anointed, whom Moses and Joshua typified. 

(2) Those who celebrate the Lord's death every Sunday 
well know that more appropriately that day commemorates 
the reverse idea,— the resurrection of our Lord from 
death; but they think that they find justification of their 
course in the "breaking of bread" every first day of the 
week, practiced by the early Church. But they hastily 
draw a wrong inference: those "breakings of bread" 
were only ordinary lunches or "love-feasts" eaten for a 
double purpose— to satisfy hunger, but apparently, specially, 
because they met on that day to celebrate the Lord's 
resurrection;— because it was in the "breaking of bread" 
that he had twice made himself known to them on that 
notable day when his communion and expounding of the 
Scriptures had driven away their fears and enkindled hope 
and caused their hearts to burn within them with the hope 
that maketh not ashamed. (Luke 24:32; Rom. 5:5.) It was 
in connection with the eating of natural food that twice 
again before his ascension, our Lord made himself known 
to the disciples and instructed and refreshed them, and 
probably both were on the first day of the week.— John 20:26; 
21:13. 

Is it any wonder, then, that the early Church formed 
the habit of gathering every first day of the week to commune 
with the Lord in spirit; and is it any wonder that 
they repeated the "breaking of bread" and any other 
features that would keep vividly before their minds the 
scenes and thoughts of their first experience and heart-burning? 
It is not surprising. But that had nothing whatever 
to do with the annual Passover, which to the early 
Christians took on a fresh importance, because "Christ our 
Passover" had been slain. (1 Cor. 5:7,8.) Christ our 
Passover represented his sacrifice by both bread and wine, 
as symbols of his flesh and his blood; but the accounts of 
the love-feast or "breaking of bread" make no mention of 
the wine,— and not the slightest hint that these were meant 



to commemorate the sufferings and death of our Lord, the 
Head, and the Church, which is his body. 

But we, as Christians, do not celebrate the Jewish Passover 
and its deliverance from Egypt, nor do we kill and 
eat the typical lamb. With the Jews the lamb, its selection 
on the 10th day of the month and its killing on the 14th 
day were separate from the Passover festival, which began 
on the 15th and lasted for a week. The Jews celebrate 
specially the festival: we memorialize the death of the great 
Lamb of God, and understand the Jewish seven days festival 
to be only typical of the complete and everlasting joy 
resulting from our present eating of our Lamb with the 
bitter herbs of persecution during this Gospel night, waiting 
for deliverance early in the Millennial morning. Surely 
when the blindness of fleshly Israel begins to turn away, 
nothing will appeal to them more forcibly than that Christ 
is the antitype of the Passover lamb, and that the blessings 
flowing from his death are the antitypes of the Passover 
blessings. 

R1787 : page 72 

We follow the Jewish method of reckoning the date— 
the same that our Lord and the Primitive Church followed 
—and it is very simple. The Jewish (ecclesiastical) year 
begins in the Spring,— with the first appearance of the new 
moon after the Spring equinox. There they begin to count 
their month. This year the new moon of Spring will appear 
on the 26th of March, and consequently the fourteenth 
day of the first month will be April 8th. But as in the 
Hebrew reckoning the day begins at six o'clock of the preceding 
day, it follows that the fourteenth of Nisan will 
begin at six P.M., Sunday, April 7th. About 8 o'clock 
on that evening, therefore, would be the anniversary of the 
Lord's Supper. 

At this hour, in accordance with our usual custom, the 
Church at Allegheny will celebrate the memorial of the 
greatest transaction upon the pages of history;— the transaction 
which means so much to all who trust in the ransom 
given once for all, but which has so little meaning to others. 
No arrangement is made for a convention or general gathering 
at the time; but friends passing through the city are 
always welcome. The same course is recommended to the 
scattered ones of like mind everywhere: that they meet with 
brethren residing near them, and celebrate with as nearly 
as possible the simplicity of the model given us by our Lord 
over eighteen centuries ago. 

Let us each call to mind that the bread and wine not 
only symbolize our Lord's sacrifice on our behalf, but also 
that as his Body or Church we are members of the one loaf 
now being broken for others;— that thus we are to share 
with our Lord in sacrifice, and by and by share also his 
glory— "If so be that we suffer with him, that we may also 
be glorified together."— Rom. 8:17. 



R1787 : page 72 
"COME, MY PEOPLE. 



"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut 
thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a little 
moment, until the indignation be overpast."— Isa. 26:20. 

THERE is an affectionate tenderness about these words 
of our Heavenly Father which helps us to realize his 
great love for his people, and his special care over them. 
Through his prophet, taking the standpoint of the end of 
this age, he is forewarning us of a great time of trouble 
which is just imminent (verses 5,6,21)— "a time of trouble 
such as was not since there was a nation," when the whole 
present order of things, civil, social and religious, shall be 
swept with the besom of destruction. Yet in the midst of 
it all he would have his people in rest and peace in him, as 
saith the prophet, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace 
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusteth in thee. 
Trust ye in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is 
everlasting strength."— Verses 3,4. 

And again the Lord had another of his prophets put 
into our mouths those beautiful words of trust and confidence 
—"God is our refuge and strength, a very present 
help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though the 
earth [the present social order] be removed, and though 
the mountains [governments] be carried into the midst of 
the sea [overthrown by the turbulent sea of world-wide anarchy]; 
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, 
though the mountains shake with the swellings thereof.... 
The Lord of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our refuge." 
(Psa. 46.) Surely, "like as a father pitieth his children, 
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him."— Psa. 103:13. 

But while appreciating very gratefully this special love 
and care for us as his people, in the comfort, encouragement 
and protection afforded us by our Heavenly Father 
in the midst of the world's great tribulation, we would 
come far short of having his spirit if we should regard 
the matter with self-complacency, forgetful of his great 
love for the whole world also, which, vailed behind the 
clouds of his righteous indignation against their sins, in 
wisdom strikes the heavy blow which will shatter all their 
idols and humble their pride in the dust, that so the sore 
wounds of his wrath may prepare for their everlasting healing. 
If God so loved the world as to give his only begotten 
Son, "that whosoever believeth in him should not perish 
[eternally], but have everlasting life," he loves them still, 
and it is his love that wields the rod for their correction. 
So also would he have his people regard his judgments, and 
while rejoicing in the sunshine of his favor, because by 
faith and obedience they have come into an attitude which 
can receive it, he would have them share his spirit towards 



the world; and while the blows of his righteous indignation 
fall heavily upon them, he would have us point them 
to the cause of their calamities and to the only remedy— 
"In returning [to God] and rest [in him alone] shall ye be 
saved; in quietness and in confidence shall be your strength." 
"Be still," saith the Lord, "and know that I am God; I 
will be exalted among the nations, I will be exalted in the 
earth."-Isa. 30:15; Psa. 46:10. 

But who are those whom the Lord is pleased to designate 
by the endearing name, "My people?" Does this 
class include every one upon whom his name is named? 
No, for that would include a great number of false professors. 
As the Psalmist expresses it, it includes all those who 
have made a covenant with God by sacrifice (Psa. 50:5)— 
all the consecrated and faithful children of God, however 
young or weak they may be, whose hearts are fixed firmly 
and resolutely to be true loyal and obedient children by his 
assisting grace. 

To be numbered among the people of God is a very 
great privilege; but it means much more than many seem 
to understand— much more both on their part, and on 

R1788 : page 72 

God's part. On their part, it signifies, not merely a name 
to live, in some great organization which bears the Christian 

R1788 : page 73 

name, but that they have become sons and heirs of God 
through Christ, that they have fully consecrated themselves 
to God to follow in the footsteps of his dear Son, that they 
have renounced the vain pomp and glory of the world and 
have solemnly covenanted to live apart from its spirit, ambitions, 
hopes and aims; and not only so, but that, in 
pursuance of that covenant, they are striving daily to be 
faithful, and meekly to take up their cross and follow their 
leader and head, Christ Jesus. 

On God's part it signifies the fulfilment of all his 
gracious promises to such through Christ, both for the life 
that now is, and for that which is to come. It signifies 
that in the present life we have his fatherly love, care, discipline, 
counsel, teaching, protection and encouragement 
to the end, and that afterwards we shall be received into 
his glorious presence and everlasting rest and joy and peace. 
Oh, how blessed to be the people of God! even in the 
present life the reward of his favor is beyond computation. 
Through all the age God has permitted his people to be 
scattered as sheep in the midst of wolves, and as wheat in 
the midst of tares; but now the harvest of the age is come, 
and their gathering together unto him is due. They have 
been growing in the midst of that great organization, the 
nominal Christian church, which God calls Babylon (confusion), 
but which men call Christendom (Christ's Kingdom). 
Upon this great system which has appropriated the 
name of Christ while misrepresenting his teaching and his 



spirit (although in possession of his Word of truth and of 

many advantages of precept and example from his saints 

so long permitted to dwell in her midst), God is about to 

pour his indignation, which will involve the whole 

world with it; but before doing so, he forewarns his people 

to come out of her (Babylon), that they be not partakers of 

her sins, and that they receive not of her plagues. (Rev. 18:4.) 

But while calling them thus to come out of Babylon, 

he calls them also to come into another place, or condition 

rather— "Enter thou into thy chambers and shut thy 

doors about thee: hide thy self... until the indignation 

be overpast." 

The place of hiding is the secret place of the Most 
High, under the shadow of the Almighty. (Psa. 91:1-9.) 
This secret place of the Most High, Beloved, is the place 
of intimate communion and fellowship with God, through 
the blessed privilege of prayer and through faith in his 
precious Word and his promised providential care. 
"When all around our souls give way, 
He then is all our hope and stay." 

Oh, how precious is this hiding place! What rest and 
refreshment we find in the midst of the commotion that is 
even now bestirring the whole world, but especially the nations 
of Christendom— rest from the pride and folly of man 
in their abortive efforts to readjust the present unsatisfactory 
social order; and rest from the strife of tongues in 
an equally vain attempt to evolve the clear principles of 
truth and righteousness from the present confusion of human 
traditions. (Psa. 31:20.) Here we find rest, peace, 
light and joy, which the world can neither give nor take 
away. 

Few indeed are those who can understand our motives 
in thus withdrawing from the world and from the various 
organizations of the nominal Christian church to walk alone 
with God; and many are the reproaches which such must 
endure for his name's sake. But fear not; "shut thy 
doors [of faith] about thee," and heed not the reproaches; 
turn a deaf ear to them, and "Sanctify the Lord of hosts 
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your 
dread" (Isa. 8:13); and, "Above all, take [for the conflict 
before you] the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be able 
to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked." 

It is well, especially in this time of greatest need, that 
the Lord's people should consider the value of this portion 
of the Christian's armor, and that the doors of their faith 
should thoroughly shut them in to the secret place of the 
Most High. When the reproaches fall thick and fast, when 
they are told that they have left the faith and gone after 
fables, that they have incurred the Lord's displeasure, and 
that their sufferings for Christ's sake are the penalties they 
deserve, when their names are cast out as evil and they are 
separated from the company of those whom they have long 
regarded as the Lord's people, because they bear his name, 
ah, then is the time for firmly grasping the shield of faith 
and for adopting the triumphant language of the Psalmist: 

"The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall 



I fear? the Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall 
I be afraid?. ..Though an host should encamp against 
me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise against 
me, in this will I be confident. ..In time of trouble he 
shall hide me in his pavilion: in the secret of his tabernacle 
shall he hide me: he shall set me upon a rock. ...When 
my father and my mother [my most trusted human friends] 
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up." "The Lord is 
my shepherd, I shall not want. Yea, though I walk through 
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; for 
thou art with me: thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me." 
-Psa. 27:1,3,5,10; 23:1,4; also 56:4. 

It is to inspire such a faith as this that the Lord has 
offered us, in addition to all his precious promises, so many 
encouragements to simple, childlike trust in him, and that 
he has bidden us turn a deaf ear to the reproaches of men, 
saying— "Hearken unto me, ye that know righteousness, the 
people in whose heart is my law; fear ye not the reproach 
of men, neither be ye afraid of their reviling s.... I, 
even I, am he that comforteth you: who art thou, that 
thou shouldest be afraid of a man that shall die, and of the 
son of man that shall be made as grass, and forgettest the 
Lord, thy Maker, that has stretched forth the heavens and 
laid the foundations of the earth, and hast feared continually 
every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he 
were ready to destroy?. ..I have put my words in thy 
mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, 
that I may plant the heavens [establish the new heavens], 
and lay the foundations of the earth [the new earth], and 

R1788 : page 74 

say unto Zion [the people tried and proved by these 
afflictions to be the worthy heirs of the new Kingdom— 
the new heavens and earth], Thou art my people."— 
Isa. 51:7,12,13,16. 

What condescension on the part of the Almighty to 
thus consider our weakness when the darts of the enemy 
wound our hearts, and to pour in the balm of his consolation. 
He would not have one of his children whom Christ 
has made free to come again under the bondage of "the 
fear of man which bringeth a snare." (Prov. 29:25.) He 
would have every man in Christ realize his liberty from sin 
and superstition and his solemn accountability to God for 
all his thoughts and words and doings.— "Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let 
him be your dread." 

Just here the words of the Apostle Paul (1 Thes. 5:21; 
Gal. 6:4) are worthy of special notice— "Prove all 
things; hold fast that which is good," and "Let every 
man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing 
in himself alone and not in another." Thus every individual 
in Christ is reminded of his own personal responsibility 
in matters of faith and conduct. Not until he has proved 
what is truth and righteousness, accepting the Word of 
God as the only standard of authority, is it proper to take 



a resolute stand; but, having proved "what is that good and 
acceptable and perfect will of God," nothing should be 
able to unsettle his faith or turn him from the line of duty, 
and no fear of man should bring him again into the snare 
of bondage to superstition or human traditions or opinions 
of others. If each individual prove his own work— his 
faith in the doctrines and his conduct in life— by the square 
and compass of God's Word, "then shall he have rejoicing 
in himself and not in another"— i.e., his faith, no matter 
through what privileged human agent or agency it may 
have been received, will be so established by the Word of 
the Lord that it will be his own, and in no sense dependent 
upon another. 

It was the neglect of this principle, of the right and 
duty of the individual judgment in proving all things by the 
inspired Word, that brought upon the Church the snare of 
the great apostacy, which set up infamous popes to dictate 
in matters of faith and conduct and subvert the consciences 
of men. Let us remember the command, "Sanctify the 
Lord of hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let 
him be your dread." Let us fear and dread to displease him; 
let us see to it that we know and love righteousness and 
that we have the law of God, not in our heads only, but 
also in our hearts, for so shall we ever find acceptance with 
him; and to such, who in faith continually rely upon the 
Lord, who go forth, strong in the strength which he supplies 
through faith, to do valiant service for truth and righteousness, 
comes also the blessed assurance, "Fear not, little 
flock, it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the 
Kingdom." 

While the storm of trouble that is to engulf the whole 
world will affect all men, both individually and collectively, 
the Lord's people, who seek only to draw yet closer 
to him, entering more fully into the secret place of communion 
and fellowship and rest in him, and shutting the 
doors of faith about them, will there be safely hidden from 
the alarm and fear and trembling that will take hold upon 
all other classes; and while they patiently endure its effects 
upon their temporal interests, they will rejoice not only in the 
knowledge of God's overruling providence, in the whirlwind 
and in the storm as well as in the calms of life, but 
also in his blessed assurance that his wrath will be thus revealed 
only "for a little moment," and then will his righteous 
Kingdom be manifested in power and great glory, and they 
shall shine forth as the sun. 

"Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and 
shut thy doors about thee: hide thyself as it were for a 
little moment, until the indignation be overpast." Oh 
blessed invitation! Lord, we will trust in the covert of thy 
wings. 



R1789 : page 74 

LOVE THE ESSENCE OF DIVINE LAW. 



-MARCH 24, ROM. 13:8-14.- 

Golden Text— "Abstain from all 
appearance of evil."— 1 Thes. 5:22. 

VERSES 8-10 need no comment. The truth of the 

statement, "Love worketh no ill to his neighbor: 

therefore love is the fulfilling of the law," is obvious to all. 

Love delights to bless, and against its pure and benevolent 

instincts there is no law. It recognizes the rights and 

liberties and proper relationship to God and fellow men of 

every individual, and in no sense interferes with those inalienable 

privileges of any of God's intelligent creatures; 

but rather delights in the largest development and most 

rapid progress of every individual. It is noble, generous, 

free, frank, unselfish, kind, tender-hearted, pitiful, helpful 

and true. 

This noble benevolence, Paul says, we owe to every 
man.— "Owe no man any thing but to love one another." 
This debt we owe, not only to our brethren in Christ, but 
also to our brethren of the human family. Originally God 
created man in his own image, and though that image has 
been sadly defaced in all, he has planned to restore it, 
and himself so loved the world, even while they were yet 
sinners, that he redeemed them at great cost. And if God 
so loved the world, then we also should love them with the 
same benevolence, kindness and tender compassion; and 
if we love God and have our hearts filled with his spirit we 
will delight to do so. 

Verses 11-13 remind us of the near approach of the 
day of Christ when virtue will meet its just reward, and when 
sin and selfishness will be exposed in all their horrid deformity. 
Therefore, the Apostle urges, we should put on the 
armor of light, that we may stand approved in that day. 

Verse 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ— put on 
his loving, generous, noble, pure spirit: study and copy his 
life, which was an illustration of the perfect law of God; 

R1789 : page 75 

and, while so doing, ignore so completely the desires of the 
old nature as to make no provision for fulfilling them, thus 
manifesting the singleness and fixedness of the purpose to 
follow him. 

The Golden Text is a plain and timely precept to all 
who would live godly— "Abstain from all appearance of 
evil." It would not be consistent with righteousness to do 
otherwise than abstain from the appearance of evil, as well 
as from the evil itself. If we love righteousness and hate 
iniquity we will hate the very appearance of evil ourselves, 
and will shun the appearance as we would shun the thing 
itself. We will shun it, not only because we desire to have 
others think well of us, but because we love purity and 
delight in moral excellence. 



R1789 : page 75 

REVIEW. 

-MARCH 31.- 

Golden Text— "Take my yoke upon you and learn of me."— 
Matt. 11:29. 

We trust that all our readers who have been studiously 
pursuing the lessons of this quarter have indeed taken upon 
them the yoke of Christ, and that they have been learning 
of him, not only in an intellectual way, but also through 
the medium of the heart. Not until we have taken the 
Lord into our daily life as our living, personal companion 
and confidential friend and counselor and comforter and 
guide, as well as our Redeemer and Lord, can we fully 
learn of him those precious lessons which give to his 
disciples a joy which the world can neither give nor 
take away. 

May this intimate communion and fellowship with 
Christ impart to us each more and more of his own spirit, 
so that the world may take knowledge of us, as they have 
of others (Acts 4:13), that we have been with Jesus; and 
let the prayer of each be, 

"Lord Jesus, make thyself to me 

A living, bright reality! 
More real to faith's vision keen, 
Than any earthly object seen; 
More dear, more intimately nigh, 
Than e'en the sweetest earthly tie." 



R1789 : page 75 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We had for our lesson last 
Sunday, "On Trial for Life." Can it be possible that if I 
do not attain the high calling, I shall die the Second Death? 
I had always supposed that if I failed to attain the prize of 
the high calling I would get the spirit nature; that is, so 
long as I remained under the ransom. Is there not a second 
prize, or is there no other life for us? 

[In reply we refer the brother to the TOWER 
for July 1, '94, "The Prize set Before Us."— ED.] 

My life has not always been an overcoming one, in 
the warfare between the new and the old natures; and I 
have had no assurance that I would attain the reward of 
the high calling; but I did receive some comfort from the 
thought that I would be with the "great company;" and now 
you have taken that from me. But though I have not always 
walked as obeying the high calling, I do love the dear 



Lord with all my heart and love his truth and all his saints, 
and would give my life for any of them; yet for all that 
I have not assurance that the dear Lord would give it me, 
and it would be too bad, after serving the Lord for so many 
years, to be at last a castaway. The thought makes my heart 
fail within me, and I have again covenanted with the Lord 
that with his help I will be a better man, and I have resolved 
to live nearer the fountain of divine grace and to pray 
without ceasing. Pray for us here, as a church. We all 
feel a desire, as never before, for a more consecrated life 
and to walk in the spirit. We will all be more careful to 
walk in the narrow way. Your Brother, ADOLPH FOYEN. 

[REPLY.— You have correctly understood the article 
in question. The human nature once consecrated to the 
Lord a sacrifice— exchanged by his grace for the new nature, 
the spiritual,— is gone from our grasp entirely and forever. 
Whatever life we gain thereafter must be spiritual life or 
none. Hence the Lord and the apostles always present the 
matter as a race for life, and declare that the gospel is to 
us, either "a savor of life unto life, or of death unto 
death;" and speak of those who draw back, not as drawing 
back to an earthly hope of restitution, but as drawing back 
unto perdition— destruction. 

But our Heavenly Father's plan has so safeguarded us 
that none will be total failures here, except those who would 
also fail of life there,— in the Millennium. While the way 
to joint-heirship is very "narrow," as the prize to be gained 
is very valuable, yet the Lord's provision for the "great 
company" of the consecrated, who fail as "overcomers," 
his arrangement for their special scourging as sons and for 
bringing them through great tribulation for the "destruction 
of the flesh" which they did not overcome and "sacrifice" 
as they had covenanted to do, will be so complete that all 
who would be worthy of life at all will be purified and made 
white and tried, and be "saved so as by fire," though their 
works shall suffer loss— the loss of the great prize of joint-heirship 
with Christ. See the letters and answers in last 
issue. See also again the article to which you refer and 
one in our issue of Feb. 15th— "The King's Highway;" 
also, "The Scape Goat Class" in TABERNACLE SHADOWS 
OF BETTER SACRIFICES, pp. 59-63. 

These are good resolutions, dear Brethren: Any who 
run for anything less than the great prize of our high 
calling are making a great mistake. God's way is not 
only the best in the end, but the best all the way to 
the end. Those who, though loving the Lord and righteousness, 
cling to the desires of the world and the flesh, 
and endeavor to drag these along in the race, are never 
satisfactory to the Lord nor to themselves. And they find 
"the destruction of the flesh" a much more severe ordeal 
than its "sacrifice" would have been; for the Lord's 
smile is upon those who joyfully sacrifice what they can in 

R1790 : page 75 

his service. Go on, dear Brethren, the King is your 



Brother as well as your Lord, and his "grace is sufficient 
for you." He says, Be thou faithful unto death, and I will 
give thee a crown of life. Faithfulness means to the extent 
of your ability: and none of us should expect to be owned 
at all of the Lord unless willing to do according to our 

R1790 : page 76 

ability in his service. The love of Christ constraineth us 
to do no less than this.] 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Your kind favor of the 14th 
ult. with letter of Bro. Green came duly and was read with 
much interest. 

Relative to meetings to be held at Carroll: It will 
give me pleasure to lead them whenever I can, and I have 
so informed Bro. Goodbury. Bro. Airport is also desirous 
that I should start a class at W . 

Enclosed please find check to cover our "Good Hopes," 
also twenty-five subscriptions to ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

During last year a considerable number of tracts (No. 
12) were distributed at church doors on Sunday mornings, 
and we have reason to believe that some good has been 
accomplished. As a consequence a number of DAWNS have 
already been sold. Our meetings have also been held 
regularly. The attendance has been good, sometimes as 
high as twenty. 

Wishing you a happy and prosperous year, I am your 
fellow-servant and brother in the truth, 
H. N. RAHN. 



page 76 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL: We have had another splendid 
meeting to-day, although the number present, owing to 
bad weather, was not so large as usual. Yet all who did 
come seemed to feel the power and presence of the Lord, 
and held sweet communion with him and with one another. 
There is one brother, who is now a regular attendant, in 
whom I feel a great interest. He is sixty years old or 
more. Many years ago he read himself out of orthodoxy 
and withdrew from the Lutheran church, finally becoming 
an atheist, then a spiritualist of the most pronounced type, 
which belief he has held for a number of years. 

About a year since, I loaned him DAWN, but he did 
not get much interested until two months ago. He has 
now read all three volumes, the first volume three or four 
times, and says that after reading many systems of theology 
this comes the nearest "holding water" of any of them. 
He used to be a great Bible reader; but believing that the 
churches were the authorized exponents of Bible doctrine, 
and seeing their sham and hollowness, he turned his back 



on it all, despaired of ever getting any satisfaction out of it, 
and latterly seemed to take delight in fighting the Bible 
and was looked upon as a great blasphemer. 

Now that he sees the harmony of God's great plan, he 
says, "I thought I had been fighting the Bible all these years, 
but I see now, that I have been fighting the hypocrites and 
liars instead." How many honest skeptics are doing the 
same thing to-day. Our old brother has given up his spiritualism 
and is as teachable as a child. In this particular, 
at least, the truth has wrought a complete change in him. 
He wants the TOWER. 

Yours in our dear Redeemer, C. A. OWEN. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL AND WIFE:-Your last communication 
to me was in answer to an inquiry as to whether 
a person who had read the DAWNS and accepted their teaching 
as the plan of God, but who because of his inevitable 
surroundings could not see his way clear to accept and run 
for the high calling, would have an opportunity for the 
earthly phase of the Kingdom. I need not restate your 
answer. You know what it would be. 

As you know I have been a reader of the TOWER since 
'92, and have never had a doubt as to the correctness 
of your interpretation of God's plan; but it pointed out 
the way so narrow and difficult, that I thought that with 
the responsibilities of a large family and some other difficulties, 
I could never attain the end. Hence I was really 
making no effort in that direction (a delusion of the enemy 
of all souls). Your answer to my inquiry, and the coming 
of Brother Bohnet about the same time, showed me that 
the very things I had supposed to be insurmountable obstacles 
were perhaps the very things I needed to fit me for the 
Kingdom honors. Hence I am determined to run for the 
prize, notwithstanding I know I still have much to overcome. 
But the Lord has promised to be with me in six 
troubles and will not leave nor forsake me in the seventh. 
Praise his dear name for ever! I am so glad, too, to accept 
him as my substitute; for it is only in and through his imputed 
righteousness that I can hope to stand. 

In conclusion will say, pray for our little number here, 
that the very God of peace may sanctify us wholly, and 
keep us against the evil day. May God bless you and 
spare you long to give meat in due season is my prayer. 
H. C. ROGERS. 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I desire to congratulate you 
on the beautiful "new dress" of the WATCH TOWER: it is 
very striking. How firm a foundation the tower stands upon, 
while those waves and storms beat upon it. The entire 
design is excellent. 

Regarding contribution to the Tract Fund the coming 
year: if prospered, count on me for as much as heretofore 



-more if I can make it so. 

With love to yourself and Sister Russell,— in Christ, 
Your brother, J. H. BROWN. 



R1790 : page 76 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-In reading the article in TOWER 
for Feb. 1, on "Seeking Fellowship with Rome," I am reminded 
of an editorial in the N.Y. Evangelist, Jan. 31, 
which shows how the contagion is spreading amongst all 
the "daughters" who seem to be developing so much 
"love" for the old "mother." The editorial in question 
was upon the Pope's recent American Encyclical. Among 
other good words for the "old mother," the Editor says: 

"There is neither weakness nor corruption in St. Peter's 
chair to-day, and there is much of wisdom, much we may 
be glad to recognize without any disparagement to Protestant 
principles, which is worthy of respect. Why should we not 
rejoice if the prospect is that, by virtue of this necessity to 
accommodate itself to the American spirit and American 
institutions, such a change may be brought about in the 
ancient church as may be tantamount to an internal, if not 
an external reformation? The church of Rome, with all 
its faults and all its errors, is a part of Christ's Church. 
It has done a glorious work, in some periods of the world's 
history. We should not be Christians if we did not hope 
that it may yet have a glorious work to do." 

I have underscored some of the most notable words. 
How it must make the "faithful" smile to read these words 
of love— especially when they recall those "glorious periods" 
past,— the Inquisition, the Crusades, the Massacre 
of Bartholomew, the slaughter of the Hugenots and Waldenses, 
the fires of Smithfield, and all the other "glorious 
periods" when noble men and women were horribly tortured 
and put to death, simply because they loved God and 
his Word of truth! 

How clearly passing events in the "ecclesiastical heavens" 
go to show the truth of our view of God's plan,— 
that he has "spewed" the systems— Babylon— out of his 
mouth. Truly the "voice of the Bridegroom and the Bride 
is heard no more in her." They "know not the time of 
their visitation." 

With Christian love, yours, J. A. MITCHELL. 



page 77 

VOL. XVI. APRIL 1, 1895. No. 7. 



CONTENTS 



Special Items— Allegheny Meetings 78 

Serving the Emblems 78 

Views from the Tower— 79 

Religious Views 79 

The Social View 81 

Theologians Becoming Rationalists 81 

How are the Mighty Fallen 83 

Bible Study: Our Lord's Typical Triumph 85 

Bible Study: The Wicked Husbandmen 86 

Bible Study: Watchfulness 87 

page 78 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1793 : page 78 

THE MEMORIAL SUPPER. 

Our advice that the little groups meet as usual for this celebration 
on the evening of April 7th (see last issue) and that there be not a deserting 
of the home meeting to attend larger gatherings, was not from 
any lack of cordiality toward all. Solitary ones, deprived of fellowship 
and meetings, who may find it convenient to meet and celebrate with us, 
will be very warmly welcomed. 

SPECIAL HOURS FOR ALLEGHENY CHURCH 
SERVICES ON SUNDAY, APRIL 7TH. 

BIBLE HOUSE CHAPEL, 58 ARCH ST. 



Preaching service at 10.30 A.M. to be followed by a baptism service, 
and that by a German service. 

At 7 P.M. a Prayer and Testimony meeting of which the central 
thought shall be the Apostle's words, "I determined not to know anything 
among you save Jesus Christ and him crucified."— 1 Cor. 2:2. 

At 8 P.M., after explanatory remarks and prayer, the Memorials of 
our Lord's body and blood will be served. 

The afternoon is recommended to be used for personal and private 
meditation upon the great transactions which closed our Lord's ministry, 
and led up to the all-important finishing event, his death, by 
which our ransom was secured. And let us not neglect to make it a 
time of self-examination, as well as of communion with our Lord in the 
spirit of prayer. "Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation," said 
our Master on this occasion; and experience has repeatedly proved that 
at this season every year God permits Satan to specially sift the wheat. 
(Luke 22:3 1,32.) Let us not only avail ourselves of the great Mediator's 
aid (Heb. 7:25), but also seek to be so filled with his spirit that in the 
sifting we may be able to come off conquerors, through him that loved us 
and bought us with his own precious blood. 

In coming to the evening meeting we suggest that each seek to 
continue the meditation and avoid general conversation. 

All who trust in the precious blood of Calvary, and who are fully 
consecrated to the Lord, will be cordially welcome. 

AS TO SERVING THE MEMORIAL EMBLEMS. 

A Brother writes, inquiring for an appropriate order of service in 
connection with the celebration of the Memorial Supper, and, as the 
subject may be of interest to many, we publish a portion of our reply, as 
follows:— 

After opening the meeting, let as competent a one as is present 
give a little talk upon the import of the ordinance and then on the emblems, 
beginning with the bread and what it symbolizes— informally, 
and just as lengthily or briefly as circumstances indicate, endeavoring to 
set forth the real meaning of what is done. Follow with the remark 
that the Lord, in instituting the Memorial, first gave thanks; then either 
return thanks yourself or ask some one else present to do so. Then follow 
with some such expression as the following,— After having eaten the 
Passover Supper, the typical lamb, our Lord "took bread, and blessed 
it, and break it, and gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is 
my body." Suiting the action to the word, break a piece of the bread 
(preferably "unleavened bread" purchased from Hebrews, or else soda-biscuits, 
which are unleavened), and hand it to those who will serve 
it, or serve it yourself, according to the size of the company. 

It is generally well, we think, to have a little interim of silence for 
meditation— a few moments. Then let some one give thanks for that 
which the cup emblemizes. Then say, "And he took the cup, and 
gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it; for this is 
the blood of the New Covenant, which is shed for many for the remission 
of sins." (We advise, as preferable, either grape juice or a mixture of the 
latter with a very little wine and sugar,— so little that the flavor of the 
alcohol cannot be detected— as a safeguard for any who may have had in 
the past a craving for liquors.) After passing this emblem, again leave a 
little space for silent reflection, and then say: It is written, "And when 
they had sung an hymn, they went out." Let us do likewise,— in thought 
following the course of the Lord during that eventful night in the Garden 



of Gethsemane, the prayer with the disciples and admonishing them 
to watch and pray, the betrayal, arrest, trial, crucifixion, etc. 

Sometimes it may be found profitable, instead of speaking, to read 
from the WATCH TOWER-Mar. '91, page 36; March 15, '95, page 71. 



R1790 : page 79 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RELIGIOUS VIEWS. 



EVEN in this day of rapid changes on every subject 

the changes on religious subjects constantly 

cause surprise. The secular press properly recounts as 

sensations the novel methods by which so-called ministers 

of the gospel and ambassadors for Christ are seeking to 

draw men after themselves by "tickling" their itching ears. 

One clergyman recently preached a bicycle gospel and illustrated 

it by using a bicycle in the pulpit. Another introduced 

a quotation from one of Shakespeare's plays and acted 

the part of Richard III. by falling as if dead upon the pulpit 

platform, as do theatrical professionals. Another has 

startled and almost magnetized, not only his congregation, 

but also the worldly of his city by declaring that dancing, 

card-playing, billiards and theater-going are not only not 

great sins, but positively virtues to be pursued as elements 

of Christian happiness. He said, "The Bible does not say 

that men and women are not to enjoy to the full the pleasures 

of the world. They are intended for the Christian." 

"Satan. ..in all his craftiness comes to us and says, 'If 

you become a follower of Christ, you must give up these 

pleasures'— to keep lovers of pleasure from joining churches." 

This Presbyterian minister wanted to build up a large 

membership, a healthy looking church from the worldly 

point of view, and was letting down the bars to get more 

goats into the flock. Indeed, we may presume that the 

goats already so outnumbered the sheep that the few true 

sheep of Christ were oddities— "peculiar people," and that 

nice goats had become the standard with this shepherd. 

Such conduct and teaching draws some, but will arouse 

and repel others;— those of whom the Great Teacher said, 

"My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they 

follow me.... And a stranger will they not follow, but 

will flee from him; for they know not the voice of strangers." 

-John 10:27,5. 

The true sheep hear the shepherd's voice, saying, "If 
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take 
up his cross, and follow me." "Love not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world. If any man love 
the world, the love of the Father is not in him." "As 



many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of 
God." "Now the just shall live by faith [not according 
to the course of this world, but contrary to it]; but if any 
man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him." 
"Whatsoever is begotten of God overcometh the world: 
and this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our 
faith." "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall 
suffer persecution." "Men shall revile you, and persecute 
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for 
my sake. [At this] rejoice and be exceeding glad; for 
great is your reward in heaven." "Strait is the gate and 
narrow is the way which leadeth unto life, and few there 
be that find it." -2 Tim. 3:12; Matt. 5:11,12; 7:14; 16:24; 
1 John 2:15; Rom. 8:14; Heb. 10:38,39; 1 John 5:4. 

The Lord's course is said to be an example for his true 
followers, who are exhorted to follow him, to "follow the 
Lamb whithersoever he goeth and to "walk in his footsteps, 
as he hath set us an example." How much of his 
time was spent in self-indulgent pleasure-seeking, in attending 
theatricals, playing billiards, etc.? Only so much 
as we find in his life, are we to copy. But so surely as being 
a true Christian means anything, it means to walk not 
according to the course of this world, but to be renewed by 
the transforming of our minds to the good, acceptable and 
perfect will of God, illustrated in the Lord Jesus Christ,— 
so surely as it means self-sacrifice and full consecration to 
the Lord, it means also the avoidance of even foolish talking 

R1790 : page 80 

and jesting, and the laying aside of all weights and 
hindrances which would impede us in our race for the prize 
set before us in the gospel.— Eph. 5:4; Heb. 12:1. 

Another well meaning but much mistaken man, Bishop 
Fallows, has started what he terms the first "Home Saloon," 
in Chicago. In it he sells imitation beer, flavored like 
the genuine with hops, but devoid of alcohol. To make 
it as much as possible like a regular "devil trap" is his 
aim; so it supplies free lunch, billiard tables, games and 
cigars, and adds, we believe, hot coffee. 

Two ministers in New York City (Rev. Drs. Rainsford 
and Rylance) have gone still farther, and on March 14th 
addressed a mass meeting favoring the permitting of saloon-keepers 
to open their saloons on Sundays— before and after 
the usual morning church service hour. 

What is the meaning of all this? There is but one answer. 
It is— False doctrine; a false conception of the true situation, 
and a consequent fumbling in the dark. The teaching 
of the Lord and the Apostles, that the object of the 
gospel is to select or elect a "little flock" of saints, who, 
when tried and made white, will, with their Lord and Redeemer, 
constitute the "holy nation" and heavenly Kingdom, 
which, during the Millennium, as the promised "seed 
of Abraham" (Gal. 3:16,29) and "royal priesthood," 
shall bless all the families of the earth with the clear knowledge 
of the truth, and grant to all the world the trial for 



life made possible by Christ's redemptive sacrifice— this 
gospel has been lost to sight; and, instead, the view is held 
(contrary to all the evidences), that all men are now on trial 
for eternal life or death. 

With such wrong views, no wonder ministers leave off 
attempting the "perfecting of the saints for the [present and 

R1791 : page 80 

future] work of ministry" (Eph. 4:12), and instead try to 

clean up the world, the flesh and the devil a bit. To these, 

the preaching of a "narrow way" that few find seems inconsistent, 

because they have imbibed the erroneous idea 

that all who do not find the "narrow way" will never find 

any way to life. They do not see that after the experiences 

of the present "narrow way" of this Gospel age of the 

Church's trial has sifted and separated from among men, 

and polished and prepared through self-denial the heirs of 

glory who are to be joint-heirs with Jesus Christ their Lord 

—then will come the world's trial under more favorable 

conditions, but for a lesser glory and honor; that 

then, instead of the present narrow way, the grand highway 

of Isaiah's prophecy (Isa. 35:8) will be opened up, on 

which every facility will be offered to every member of the 

redeemed race to accept the New Covenant and under its 

gracious provisions have life everlasting. 



On Sunday, March 3, Cardinal Gibbons preached a 
discourse on the Bible, in which he complimented it as the 
book above all others and the treasury of the heavenly 
science. He commended it to all Roman Catholics, clergy 
and laity alike. Our object in mentioning this is to point 
out the great change of policy in the Church of Rome on 
this subject. We say policy, not principle, for the principles 
of that institution never change, though its policy is 
always adapted to its own evil ends with a shrewd reference 
to circumstances and conditions. It is only a few years 
since Roman Catholics, by the Council of Baltimore, were 
given permission to read the Bible. It is only about twenty-two 
years since Bibles were openly burned by priestly orders 
in Spain, and only a little while, a couple of centuries, 
since men and women were by them hunted to death and 
burned at the stake for having and reading that Book of 
books which the Cardinal now commends. 

We would be glad to think that real reform is taking 
place, and that Roman Catholics are learning to love that 
which once they hated and persecuted; but the light of 
history forbids such a conclusion. The experiences of past 
centuries should and do teach us that Rome's conduct has 
always been marked out by policy. And so we believe it is now; 
she is working another policy for her own aggrandizement. 

What will she gain, and what could she lose, by outwardly 
making friends with the Bible? 

She may gain much; she expects to lose nothing. She 



sees the trend of Protestant teachings toward "higher criticism" 
—infidelity. She knows from experience that the 
masses of the people are conservative, and will by and by 
shrink back from so ultra a position;— and meantime she is 
favoring Christian union, adopting the Bible, etc., and when 
the time shall come, which will be soon, for a revulsion of 
sentiment, she expects that the masses of Protestants will 
recognize her as the one safe hiding-place. 

Besides, she may well reason that, if Methodists, Presbyterians 
and others can read the Bible, and yet each hold 
as firmly as ever to his sectarianism, so can and will Roman 
Catholics cleave to the traditions of their system, no matter 
what they find in the Bible when they read it. Alas ! how 
true the reasoning, how safe the power of priestcraft, and 
how little likely it is to lose its hold upon the laity! 



Here is an illustration of another class of Protestants. 
While the "great teachers" are becoming "higher criticism" 
infidels, and those of the laity who will think for themselves 
are becoming skeptical, another class, calling themselves 
"Holiness people," are discarding the Bible in another 
way,— claiming that their own minds are superior guides 
without the divine revelation. Note the following extract 
from the Gait Daily Reformer:— 

"Simcoe, Canada, March 8.— The 16th annual convention 
of the Canada Holiness Association convened yesterday 
afternoon. The convention was opened by singing 
and prayer by the president, Rev. N. Burns, B.A., of Toronto. 
Mr. Burns in his remarks alluded to the distinctive 
mission of the Association, which was to teach and practice 
that each individual could know from God what is truth 
for himself, personally, independent of tradition, or even the 
Bible. Vice-President Dickenson and Mrs. Truax spoke 
along similar lines." 

Alas! how evidently the great enemy is leading God's 
professed people captive, some in one direction and some 

R1791 : page 81 

in another; some blinded in one way and some in another. 
"When the Son of Man cometh shall he find the faith on 
the earth?" Only with a "remnant," as in the end of 
the Jewish age. 



The following cablegram explains itself:— 
"London, March 23.— The interview between Viscount 
Halifax, President of the English Church Union, and 
the Pope yesterday is regarded in Roman Catholic circles 
here as really of great importance and significant of the 
enormous strides the Catholic Church has made recently 
in England. In a recent cable letter The Dispatch 
correspondent noted the number of English clergy 



who have taken orders in the Roman Church during the 
last two years. The mere fact of Lord Halifax's visit would 
have raised a storm in the English Church a few years ago, 
but it hardly excites comment in to-day's newspapers. 

"The Church Union has in its membership 3,000 of 
the Anglican clergy and 30 bishops. Lord Halifax is reported 
as asking the Pope to send 'a tender and gracious 
message to the Anglicans in the forthcoming encyclical.' 
On what ground and with what purpose is not explained." 

In a fourteen-column article in the Church Times, Lord 
Halifax recently advocated church re-union. He expressed 
the opinion that— 

"The Pope desires nothing so much as to take the 
first steps for the reunion of the Church, and by means of 
a reunited Christendom to find the solution for the political, 
social, and religious difficulties of the time. Surely, it is 
our duty to do our utmost to further such wishes. Surely 
there was never a period in the history of Christendom when 
there was a more favorable opportunity for the realization 
of such desires." 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



The announcement of the Czar of Russia, that he will 
uphold aristocracy as ardently as did his father, greatly disappointed 
the hopes of those who looked for him to favor 
Republican institutions in Russia. However, he is showing 
his interest in the general welfare by arrangements for 
compulsory education and free schools. 



"Speaking recently at a banquet, the Pope's delegate, 
Mgr. Satolli, concluded by saying that the opinion was certainly 
growing that we were nearing a most critical point 
in history, and that in this country, especially, great problems 
would soon demand positive solution. All the horrors 
of a social revolution were predicted by men as renowned 
for accurate and calm thinking as Prof. Goldwin Smith and 
Prof. VonHolst. The Apostolic Delegate held, with a recent 
magazine writer, that the Catholic Church alone held 
the true solution of the terrible problem, which lies on the 
threshold of the twentieth century, and that it belongs to 
the Pope alone to pronounce a social pax vobiscum." 



"General Booth, of the Salvation Army, a close observer 
of men and things, expressed himself as follows to a 
reporter of the Toronto News, when asked respecting a prophecy 
made by him since his arrival in Canada to the effect 
that the 19th century would close with greater horrors than 
did the preceding century:— 

"Any one who knows the world and society, and hears 



the rumblings of discontent, if he is not blind, can easily 
see and forecast serious results. The masses are dissatisfied, 
and they are determined that their wrongs shall be righted. 
They have been gaining power to this end for many years 
by extending the franchise, and unless Governments, and 
those who control affairs, can bring about harmonious relations 
amongst all classes, there will be an outburst such as 
the world has never known." 



All men are coming to see what our readers have for 
fifteen years been viewing from the Watch Tower of Zion 
through the telescope of God's Word. And now, as showing 
men the futility of hope in their own efforts for the relief 
needed, the world is witnessing the general disintegration 
of labor unions. A labor paper, the Chicago Dispatch, says: 

"The labor union is rent by internal dissensions and 
bickerings, and unless the hard feeling engendered during 
the past six months is eradicated the hopes of the workingmen 
in the battles to be fought this spring are small indeed. 
...Ninety-nine per cent of the quarrels and splits in 
the labor movement are caused by the failure of ambitious 
men, totally incompetent to be elected to office. These, 
with the assistance of the disorganizers, have been doing 
their work well." 

The effect will be a general discouragement for a time, 
in which hope will be smothered; until finally, the pressure 
becoming too general, as well as too heavy, the explosion 
and disruption mentioned by General Booth and the Pope, 
but long ago predicted by the Lord, will come to pass.— 
Dan. 12:1; Jas. 5:1-4; Zeph. 3:8,9; Matt. 24:21,22. 



R1792:page81 

THEOLOGIANS BECOMING RATIONALISTS. 



DR. Lyman Abbott's paper in a recent issue says:— 

"One of the most significant signs of the times 
is the change of attitude among scientists toward religious 
questions. Those who keep pace with scientific thought, 
and are familiar with the atmosphere and spirit of scientific 
investigation in the universities abroad, have been struck by 
the radical change which has taken place in the last twenty 
years. What now strikes one in the attitude and spirit of 
a great many scientific men is a spirit of reverence toward 
the religious side of life." 

While we agree that it is a fact, that the leading scientists 
and the leading theologians have come into closer 
sympathy of thought within the last twenty years, we account 
for this in a totally different manner. We hold that 
it is the theologians, and not the scientists, that have 



changed their base and made warfare between the two no 
longer reasonable. 

If these theories of Professors Darwin and Huxley 
have been changed within the last twenty years, we know 
nothing of the changes. But who is not aware that all the 

R1792:page82 

theologically great (Isa. 29:14) have surrendered to the 
Darwinian theory, that man was not created in God's 
image, but had apes for his parents, and is merely one 
or two evolutionary steps in advance of them? Who 
is not aware that as fast as Darwin's theory of evolution 
took hold, it displaced the Bible theory of a fall of mankind 
into sin and death, and substituted the reverse theory 
—that man never fell at all, but has been coming grandly 
upward out of the bad condition in which his ape parents 
started him, to his present development; and that death, 
so far from being the penalty of Adamic sin, is really another 
grand step in evolution into a still higher condition 
than manhood? 

Who does not know that Rev. Henry Ward Beecher, 
Dr. Abbott's predecessor in Plymouth church pulpit, was 
one of the first theologians to surrender to science, and that 
he publicly said to his congregation, "If Adam fell at all, 
he fell upward; and if you believe that legend of the Garden 
of Eden, the eating of an apple, original sin, etc., you 
have no farther use for my preaching?" Who does not 
recall Mr. Beecher's public recognition of Robert Ingersoll 
about the same time? 

Who is so blind that he cannot see that the leading 
theologians have not only rejected the Bible account 
and accepted the deductions of science, falsely so-called, 
respecting the origin of man, but that many of the foremost 
of them, Mr. Abbott among them, have endorsed the 
so-called "higher criticism" views of Professors Briggs, 
Smith, Harper and others, which are substantially the views 
of Paine and Voltaire respecting the Bible— that it is not 
of divine origin or authority, and that the utterances of its 
writers are to be generally rejected, although a good thought 
may here and there be gleaned from the rubbish by the aid 
of these professors, so very wise and almost infallible 
in their own eyes? 

And yet, knowing all this, one of these gentlemen tells 
us, as above, that a radical change has taken place in scientific 
circles, in their attitude toward religion. No wonder 
that a change has taken place! It would be strange indeed 
if the scientists would keep up the fight after they have 
captured their opponents;— and more, after those once opponents 
have become their strongest allies, astounding them 
continually with their vigorous attacks on the Bible from 
the inside,— while still drawing their salaries and holding 
their titles as Doctors of Divinity. Verily, while the trusted 
Doctors are administering poison to the trusting patients 
on the inside, the outside assailants can afford to keep quiet. 

In evidence that Dr. Abbott's views have changed, we 



quote from a Religious Dictionary edited by him and published 
exactly twenty years ago— in 1875. Therein he says, 

"We think that science confirms at every point the 
great religious teaching of the first chapter of Genesis."— 
Page 233. 

But the first chapter of Genesis declares not only that 
God purposed to make man in his own image, but also adds, 
"So God created man in his own image, in the image of 
God created he him." Dr. Abbott now rejects this, the 
greatest religious teaching of Genesis 1, claims that man 
was not created in God's likeness, did not fall from it and 
hence needed not to be redeemed nor restored to it; but 
that, evolved from an ape and in much of the ape's likeness, 
man has been going up to manhood grandly for six 
thousand years. 

We might here remark that it is because what is 
true respecting Dr. Abbott's surrender to Infidelity is true 
also of nearly all prominent ministers in the pulpits of 
Christendom, that we think worth while to point out these 
matters so particularly. The poor "sheep" under guidance 
of such blind guides are following to the ditch of unbelief, 
as surely as did a similar class, warned by our Lord, at his 
first ad vent. -Matt. 15:14. 

In further evidence that the change has been on the 
part of the theologians and not on the part of the scientists, 
we quote again from Dr. Abbott's book, published just 
twenty years ago (page 792), as follows:— 

"The doctrine of Redemption is embodied in the 
promise with which the angel of the Lord accompanied his 
prophecy of the birth of Christ: 'Thou shalt call his name 
Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.' The 
doctrine of redemption, then, is that the human race have 
come into bondage to sin and sinful habits and propensities, 
and at the same time under just condemnation of God's 
law, because of them [See Rom. 5:12]; and that God has 
sent his Son into the world, not only by his death to atone 
for their past sins, so that they may be freely forgiven for 
the past, but also by his present power as a risen Savior, 
spiritually dwelling in the hearts of his people, to deliver 
them from the power of sin, and enable them to become 
followers of him in their lives and conformed to him in 
their character." 

How beautifully and simply the above quotation expresses 
the truth upon this subject!— man's sin, his just 
condemnation, the atonement by the death of our Lord as 
a ransom-sacrifice, the forgiveness and reconciliation thus 
effected, and the new life in his people fashioned after his 
as a copy. Alas! that one who so clearly saw the truth 
should so greatly change in twenty years as to say, as he 
did on Sunday, March 3rd, as reported in the New York 
Times:— 

"I mean what I say, It was not by his death that 
Christ saved the world, but by laying down his life for the 
world. Passion week began when he was baptized." 

Here Dr. Abbott distinctly denies the value of our 
Lord's death as the basis of reconciliation between God 



and the sinful, fallen race, and claims that it was the three 
and a half years of our Lord's ministry, his conduct and 
teaching (and not his death as man's ransom) that saves 
the world. The Evolution theory led him to this position. 
Having rejected the doctrine that man was created in God's 
image and that the race in Adam fell from it into sin and 
just condemnation, and having accepted the theory that all 
men have been advancing from apehood toward God's likeness 
by evolution, he would be compelled by the force of 
logic to deny that Christ's death redeemed anything or 

R1792 : page 83 

atoned for anything; for if the present development of our 
race is progressive, and according to divine arrangement, 
the race has no sin to be atoned for or forgiven. But Dr. 
Abbott and his hearers were not yet ready to cast the Word 
entirely aside, so he proceeds to endeavor to show that our 
Lord's work for the race "was not by his DEATH" as a 
propitiation [satisfaction] for our sins, as the just for the 
unjust, but by his consecrated living, during the three and 
a half years following his baptism. We have already pointed 
out that, as in the case of the Church each consecrated 
one is reckoned as beginning the sacrifice from the time 
that he consecrates himself even unto death, so with our 
Lord and Redeemer, his sacrifice, which ended at Calvary, 
was begun at his consecration at baptism.* But the entire 
plan of redemption would have been a failure, and our race 
would have remained "strangers and foreigners" to God, 
sinners,— "without God and having no hope" had not his 
death sealed the New Covenant. 

But that Dr. Abbott totally rejects the value of the 
ransom-price, Christ's death, and holds that merely the 
good words and deeds of our Lord were all that was needed 
and all that benefited men, and that his death at Calvary 
was of no redeeming value, but merely an evidence of his 
devotion, is clearly shown by other statements, as follows: 

"The crucifixion was rendered necessary by the fear 
and hate of men. ...If the world had been willing 
to take Him and follow, the world might have been saved 
without a drop of blood or a throb of anguish." 

It was with these words that this wandering star in the 
ecclesiastical heavens led a large congregation of professing 
Christians to the celebration of the Lord's Supper. 
Because his mind had been poisoned by "science, falsely 
so-called," and perverted from the simplicity of the doctrines 
of Christ, "as the serpent beguiled Eve," this once 
able man becomes a sophist who deludes his flock, so that 
when they read, "Without the shedding of blood there is 
no remission of sins," and again, "This is my blood of the 
New Covenant, shed for many for the remission of sins," 
they will, under his instruction, conclude the very reverse 
to be the truth, that his death was not necessary either for the 
forgiveness of their sins or their reconciliation to God, but 
merely their acceptance of and obedience to his pattern life. 

Every child of God who has gotten awake to the present 



situation should lift up his voice like a trumpet and call 
the attention of all the true sheep to the misleading of their 
blinded shepherds. Tell them that the true Shepherd is 
calling, "Gather my saints together unto me— those that 
have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, page 43. 



R1793 : page 83 

HOW ARE THE MIGHTY FALLEN! 



WE clip the following, from the New York Times. It is 
no doubt a faithful report of recent utterances of 
Dr. Lyman Abbott in the famous Plymouth Church pulpit. 
How sad to see that a man once so able a defender of the 
Scriptures and so well informed respecting them is now so 
blinded as to make the serious misstatements shown below. 
We discuss the subject because these are general errors into 
which Christendom as a whole is rushing, blindly following 
such leaders. We quote:— 

"Traditional theology supposed that God made man 
perfect; but what is meant by perfect, traditional theology 
does not disclose. The idea of man being created perfect 
has been carried to such an extent that I know of an instance 
in which a Methodist minister in Connecticut stated 
to his congregation that so great was Adam's perfection 
that he had a knowledge of the telegraph. 

"Adam, although perfect from the point of view of 
traditional theology, fell when he was tempted with an apple, 
a temptation which even a schoolboy is able to resist. 

"Evolution takes a very different view of man and 
holds that he is the result of a slower process in which his 
lower physical and his lower moral attributes and conditions 
have been lifted up to their present higher conditions. 

"The doctrine of the fall of man from a state of perfection 
is not to be found in the Bible outside of the third 
chapter of Genesis. Christ never refers to Adam's fall. 
John, Peter, Matthew, Jude and the others never do. St. 
Paul does so only once, and then mentions it incidentally 
to illustrate only. 

"It is generally asserted and believed that sin came 
through Adam. It is as universal as humanity, and, therefore, 
grace came. 

"I am not a believer in the perfect man of traditional 
theology. I am a believer in evolution, and I tell you 
frankly, that I do not believe in the third chapter of Genesis. 
I consider it to be a legend of the early writers, which 
some early poet took up, like the Arthurian legends were 
taken up, and worked into it a sort of spiritual life, and 



that as such it has come down to us. 

"When Paul came to portray the drama of sin, he 
had nothing to say about Adam on original sin." 

The Lord truly declared through the Prophet (Isa. 29:14), 
"The wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the 
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." The 
most ignorant member of Mr. Abbott's congregation would 
not probably have blundered into so foolish and untruthful 
a statement respecting the teachings of the Scriptures. 

Let us search the Scriptures. Let us see whether or 
not our Lord, Peter, Matthew, John, Jude and Paul knew 
nothing and wrote nothing concerning the fall of Adam, 
and "never refer" to it, except St. Paul "only once," 
and then to "illustrate only." 

Mr. Abbott says, "only once," as though he thought 
that his audience ought to forgive St. Paul for lying just 
once, as he did it "to illustrate only." But if St. Paul's plain 
teachings belied the facts just once, for illustration or other 
purpose, it would be sufficient to shake and break all confidence 

R1793 : page 84 

in him as one of those twelve Apostles inspired and 
infallibly guided in all of their doctrinal utterances by the 
Holy Spirit, so that we might be sure that in building upon 
their testimony, we were building upon the foundations of 
faith which God himself had established.— See Rev. 21:14; 
Matt. 18:18; Eph. 2:19-22. 

OUR LORD AND HIS HOLY PROPHETS AND APOSTLES 
DID PREACH THE FALL. 



First of all we remark that the doctrine of the fall of 
man in Adam did not require statement, as if it were a new 
doctrine; for the Jews already believed it, having been instructed 
therein by Moses and the prophets, whose writings 
were read "in the synagogues every sabbath day." (Acts 15:21; 
13:27.) The fact that our Lord endorsed the 
teachings of Moses without exception, and declared that not 
one jot or tittle of the Law could pass away unfulfilled, was 
quite sufficient endorsement by him of all that Moses wrote 
in the third chapter of Genesis, as well as in all the other 
chapters of the Pentateuch. The doctrine that Adam had 
sinned and fallen from divine favor and that all mankind 
as his offspring shared naturally in Adam's curse, and, as a 
result, had all been "born in sin and shapen in iniquity" 
was the very essence of Jewish belief upon and into which 

R1794 : page 84 

were fitted the various typical sacrifices for sins, atonements 
and washings from uncleanness. 

The Prophet David acknowledges the perfection in 
which man was created, saying, "Thou hast made him a 



little lower than the angels, and hast crowned him with 
glory and honor; thou madest him to have dominion over 
the works of thy hands." (Psa. 8:4-6.) He acknowledges 
also the fall, saying, "Behold I was shapen in iniquity and 
in sin did my mother conceive me." (Psa. 51:5.) Having 
the same view of the fall, Job asks, "Who can bring a clean 
thing out of an unclean?"— Job 14:4. 

Solomon the wise declares, "Lo, this only have I 
found, that God hath made man upright; but they have 
sought out many inventions."— Eccles. 7:29. 

All the promises of a new heavens and earth,— of a 
time when the wilderness shall blossom as the rose and the 
knowledge of God fill the earth, and his favor be offered 
through Christ to all who will go up on the highway of 
holiness, are but so many promises of Eden and Paradise 
to be restored, and were so understood by the Jews, and so 
spoken of by our Lord and the apostles, and so symbolically 
pictured in Revelation.— Rev. 2:7. 

Our Lord distinctly declares that he came "to seek and 
to recover that which was lost." Thus he teaches man's 
original harmony with God and his loss of life and of God's 
fellowship; and that his own mission was to restore the original 
conditions. He declares also that he came to give his 
life a ransom [lutron anti— a price in offset] for all. This is 
another declaration of man's original perfection, and of his 
fall into sin and its penalty, death, and of his need of a 
ransom therefrom. Because if man's life were not under 
divine sentence, it could not be ransomed or bought back; 
and if under divine sentence, the implication is that at 
some time in the past man had been tried; and if tried, 
that trial implies a condition fit for trial,— a condition of 
capability for obedience,— the very perfection and trial and 
fall recounted in Genesis. 

The Apostle Peter teaches the fall when he says, "Ye 
were redeemed... with the precious blood of Christ." 
He taught the same thing in unmistakable language when, 
in his discourse at Pentecost, he spoke of the "times of 
restitution." Restitution means to put back as before. If 
there had been no fall from perfection, and if Peter and 
the people who heard him had not so believed, he would 
not have mentioned restitution (Acts 3:19-21) as a part of 
the gospel hope which he was commissioned by the holy 
spirit to preach. We may be sure that if under the inspiration 
of the holy spirit the Apostle Peter had the Evolution 
view of Dr. Abbott, Prof. Drummond, et al. (that man 
was created about on a par with the monkey), he never 
would have mentioned restitution as a glorious hope to be 
anticipated as part of the Millennial blessing. Would Dr. 
Abbott preach restitution? Did he ever preach from these 
words of Peter as a text? We presume not. It would fit 
very poorly with his theory; for if the past six thousand 
years have been spent in lifting man up from an apelike 
condition to intelligence, restitution would mean the undoing 
of it all, and a return to ape-like-ness;— and not to 
the God-like-ness in which the Scriptures declare that man 
was created, from which he fell, to which he has been redeemed, 



and to which, if he will, he is to be restored. And 

yet, astounding fact! the Apostle Peter declares not only 

that he believes in restitution, but that God has spoken 

of it; not only once, but "by the mouth of all his 

holy prophets since the world began." (Acts 3:19-21.) No 

wonder, then, in view of so general instruction by God for 

so long, that the people knew of the fall so thoroughly that 

it was unnecessary for our Lord or the apostles to make it 

a special subject of discourse, although all of their utterances 

were in harmony with it and implied it. 

Dr. Abbott is willing to concede that the inspired 
Apostle Paul mentions the fall "only once," and he seems 
willing to forgive that once because it was "to illustrate 
only." If Dr. Abbott would not use bald untruths to illustrate 
his discourses, why offer such an excuse for St. Paul? 

But if mention of the fall be an error, Dr. Abbott will 
have to forgive St. Paul more than once. If mistaken at 
all on this point, St. Paul, as well as the others, was much 
mistaken; for, as we will show, he mentioned the matter 
several times. Note the following instances and ask yourself 
whether it was natural or mental blindness (Isa. 29:1 1,14) 
that hindered Dr. Abbott from seeing any but one of 
these. We wonder which one of the many he saw:— 

"Through the offense of one many be dead."— 
Rom. 5:15. 

"Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived 
was [first] in the transgression."— 1 Tim. 2:14. 

"The serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety."— 
2 Cor. 11:3. 

R1794 : page 85 

"By one man sin entered into the world, and death 
by [as a result of] sin, and so death passed upon all."— 
Rom. 5:12; 1 John 2:2. 

"By one that sinned."— Rom. 5:16. 

"As all in Adam die."-l Cor. 15:22. 

"By one man's offense death reigned by one."— 
Rom. 5:17. 

"By the offense of one judgment came upon all."— 
Rom. 5:18. 

"By one man's disobedience many were made sinners." 
-Rom. 5:19. 

St. Paul referred to the fall every time he mentioned 
justification, or the ransom-sacrifice by which we are 
reckonedly justified; as, for instance, when he said, "I 
delivered unto you first of all that which I also received 
[first of all], how that Christ died for OUR SINS, according 
to the Scriptures."— 1 Cor. 15:3; Jude 3. 

With the testimony of St. Paul, of St. Peter, of our 
Lord Jesus and of "all the holy prophets since the world 
began," corroborating the account of Genesis 3, we advise 
Doctor Abbott, and all who have determined to reject 
God's revelation on the subject and to adopt instead human 
speculation and philosophy and "science falsely so-called," 
that they would better cut loose from the Bible 



entirely. Their claim of allegiance is injurious to the Book 
and to the Lord's cause in general, and is very discreditable 
to themselves, their honesty, etc., leading them to make 
such untruthful statements as the one we quote at the head 
of this article. 

But so far from falling from the esteem of men, Dr. 
Abbott is being lionized by the ministers and school-men 
of all denominations. Amongst the speakers at a banquet 
of the "Methodist Social Union" on Feb. 1, at the St. Denis 
Hotel, New York City, Dr. Abbott's name was first in the 
announcement. This only indicates how general among 
the worldly-wise is the falling from grace now in progress 
—denying the fall of man and consequently the redemption 
from the fall by the precious blood of Christ. But we are 
assured that some things highly esteemed among men are 
an abomination unto the Lord; and surely this is one of 
them.-Luke 16:15; Heb. 10:29. 

We are here reminded of our Lord's words,— "When 
the Son of Man cometh, shall he find the faith on the earth?" 
(Luke 18:8.) Evidently not to any great extent. "Let 
him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall."— 
Psa. 91. 

"In God I have found a retreat, 

Where I can securely abide; 
No refuge no rest so complete, 

And here I intend to reside. 

"A thousand may fall at my side, 

Ten thousand at my right hand; 
Above me his wings are spread wide, 

Beneath them in safety I stand." 

"His truth is my buckler and shield; 

His love he hath set upon me; 
His name in my heart he hath sealed;" 

E'en now his salvation I see." 



R1794 : page 85 

OUR LORD'S TYPICAL TRIUMPH. 

-APRIL 7, MATT. 21:1-17; LUKE 19:29-48; 
JOHN 12:12-19; MARK 11:1-11.- 

Golden Text— "Hosanna: blessed is he 
that cometh in the name of the Lord." 

THE lessons of this quarter carry our minds step by 

step through the painful scenes attending the last 

days of our Lord's life in the flesh, ending with his crucifixion, 

and then introduce us to the risen Lord, mighty to 

save, having the keys of death and the grave. In the course 

of the last quarter we saw his rising popularity with the 



masses of the people, attracted by his miracles and astonished 
and fascinated by his teachings; and, with them, we 
have marvelled at the gracious words that proceeded out of 
his mouth, and have hung upon his words, and our hearts 
have burned within us while the spirit of God has applied 
to us also the balm of his counsel. And now as we mentally 
proceed with him through the last few days of his 
human life, let its solemn scenes bring our hearts into yet 
closer fellowship and sympathy with that wealth of love and 
tenderness which so freely sacrificed all things for our sakes. 

R1795 : page 85 

Three and a half years of public teaching and works 
which testified to the truth of his claims as the Messiah, 
ending with the raising of Lazarus from the dead, culminated 
in a seeming triumph which raised high the hopes of 
his disciples and of many in Israel that now their king, 
their Messiah, had indeed come and that the glory of Israel 
foretold by the prophets was soon to be realized. In 
this state of the public mind the Lord saw his opportunity 
to fulfil the prophecy of Zech. 9:9, by publicly essaying to 
assume the kingly office. And not only were the circumstances 
thus propitious, as foretold, but the time had come. 

According to God's covenant with their fathers (Acts 3:25,26), 
the gospel of the Kingdom was to be to the Jew 
first. Yet God knew beforehand that, as a nation, they 
would neither appreciate nor accept it, and by his Prophet 
foretold that only a remnant of the nation would prove 
worthy of the covenant favor, and that the rest would be 
blinded (as they were by their prejudices and hardness of 
heart), while the great covenant blessing would be accepted 
and realized by some from among the Gentiles, who 
should be accounted the seed of Abraham to whom pertain 
the promises,— children not according to the flesh, but according 
to the spirit, having the faith of Abraham; for, as 
Jesus said, God was able of the very stones to raise up 
children unto Abraham.— See Rom. 9:27; Isa. 10:22,23; 
Rom. 11:7,11,12; Acts 13:46; Gal. 3:9,16,28,29; 
Matt. 3:8,9. 

It was on account of this covenant of God with their 
fathers that Jesus, instructed by these and other prophecies, 
offered himself thus to fleshly Israel as their King, although 
he knew that, while the masses would give him a royal welcome 
and hail him with hosannas, their unstable and fickle 
minds, swayed by their false teachers and unwilling to act 
upon their convictions in the face of opposition, would, only 
a few days later, cry, Crucify him! crucify him!— John 12:1,12,13; 
19:6,7,14,15. 

Why then, is it asked, did Jesus go through this form 
of assuming kingly authority when he knew how it would 

R1795 : page 86 

result? We answer that, according to the teachings of the 
Apostle, this action was performed as a part of that great 



system of types which foreshadowed good things to come. 

This triumphal entry into Jerusalem, together with its 
chronological order, prefigured the coming of Christ as 
king, in the end of this Gospel age, which is the 
antitype of the Jewish age, the two being exact parallels in 
both time and circumstances.* According to this remarkable 
parallelism we find the year 1878 A.D. to be the 
point of time in this age when the king, our risen Lord, 
was due actually to take his great power and begin his reign. 

That such is the accomplished fact we have no hesitancy 
in stating. We have ample proof from the sure word 
of prophecy+ that the time is at hand for the setting up 
of the Kingdom of God in the earth under the dominion 
of his Anointed— the Church. Around this fact cluster 
truths of deepest moment, not only to Christians, but to the 
whole world, if they were only wise enough to hear and heed. 

Many are blinded to the fact of the Lord's presence, 
so clearly indicated in the Scriptures, by their misapprehension 
of the manner of his coming. Expecting to see him 
in the flesh, and his coming to be announced by the blast 
of a literal trumpet and visible to the natural eye in 
the literal clouds, they are unable to see, to recognize, him 
as having come and as now present, not in the flesh, but a 
spirit-being, invisible to the natural eye, yet clearly attested 
to the eye of faith by the sure word of prophecy, and to 
discern his presence and power in the midst of the clouds 
of trouble now so rapidly casting their dark shadows over 
the whole world. Nevertheless, these are facts, and of most 
solemn import, especially to all that name the name of 
Christ. You that are faithful they bid to "look up, 
and lift up your heads; for your deliverance draweth 
nigh" (Luke 21:28); while you, professed Christians who 
have grown lukewarm and indifferent, and you that are of 
the world seeking to satisfy your soul's cravings with the 
husks of worldly pleasure, all unmindful too of the cries of 
the oppressed and the woes of the suffering, you they bid 
beware of "a time of trouble such as never was since there 
was a nation"— a trouble even now imminent.— Dan. 12:1. 

The authoritative course of the Lord upon this occasion, 
in overthrowing the tables of the money-changers in 
the temple (Matt. 21:12,13), saying, "It is written, My 
house shall be called the house of prayer, but ye have made 
it a den of thieves," as a typical act, indicates what is elsewhere 
also stated, that in the end of this age judgment begins 
with the professed house of God (1 Pet. 4:17), and 
his great displeasure against those who make merchandise 
of the truth. 

Then followed the healing of the lame and the blind 
who came to him in the temple (Matt. 21:14), showing 
how the spiritually lame and blind in the church here may 
also be blessed by his healing touch.— Rev. 3:18,19. 

And when the chief priests (Matt. 21:15,16; Luke 19:40) 
expressed their displeasure against those who glorified 
the new king (as the chief priests— the clergy— do to-day 
against those whose blindness and lameness the Lord has 
healed), Jesus said, "I tell you that if these should hold 



their peace, the stones would immediately cry out." Why? 
Because the Prophet Zechariah (9:9) had foretold the shouting 
and rejoicing, and now the time had come and the 
prophecy was sure to be fulfilled— "Rejoice greatly, O 
daughter of Zion; shout, O daughter of Jerusalem: behold 
thy King cometh unto thee," etc. So it was in the type 
then; and so it is in the antitype now. As truly and as necessarily 
as there was shouting and rejoicing there, so there 
is and must be now. Great is the joy now among the saints 
as they recognize the King; and their proclamation of his 
presence and Kingdom is the "shout," heard, if not believed. 
"Yea," said the Master, "have ye never read, Out of the 
mouth of babes and sucklings thou hast perfected praise?" 
Even so is it now also in this antitype of that day; for it 
is not from the chief priests, the clergy, of to-day that the 
hosannas rise in recognition of the King's presence and 
power here, but out of the mouths of the common people— 
"of babes and sucklings" are heard the notes of praise and 
jubilee— "Hosanna to the Son of David" who has come 
to reign, and who is even now setting up his Kingdom. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. vii. 
+See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. II. and III. 



R1795 : page 86 

THE WICKED HUSBANDMEN. 

-APRIL 14, MARK 12:1-12; MATT. 21:33-46; LUKE 20:9-19. 

Golden Text— "They will reverence my son." 

THIS parable was very promptly recognized by the 

Jews as spoken against them (Mark 12:12); and so 

aptly did it represent their state of heart that its only effect 

was to arouse them to renewed energy to fill up the iniquitous 

measure of their guilty fathers and so fulfil the final prediction 

of the parable.— Verse 13. 

The foundation of the parable is the very similar language 
of the prophecy of Isaiah 5:1-7, which is explained 
thus— "For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house 
of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he 
looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, 
but behold a cry."— Verse 7. 

The parable, briefly interpreted, would read thus— "A 
certain man [God] planted a vineyard ["the house of Israel" 
-Isa. 5:7. See also Psa. 80:14,15; Jer. 2:21] and 
set a hedge about it [the divine law, the testimony of the 
prophets, the special supervision and fatherly guardianship 
of God and the ministration of his faithful servants, all of 
which served to separate them from the ungodly, surrounding 
nations, and to protect them from their influence], and 



digged a place for the winefat [or wine press, including the 

trough in which the grapes were pressed and the vat for 

the reception of the juice pressed from them. Thus God represents 

the various advantages conferred upon Israel, such 

as the worship of the sanctuary, the wonderful leadings of 

Jehovah, the teachings of the prophets, all of which should 

have caused the vine, Israel, to yield a large increase of 

precious fruit and caused her vats to overflow with wine. 

Well did the Lord inquire through his prophet, "What 

could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not 

done in it?"— Isa. 5:4], and built a tower [a watch tower 

for the protection of the vineyard— representing God's care 

over it in setting watchmen, the prophets and others, upon 

the towers of Zion— Ezek. 3:17; Isa. 62:6; Jer. 6:17], 

and let it out to husbandmen [the priests and leaders of the 

people, whose duty it was to instruct and to lead in the 

right ways of the Lord, which they were miserably failing 

to do], and went into a far country [left the vineyard thus 

prepared and equipped with every advantage to insure an 

abundant harvest, which he had a right to expect at the 

R1795 : page 87 

appointed harvest time, in which those addressed were then 
living]." 

The fruits which the Lord had a right to expect from 
Israel in view of all his favors to them as a people were 
gratitude, love, obedience, meekness and readiness of mind 

R1796 : page 87 

and heart in the end of the age to follow the further leading 
into the new paths and the greener pastures of the 
Gospel dispensation, through the long promised and then 
present Messiah, the Son of God. These fruits, properly 
cultivated all through the age, would also have been manifested 
in a proper treatment of the prophets and in giving 
heed to their counsel and warnings; but the fruit was sadly 
lacking. 

Verse 2. "And at the season [at such times as it was 
proper to expect some fruit] he sent to the husbandmen a 
servant [a prophet or teacher], that he might receive from 
the husbandmen [—through their influence; for the rulers 
in Israel, because of their influence and power, were held 
specially responsible for the course of the nation, although 
this did not relieve the masses of the people, the individuals 
of the nation, from responsibility] of the fruit of the 
vineyard." 

Verses 3-5 refer to the shameful handling of those 
worthy servants of the Lord. See also Jer. 37:13-21; 1 Kings 18:13; 
22:24-27; 2 Kings 6:31; 2 Chron. 24:20,21; 
36:16; Acts 7:52; Heb. 11:35-38. 

Verse 6. "Having yet therefore one son, his well 
beloved [the Lord Jesus, who thus spake to them], he sent 
him also last unto them, saying, They will reverence my 
son." Though God knew it would be otherwise, it is so 



expressed to show the reasonableness of such expectation. 

Verse 7. "But those husbandmen [the chief priests 
and rulers] said among themselves [they plotted privately 
and deceitfully, saying in substance], This is the heir [this 
man claims to be the king, the Messiah of the Jews]. Come 
let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be ours [the desire 
to retain their prestige and power was the very object 
of the leaders in Israel in persecuting and finally crucifying 
the Lord] . " 

Verse 8 was a prophecy of the murderous culmination 
of the wicked purposes that were even then filling their hearts. 

Verse 9 foretells the purpose of God to cast those 
wicked husbandmen out of their offices and to give his 
favors to others than the Jewish nation; viz., the Gentiles. 

Thus ended the parable with its awful significance of 
the triumph of evil; for full well the Lord knew that his 
days were numbered. But he did not wish to leave them 
with the idea that their triumph would be lasting, and so he 
called their attention to another prophecy (Psa. 1 18:22,23), 
saying, "Have ye not read this scripture?— The stone 
which the builders rejected is become the head of the 
corner: this was the Lord's doing and it is marvelous in 
our eyes." 

This was said in reference to his triumph in the resurrection 
and his future glory as the king of the whole earth. 

Verse 12 shows the wickedness of their hearts in strong 
contrast with that beauty of holiness which never more 
than on this occasion appeared more lovely. Not a selfish 
thought stirred his generous soul. Here was goodness, 
purity, benevolence, grace, standing on the verge of an awful 
tragedy, with calmness and composure doing the last 
works of his earthly life. He had no time for gloomy 
thoughts or fearful forebodings: he must be about the Father's 
business. He must give the last words of testimony, 
of instruction, of warning, and fulfil all that remained to 
be fulfilled of the prophecies concerning him in the flesh. 
Then he was ready to be offered for the sins of the world 
—for just such ungrateful, wicked people as the Jews had 
proven to be, even under all their advantages, and as the 
Gentiles also were without those advantages. 

But, thank God, he shall yet see of the travail of his 
soul and be satisfied. 



R1796 : page 87 

WATCHFULNESS. 

-APRIL 21, MATT. 24:42-51; MARK 13:32-37; LUKE 21:34-36. 

Golden Text— "Take ye heed, watch and pray." 

NEARLY nineteen centuries have passed since our 

Lord instructed his disciples to watch for his 

second coming, saying, "Watch therefore; for ye know not 



what hour your Lord doth come" (Matt. 24:42); and to make 
sure that the whole Church to the end of the age should feel 
this command incumbent upon them, he added, "And what I 
say unto you I say unto all, Watch!"— Mark 13:37. 

Again he said, "Blessed are those servants whom the 
Lord when he cometh shall find watching: verily I say 
unto you, that he shall gird himself, and make them to sit 
down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And 
if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third 
watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.... 
Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of man cometh at an 
hour when ye think not. Let your loins be girded about 
and your lights burning."— Luke 12:35-40. 

That the early Church lived in joyful anticipation of 
this longed-for event is manifest from many scriptures. 
(See 1 John 2:18; 2 Tim. 2:18; 2 Thes. 2:1-5.) And 
when the Apostle Paul had about finished his course, he 
looked forward to this event as the culmination of his own 
and the whole Church's hope, saying, "Henceforth there 
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, 
the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to 
me only, but to all them also that love his appearing." 
(2 Tim. 4:8.) To them the appearing of the Lord was the 
consummation of their hopes, and their one concern was 
to be found approved of him at his appearing. 

But how is it to-day? Alas! professed Christians have 
generally forgotten to watch for his appearing. They seem 
to have concluded that the watching will never be rewarded, 
and that the time of his advent will never be revealed. 
Its object— the establishment of his Kingdom, the exaltation 
of the Church and the blessing of the world— has been 
overlooked and also nullified by erroneous doctrines which 
have been accepted and which have subverted the truth. 

In this state of mind and under the delusions of various 
errors, they have concluded that it is wrong to study 
prophetic time with a view to a knowledge of the time of the 
Lord's return, and to this effect quote the Lord's words— 
"It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which 
the Father hath put in his own power." (Acts 1:7.) Yes, 
we reply, and he also said, "Of that day and hour knoweth 
no man; no, not the angels which are in heaven, neither 
the Son, but the Father. "--Mark 13:32. 

But is it reasonable to conclude that neither the Lord's 
people, nor the angels, nor yet the Son of God, would ever 
know the times and seasons of God's appointment? Certainly 

R1796 : page 88 

not. Because the time was long according to human 
reckoning, and a knowledge of it would therefore have been 
discouraging, it was wisely kept secret, not only from the 
Church, but also, and for the same reason, from angels and 
even from our Lord Jesus while in the flesh, and must continue 
so until the proximity of the event renders the knowledge 
of the time no longer a cause of discouragement, but, 
on the contrary, of the revival of hope and anticipation. 



The Lord surely knew about it after his resurrection when 
all power in heaven and in earth was given unto him— 
when there was in such knowledge no longer any cause of 
discouragement to him, the cross-bearing having ended and 
the glory begun. And it was to the intent that the Lord's 
people might know when God would see fit to reveal his 
times and seasons, that the waiting Church was told to 
watch. 

The injunction to watch implies not only some advantage 
in watching, but also that the manner of the Lord's 
second advent might be so contrary to the general expectation 
as to require some discernment on the part of the 
watchers. The advantages of watching have been to keep 
fresh in mind the inspiring hope of the Church— the reunion 
with Christ in glory, the reign with him in his kingdom, 
and the privilege of cooperating with him in the 
blessing of all the families of earth, and to keep the heart 
in love and harmony with the Lord and his work. Thus, 
at his coming, the watchers would be found in readiness to 
sit down to meat and be served by the Lord, who himself 
would make known to them the secret of his presence. As 
at the first advent he was present some time before his 
presence was declared and recognized, so at his second advent 
his presence, which was due in 1874, only began to be 
recognized subsequently as he drew the attention of the 
watchers to it through the Word of truth. 

It is the mistake of those laboring under the delusions 
of various popular errors, to think that they must watch for 
the appearance of the Lord again in the flesh, in the body 
of his humiliation, to see him descend from heaven in the 
literal clouds, and to hear the blast of a literal trumpet announcing 
his presence. But those who watch unto "the sure 
word of prophecy, which shineth as a light in a dark place," 
know that "though we have known Christ after the flesh, 
yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more;" that the 
clouds in which he comes are the clouds of trouble predicted 
by the prophets (See Dan. 7:13,14; 12:1; Matt. 24:30; 
Rev. 1:7); and that the trumpet sound is the 
sound of "the last trump," "the trump of God," "the 
seventh trumpet," whose sounding is in the momentous 
events of this day of the Lord, just as the preceding six 
were sounded in other historic events; for if, as all admit, 
the first six trumpets were so sounded, why should we indulge 
the unreasonable idea that the seventh will be a blast 
on the air?* Those who have been watching thus unto 



*For treatment of this subject see MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II. 

R1797 : page 88 

the sure word of prophecy, and who have also been watching 
unto prayer and thus keeping their hearts in a humble 
teachable attitude, have been and are being made to sit 
down to meat at the Master's table, to realize his presence, 



and in his light to read with unclouded vision the 
wonderful working of the divine plan of the ages and to 
see the duties and privileges of the hour. 

Verses 44-46 show who will meet the Master's approval 
in this day of his presence. They will be, not only those 
who believe in him, but who also manifest their faith and 
love in active service— "Blessed is that servant." It is not 
enough, however, that they be servants of the Lord; for 
many serve very actively whose works are to be burned in 
the fiery trials to which they shall be subjected in this day 
of the Lord (1 Cor. 3:12-15); but they must be wise and 
faithful servants— servants who study to show themselves 
approved unto God, rightly dividing the Word of truth, 
servants who are anxious, not only about the amount of 
their service, but also that it shall be in exact cooperation 
with God, directed by his Word and controlled by its principles, 
and then faithfully performed, with an eye single to 
his glory. 

"Blessed is that servant whom his lord at his coming 
shall find so doing. Verily I say unto you that he will appoint 
him over all his possessions." The whole storehouse 
of divine truth shall be open to such to be ministered by 
them to others of the household of faith. This is the present 
reward of the wise and faithful servants in the time of 
his presence, and thus they begin to enter into the joy of 
their Lord now— the joy of being taken into full confidence 
with God, of comprehending his deep and wide designs 
and cooperating with them (Luke 12:37); but the fulness 
of their joy will be when they pass beyond the vail 
of the flesh and are made like him and see him as he is.— 
1 John 3:2. 

Verses 48,49 are a solemn warning to those who are 
thus blessed against a possible falling away from even such 
a favored condition. As long as we are in the flesh, we will 
have to war against its sinful proclivities. With the increase 
of knowledge pride may reassert itself or arrogate to self 
the honor of finding out God by searching, and, to a considerable 
extent losing sight of the great reward of faithfulness 
at the end of the present pathway of humiliation 
and sacrifice, seek to gratify present fleshly ambitions with 
the prestige gained by the knowledge of the truth. Such 
a one virtually says in his heart, "My Lord delayeth his 
coming"— the coming in the glory of his Kingdom, his personal 
presence being already recognized. That is the language 
of such conduct, whether it find expression in words 
or not; and then follow the unseemly acts to which pride, 
ambition and self-righteousness stimulate:— he begins to 
smite his fellow-servants (to act tyrannically over those who 
are faithful and, generally, because they are faithful), and 
to eat and drink with the drunken (to imbibe more and 
more of the spirit of the world, the spirit of selfishness, and 
to become intoxicated with it). Thus tyranny and selfishness 
go hand in hand, as in the notable instance of the inquisitions 
and indulgences in the Church of Rome. The 
only proper course for the Lord's* people at any time is to 
have "no confidence in the flesh," and to watch against its 



old ambitions under all circumstances, and to pray, lest we 
enter into temptation. 

Verses 50,51. The penalty of falling away from such 
high privileges, and that in the face of a knowledge of the 
Lord's presence and the very near approach of his Kingdom 
and glory, is, as might well be surmised, a severe one 
—a penalty which such a one must shortly realize, when, 
in the overwhelming trouble that shall ere long put an end 
to all human ambitions, he comes to his sober senses and 
realizes that he has sold his birthright and is cut off from 
his former position in the body of Christ and appointed a 
portion with the hypocrites in the great tribulation with 
which this harvest period closes. God forbid that any of 
those at present rejoicing in the truth should thus fall away, 
now when the Kingdom and its glory are so near. Yet it 
behooves all to watch and pray lest we enter into 
temptation. 



■•See our issue of July 1, '94, page 217. 



page 89 

VOL. XVI. APRIL 15, 1895. No. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Item— Being Reviled He Reviled 

Not Again 90 

Views from the Tower— 91 

The Drift of the Times 91 

The Just Shall Live by Faith 92 

God Not the Author of Sin 93 

Bible Study: The Lord's Supper 94 

Bible Study: The Agony in Gethsemane 95 

Encouraging Letters 97 

The Memorial Celebration 100 

page 90 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 



MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1798 : page 90 

WHEN REVILED, HE REVILED NOT AGAIN! 

"Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and 
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice and 
be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in heaven; for so persecuted 
they the prophets which were before you."— Matt. 5:11,12. 

From various quarters come jibes and misrepresentations and bitter 
invectives against MILLENNIAL DAWN, the OLD THEOLOGY tracts, 
ZION'S WATCH TOWER and the Editor. We keep a file of these, and 
wonder how much shame and confusion of face will come to their authors 
when, very shortly, "every hidden thing shall be revealed," and 
the Lord shall make manifest to the world the now secret motives which 
actuate men in their opposition to truth. 

In sending these to us (and we are always glad to receive them), 
the brethren often express their confidence that we will "reply" on the 
subject. But, since the WATCH TOWER was started, we have carefully 
refrained from personalities relating to ourselves or others. Nothing has 
ever appeared except what we deemed necessary by way of explanation 
to keep the flock from being deceived,— nothing more; nothing as a 
defense or bombast of ourselves, nothing of an attack upon others. We 
attack false doctrines, and, in the event of their being promulgated by 
well known, public men, we give their names. (As in the case of Dr. 
Abbott, Bishop Foster, H. W. Beecher, Prof. Drummond, et al.) But we 
never discuss men, nor personal affairs, theirs or our own. We are- 
Set for the defence of the Truth, and the overthrow of Error, pertinent 
to the Gospel; not for self-defence, nor for attack upon others. 

Our readers may rest assured, however, that if any criticism be 
made which in our judgment would need answer, it will be given. The 
so-called criticisms of MILLENNIAL DAWN so far are merely invectives 
apparently prompted by malice, which can command neither Scripture 
nor logic, and can use only epithets. They are worthy only of silent 
pity or benevolence, according to the standpoint of the writers. The best 
answer to anyone inquiring concerning such misrepresentations is to 
hand him a copy of the DAWN to read. That will be answer enough 
for people desirous of comprehending the subjects. 

And we write thus for you, as well as for ourselves; for all associated 
with the truth bear some of its reproaches (Psa. 69:9), and will 
in due time share the rewards with our Lord and Head. 

Let our watchword be, Onward! in the name and love and service 
of our King of kings. "Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen 
your heart."— Psa. 31:24. 

page 90 

MONEY IN THE MAILS is unsafe; and, besides, it puts too great a 
temptation before some people. Send by Draft or Money Order. 



R1797 : page 91 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE five items below are from the columns of The 
Gospel Message. We are glad to see that some of 
Zion's Watchmen are awake and not afraid to "Sound the 
Alarm!" 

THE DRIFT OF THE TIMES. 



"A western Bishop of the M.E. Church in conversation 
with one of our county workers in Nebraska said that Verbal 
Inspiration was one of the most dangerous doctrines 
ever taught, that it was the cause of more abominable heresies 
than most any other doctrine, being associated with 
such ideas as the Second Coming of the Lord, and the rest 
of those things, and urged another worker— a Methodist— 
to stand by the Church of his fathers. 

"If this Methodist worker should stand by the Church 
of his fathers, he would probably not be in speaking distance 
of this present, Bible-destroying Bishop, for, thank 
God! Wesley, Fletcher and the fathers believed the Bible 
to be very words from God, and earnestly desired and 
looked for the second coming of Christ.... Sound 
the Alarm ! 



"The First Congregational Church of Denver has just 
installed Dr. John P. Coyle as pastor. During the examination 
previous to the installation services he would not 
admit that Christ was the Son of God more than any other 
good man. That he lived in closer personal relationship with 
God and in greater conformity with his will and nature 
than any other who ever lived, he acknowledged, but no 
more. Answering the question, 'What do you mean by 
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ?' he said: 'Coming into 
the same kind of personal relationship with him that some 
poor fellow does who cannot get along without depending 
upon Brother Uzzell.' (This brother is pastor of a church 
that does much to supply the needs of the poor). He also 
stated that he regarded Christ as a consummation of the 
development of the world at the time when he came. 
....At the conclusion of the examination the committee 
retired and discussed the situation nearly two hours, 
the final vote standing fourteen to five in favor of his installation 
as the new pastor.... 

"We say it deliberately, and after due consideration, 



we believe that it would have been better for this church 
to have installed some noted infidel, for then a less number 
would likely be deceived and led away into the arms of the 
Adversary. Thus the teachings of those destroyers of the 
Faith— Professor Herron and his associates— are being 
worked out in Congregationalism, and the end is not yet. 
Sound the alarm! 



"A leading Y.M.C.A. in western Iowa analyzed its 
membership in the official organ of the Associations, and 
under denominations placed Catholics, Unitarians and Jews, 
along with Methodists, Presbyterians, Congregationalists, 
Baptists, etc., with no distinction whatever. 

"A southern Y.M.C.A. General Secretary writes us 
of his dissatisfaction with his present work, and states that 
he is crowded from early morning until late at night with 
finances, gymnasium classes and the social and educational 
departments, and even the religious work is becoming such 
a display with catchy attractions that it is hard work to get 
a religious meeting (so-called) without a brass band, and 
the less spirituality there is the more it is liked, even by 
those who seem to deplore such a state of affairs. 

"All classed in together, and all given over to worldly 
sides of the work, that the Society may be made to 
go, and be counted a success before men— these are certainly 
not the marks of a Christian organization. It is, however, 
gratifying to know that all the Associations have not 
reached this place, but such is certainly the downward tendency 
of the day; and lest many of our Christian young men 
be carried down the stream, the servants of the Master will 
do well to— Sound the alarm! 



"Christian Science is developing rapidly. The teaching 
of the advocates of this unscriptural sect leads them 
into peculiar positions. In Burlington, Iowa, the disciples 
of this theory have requested that the authorities excuse 
their children from attendance upon the classes in physiology, 

R1797 : page 92 

maintaining that there is no such thing as a material 

body: they do not want their children to be taught to believe 

in lungs, livers and stomachs as actually existing. Of 

all the silly fads which intelligent people have been guilty 

of advocating, this fad of Christian Science seems the silliest: 

its very name is a misnomer, for they deny the Christ. 

If they have no bodily organism it seems a wanton waste of 

money to purchase food— they might better use their cash 

for the propagation of their doctrines. ...Sound the 

Alarm! 



R1798 : page 92 

"A short time ago a prominent Presbyterian minister 
in eastern Kansas made the opening speech for a Hebrew 
fair. There were present Jews, Roman Catholics, Congregationalists, 
Presbyterians and other classes of people, and 
among other things he said, 'This meeting shows me that 
the people are rising above sectional differences and are 
becoming more acquainted with good ways along this line; 
it is a sign of progress and that man will soon be free. I 
love to meet men as men; God is the Father of all and not 
of any particular church. Such feelings better men and 
refine women, and I am glad to see all kinds of people here 
for the benefit of this church. I congratulate you on your 
Rabbi; he is the best minister you have ever had; he is a 
man of God; stand by him; he stands before you as a 
representative of the Almighty God.' The Rabbi then 
thanked the minister, saying, 'He is my brother, broad-hearted 
and world-embracing. I am glad to see such a 
union to bring offerings to the High Priests of Benevolence.' 
As he concluded his remarks the minister stepped 
to his side and the two grasped hands for a few seconds, 
after which, the minister announced, 'This fair is now 
open.' Among the attractions there were to be voting contests 
with prizes— the most popular young lady, a side saddle; 
the most popular minister, a fine clock; etc. 

"Has this Presbyterian minister forgotten Calvary? 
—Does he intend to deny his Lord and Master? Our Savior 
said, 'No man cometh unto the Father, but by me,' 
and instead of preaching Jesus of Nazareth, Israel's crucified 
Messiah, to this poor Christ-rejecting Rabbi, he closely 
associates with him in the foolishness of a church show, 
and publicly tells him he is 'a man of God.' Such words 
seem almost to be blasphemy against God's only begotten 
and well beloved Son. May God forgive him, and raise 
up some faithful Gospel preacher in that city to— Sound 
the alarm ! " 



R1798 : page 92 

THE JUST SHALL LIVE BY FAITH. 



"Now the just shall live by faith: but if any man draw back, my soul 
shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them that draw back 
unto perdition, but of them who believe to 
the saving of the soul."— Heb. 10:38,39. 

THERE is a solemn significance about these words of 
the Apostle which the thoughtful Christian will not 
fail to perceive. Those addressed are not worldly people, 
but consecrated believers, justified by faith in Christ as their 



Redeemer. By faith they have passed from death unto life; 
to them old things have passed away and all things have 
become new; they are new creatures in Christ Jesus; they 
are sons and heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, 
if so be that they suffer with him, following in his footsteps 
of self-sacrifice, even unto death. They are begotten again 
to a hope of life (eternal), to an inheritance incorruptible 
and undefiled and that fadeth not away— an inheritance, 
however, into which they are not immediately ushered, but 
which is reserved in heaven for them. 

The promises of God made to this class are exceeding 
great and precious, and if they are really believed they cannot 
fail to powerfully influence the life; but if they are not 
received, it is manifest that they can have no power over 
the life. And more, if they be not fully believed, if they 
be not personally appropriated, they are not applicable, and 
no one can hope for anything in them. This is clearly intimated 
in the above words of the Apostle— "Now the just 
shall live by faith." It is not enough that, by faith, we 
receive the first impulse of life, but, having passed from 
death unto life, by the same means, we must continue to 
receive and appropriate spiritual nourishment, that we may 
grow thereby: we must walk by faith, following the leading 
of the holy spirit through the Word of Truth. 

In this way of faith there is much of present privilege, 
as well as future prospect. It is the way in which we may 
enjoy the fellowship and the abiding presence of our Lord 
Jesus and our Heavenly Father, in which we may have intimate 
personal communion with them, and in which we 
may also have the witness of the holy spirit to our adoption 
and continued acceptance as sons of God, and the comfort 
of the Scriptures, the communion of saints, and the blessed 
inspiration, assistance and encouragement of all the means 
of grace. These present privileges, together with the glorious 
hopes they inspire and keep alive within us, are the 
meat which we have to eat which the world knows not of, 
enabling us to live a new life apart from the world— apart 
from its spirit and its fellowship. This is what it is to walk 
by faith. It signifies a course of life quite contrary to the 
usual order of the world, which is to walk by sight and 
after the desires of the flesh. Men of the world look at 
the things that are seen: they judge of their relative values, 
but only with reference to temporal interests, entirely ignoring 
their eternal interests and the claims of the Creator 
upon them. Lacking faith in the divine Word, they lack 
substantial hope beyond the present; and upon their own 
judgment of the relative values of earthly prizes and their 
hopes of winning them, they exercise themselves in their 
pursuit, leaving the questions of the future and of present 
responsibility to God practically out of consideration. 

But not so is it with the true child of God. He walks 
by faith and not by sight: he looks not at the things that 
are seen, but at the things that are unseen (2 Cor. 4:18), 
ever bearing in mind that the things that are seen are 
temporal, uncertain and unsatisfactory, while the things 
that are unseen are eternal, sure to the faithful, and of inestimable 



value. He is living, not for the present, but for 

the future— for the things revealed to the eye of faith in 

R1798 : page 93 

the promises of God, all of which are yea and amen in 
Christ Jesus, to them that believe. In this life of faith the 
motives, hopes, aims, ambitions and joys are all of a higher, 
nobler order than those of the world; but they are such 
as depend entirely upon faith. If the Christian's faith 
be overthrown he must of necessity to that extent cease to 
live the life of faith; that is, he will cease to be actuated 
by the same motives, etc., which his faith previously inspired. 
And if, through unfaithfulness, his spiritual vision 
has become dim, so that he can no longer see or rightly 
estimate the value of spiritual things, the world, the 
flesh and the devil are still busy presenting allurements and 
deceptions to lead him farther and farther away from God, 
in whose favor alone is life. 
Weariness in well doing and desire for the rewards of 

R1799 : page 93 

unfaithfulness are first steps in drawing back from the way 
of faith and also from the favor of God. In the light of 
our text, this drawing back is a most serious matter. The 
intimation of verse 39 is that it is a drawing back unto perdition, 
destruction— "If any man draw back, my soul shall 
have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who 
draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe to the 
saving of the soul." 

The drawing back may at first be a very slight departure 
from the narrow way of sacrifice— only a looking back, 
perhaps, with a sigh for the things behind, a little slowing 
up of speed in the race set before us; then a little disposition 
to compromise the truth in favor of the cravings of the 
fallen nature. Thus the way is prepared for the arts of the 
tempter, who is quick to note our weak points, and to take 
advantage of them in a manner best suited to our case. 
Subtle errors are brought to bear against the judgment; 
pleasing allurements, with a show of righteousness, are presented 
to the fleshly mind; and, almost imperceptibly, the 
soul forgets its "first love" for the Lord, and its first zeal 
in his service, and drifts away from the truth and the spirit 
of it, being no longer led of the holy spirit of God. 

Few indeed are the children of God who have never 
been tempted in this direction; for we all have the treasure 
of the new nature "in earthen vessels," and between the 
new and the old natures there is a constant warfare; and 
only by continued vigilance can the new nature keep the 
old in abeyance. In the wearisome life-long struggle we 
often need our Father's chastening hand to guide and keep 
us in the way. "What son is he whom the Father chasteneth 
not?" By instruction, discipline, experience, he 
leads us on, and if at heart our disposition is to be led of 
the spirit— to gratefully receive the instruction, humbly accept 



the discipline, and meekly profit by the experience, 
then will the Lord have pleasure in leading us on from grace 
to grace and from victory unto victory. To merely stand 
and battle on the defensive is very wearisome, and gains no 
victory. To gain the victory we must not only put on the 
armor of God, but we must be heroes in the strife, and wage 
an aggressive warfare upon the lusts of the eye and flesh 
and pride of life and all the foes of righteousness and purity. 
Love— love for the Lord, for the truth and for righteousness 
—must inspire us, or we shall never be victors. 
Love alone will keep us faithful even unto death, and make 
us meet for the inheritance of the saints in light. Where 
fervent love rules in the heart it implies that the heart is 
fully submitted to the Lord, and that means that nine-tenths 
of the battle is already won. But even then, as the Apostle 
says (Jude 21), we must keep ourselves in the love of God, 
in watchfulness and prayer and zeal; and grace will abound 
where love abounds. 

In such faithful obedience to the truth, and earnest 
endeavor to conform to its principles, the way and the 
truth grow more and more precious, and our willing feet 
with joy are led in the paths of righteousness and peace— 
into life everlasting. 

The life of faith is an individual matter, as well of 
the heart as of the head. It is far more than an acceptance 
of doctrines which we consider Scriptural and therefore 
true; it is the assimilation of that which we have proved 
to be the truth, so that its principles become our principles, 
and its promises our inspiration. This is what it is to 
"believe to the saving of the soul." "As many as are led 
by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God." And 
however we may realize our insufficiency of ourselves to 
overcome the world, the flesh and the devil in this seemingly 
unequal contest, let us remember, for our encouragement, 
that he who has begun a good work in us will carry 
it on to completion, if we humbly submit ourselves to his 
leading and discipline. Our Lord's promise is that he will 
not suffer us to be tempted beyond what we are able to endure. 
Let us hold fast our faith and our confidence in his 
sure word of promise— hold the truth in righteousness and 
faithfulness, and we shall not be of them who draw back 
and mind earthly things. 



R1799 : page 93 

GOD NOT THE AUTHOR OF SIN. 



A BROTHER who was greatly helped by the vindication 
of God's character in the article, 

"Christian Common Sense," in our March 1 issue, refers 
us to Job 42:1 1 as a positive statement that the evil which 
befell Job was brought upon him by Jehovah. 



In reply we quote from our issue of Aug. 1, '94, page 
245, as follows:— 

"Satan is indeed the prince of the air, the present heavens 
— ecclesiasticism, both heathen and nominal Christian— 
and only the Lord's "little flock" are kept, so that the 
"wicked one toucheth them not."— 1 John 5:18. 

R1800 : page 93 

"But in another sense Satan is prince of the air power, 
—literally. When Job was given into his hand to be tried, 
he manifested his power of death. He caused fire to fall 
from heaven (probably a bolt of lightning), and destroyed 

R1800 : page 94 

several of Job's servants and his sheep. He caused a great 
wind (a cyclone or tornado) to come upon Job's house, 
and thus killed Job's sons and daughters. 

"Satan's object evidently was to make Job suppose that 
God caused those calamities and thus to cause Job to feel 
bitter and resentful against God, and to 'curse God and 
die;' or to shake his faith in there being any God. Indeed, 
that such was Satan's object is implied in the narrative; 
and Job's friends, although God-fearing men, were 
deceived into this view, and tried for days to convince Job 
that his afflictions were the work of the Lord. But of Job 
it is written, 'In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God 
foolishly [with being the author of his calamities.]'— 
Job 1:22." 

Nevertheless, Job knew to recognize his adversities as 
God permitted (Job 2:10); because Satan could do no more 
than God would permit him to do. 

However, the Brother only partially grasped our argument; 
which was not that God never causes calamities, 
such as Job experienced, such as Israel experienced, and 
such as are promised in the judgments of the "Day of 
Jehovah;" but that God never commits sin (moral evil), 
nor influences nor compels men to do so. 

We do not wonder that the real points might be confused 
in some minds in which Christian Common Sense 
rules, to whom it would be too absurd— nay, too blasphemous 
—to suppose that the Holy One, who is the very standard 
and pattern of righteousness (1 Pet. 1:15,16), could be the 
author and instigator of "all sin, wickedness and crime," 
as some are declaring is the "new light" into which they 
have come and into which they are striving to lead others. 
-See 2 Cor. 11:14. 

Another inquiry is with reference to the Hebrew word 
rendered evil in Isa. 45:7 and Amos 3:6, which in our 
issue of March 1 we showed had not the remotest reference 
to moral evil, sin. 

We reply,— The word in Hebrew is ra. It is translated 
thirty-two different ways in our common version, 
thus:— Adversity, Affliction, Calamity, Distress, Grief, 
Hurt, 111, Mischief, Misery, Sorrow, Trouble, Wicked, 



Wickedness, Evil, etc. 

Thus it will be seen that like our English word evil it 
might be used in referring to anything not good, undesirable; 
and both in the Hebrew and the English we should 
be obliged to judge from the context whether moral evil 
(sin) or physical evil (pain, trouble, etc.) is meant. We 
showed beyond question in our article referred to that the 
context showed that physical evil (trouble, calamity, etc.) 
is the only meaning which can be drawn from "evil" in the 
texts cited as proof-texts (Isa. 45:7; Amos 3:6) by those 
who would blasphemously, as well as foolishly, charge God 
with being the author and instigator of "all the sin and 
wickedness and crime" of the world. 

An illustration of the use of ra where it does signify 
sin, wickedness and crime may be found in Isa. 5:20. 
It there, however, seems to apply to those who are traducing 
God's character— calling his good evil, calling his righteousness 
sin, and in general confusing themselves and 
others by calling darkness light, and light darkness. Verily, 
"If the light that is in thee become darkness, how great 
is that darkness."— Matt. 6:23. 

[We still have over 1000 extra copies of our March 1 
issue which we will supply free to our readers to loan 
to people disturbed by the blasphemous doctrine it opposes 
and exposes. An occasional one whose head has 
been confused by sophistry, but whose heart, as well as his 
tongue, is still loyal to the Lord, may be reached; but our 
experience is— not many. Whenever the blasphemous words 
have eaten "as doth a canker" (2 Tim. 2:17) into the 
heart, so that they love darkness rather than light, when 
both are before them,— prefer to think of God as the one 
from whom cometh every evil thought, propensity and act, 
rather than to recognize him as the Light wherein is no 
darkness— you may conclude that not only is the head confused, 
but that the heart also is radically antagonistic to 
both the spirit and the Word of God. Turn from such, 
notwithstanding their "feigned words," and turn to and 
fellowship "him that hath an ear to hear" and a heart to 
love the first principles of the gospel and only such further 
teaching as is in full harmony with those first principles. 
As our Lord did, let us give special attention to "Israelites 
indeed, in whom is no guile."] 



R1800 : page 94 

THE LORD'S SUPPER. 



-APRIL 28, MARK 14:12-26;-MATT. 26:17-30; 
LUKE 22:7-30; 1 COR. 11:23-25.- 

Golden Text— "This do in remembrance of me." 



VERSES 12-16. The first day of unleavened bread 

when they killed the Passoverlamb, was the 14th of 

Nisan (See March 15 TOWER, page 71). The Feast of Passover 

began on the 15th and lasted for seven days; the day 

beginning at sunset— 6 P.M., of the preceding day. (Exod. 12:18-20.) 

The prohibition of the use of leaven during this 

time was a reminder (1) of the haste with which they fled 

from Egypt, not having time to wait for bread to rise 

(Exod. 12:34,39); and (2) of their sufferings in Egypt, 

on account of which it was called the bread of affliction. 

(Deut. 16:3.) But (3) its chief significance was the putting 

away of sin, leaven being incipient putrefaction and hence 

a symbol of impurity. (1 Cor. 5:6-8; Matt. 16:6.) Considering 

Israel in its typical character and their deliverance 

from Egyptian bondage as a type of the deliverance 

of the world from the bondage of sin and death, this feast 

is seen to be a type of the world's proper condition in the 

Millennial age. Having, through Christ, experienced the 

great deliverance from the present bondage of sin and death 

and the great time of trouble, it will be required of all 

that they put away from them the leaven of sin and, in 

grateful remembrance of their deliverance, keep the feast 

(rejoicing in and partaking of the good things of God), 

not with the leaven of selfishness, neither with the leaven 

of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread 

of sincerity and truth. 

R1800 : page 95 

The killing of the passover lamb, which prefigured the 
sacrifice of Christ, was always done on the 14th of Nisan 
(Exod. 12:6); so also the sacrifice of Christ was accomplished 
on this same day, thus fulfilling the prediction of 
the type. The sacrifice of the lamb prefigured the sacrifice 
of Christ for the salvation of "the Church of the first-born," 
and the subsequent deliverance of the whole groaning 
creation of which the nation of Israel was a type. 

During the passover week hospitality was recognized 
as a duty in Jerusalem: hence the readiness with which the 
Lord's request for a room was granted. Probably the 
man was a believer, as verse 14 would seem to indicate; or 
there may have been some previous arrangement with him, 
as verse 15 seems to show. 

Verses 17-21. The strife to be greatest, mentioned 
only by Luke (22:24), probably began when they were taking 
their places at the table, each desiring to be nearest to 
the Lord and so manifesting somewhat of a selfish spirit. 
This was made the occasion of a very touching illustration 
of humility on the Lord's part, and the enforcement of the 
truth upon the minds of the disciples that without this very 
necessary qualification they could not enter the Kingdom 
of heaven.— John 13:5. 

The attitude of the disciples upon the Lord's announcement 
that one of them should betray him showed at 
once the effect of this lesson on humility. They were not 
overconfident, but each seeming to fear his own stability, 



inquiringly turned to the Lord saying, not, Lord, is it this 
one or that one? but, Lord, is it I? They had the spirit 
of self-examination. 

The hardness of Judas' heart and the depth of hypocrisy 
manifested in the coolness with which he heard the 
Lord's warning (verse 21) and in the deliberate plotting 
and wicked perseverance in evil are in marked contrast with 
the humble, loving spirit of the eleven. It is an illustration 
of the hopelessness of a soul willingly submitted to the 
power of Satan. Verse 21 leaves no ray of hope for his 
restoration. See also John 17:12. The goodness of God 
only hardened his heart and therefore there was no remedy. 

Verses 22-24 point out the very obvious import of the 
emblems, bread and wine. The broken bread represented 
the sacrifice of Christ's humanity for our redemption, the 
benefits of which sacrifice we must individually appropriate 
by faith, such appropriation being symbolized by the eating 
of it. The cup, the wine, which symbolized his shed 
blood, the blood of the New Covenant shed for many for 
the remission of sins, had the same significance as the 
broken bread, our partaking of it also meaning our appropriation 
of the benefits of his sacrifice, thus securing our 
justification. So the Lord declares, saying, "Except ye [thus 
by faith] eat my flesh and drink my blood, ye have no life 
in you." (John 6:53.) And to this significance the Apostle 
Paul (1 Cor. 10:16,17) shows another; viz., our participation 
with him, as members of his body, in the sacrifice: 
—"The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not a 
participation of the blood of the Anointed one? The loaf 
which we break, is it not a participation of the body of the 
Anointed one? Because there is one loaf, we, the many, 
are one body; for we all partake of the one loaf." 

R1801 : page 95 

After the Supper followed all those words of instruction, 
consolation, comfort and hope, and the touching 
prayer reported by John (13:33-38; Chapters 14-17). It 
was a season never to be forgotten by the disciples, one 
whose influence was very manifest in their subsequent 
course. 

Verse 25 foretells the final triumph of Christ and the 
Church when the sufferings of the present time are all 
ended. Then their feasting together will have a new and 
blessed significance, being commemorative of the heroism 
of their faith and their fidelity to the divine purpose under 
the most crucial tests, and a rejoicing together in the victory 
that faith and fidelity. 

Verse 26. "And when they had sung a hymn they 
went out into the Mount of Olives." Instead of dispersing 
they went out together. Observing the Lord's sadness 
and forebodings, the eleven sought to comfort and help him 
with their love and sympathy, while Judas went on his diabolical 
errand. 



R1801 : page 95 

THE AGONY IN GETHSEMANE. 



-MAY 5, MARK 14:32-42;-MATT. 26:36-46; 
LUKE 22:39-46; JOHN 18:1.- 

Golden Text— "The cup which my Father 
hath given me, shall I not drink it?" 

AS we consider the solemn scenes of this lesson, let it 
be with reverence and deep gratitude, remembering 
it was our load the Master bore, that it was the 
chastisement of our peace that was upon him, and that with 
his stripes we are healed. 

The narrative, so familiar to every Christian, is one 
full of precious lessons, especially to those who, by his 
grace, are endeavoring to follow in the Lord's footsteps. 
We observe (1) that when the Master realized that his 
hour of betrayal and fierce temptation was close at hand, 
having first comforted, counselled, and prayed for and with 
his disciples, his next strong impulse was to seek a solitary 
place for prayer and communion with God, that he might 
find grace to help in time of need. (2) We note also his 
love for his disciples, and his desire for their love and sympathy 
in return. "Having loved his own, he loved them 
to the end." And because he loved them, and knew that 
they loved him, he permitted them to accompany him to 
the place of prayer, that they might watch and pray with 
him. Leaving all but Peter and James and John at the 
entrance of the garden, as a sort of outer guard against the 
sudden intrusion of his betrayer upon his last hour of 
prayer, he advanced with the three— the three in whose ardent 
natures he seemed to find the most active and consoling 
sympathy— and, with an earnest appeal to them to 
watch and pray, he left them and went about a stone's 
throw beyond. Three times did he rise from prayer and 
return to them in anguish of soul to feel the touch of human 
sympathy, saying, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death." It was a sorrow, an agony, which, of 
itself, would have worn him out shortly— an intense mental 
and nervous strain which caused him to sweat great drops 
of blood. 

It was no sign of weakness in the Master that he thus craved 
human sympathy. His was no coarse, stoical nature, insensible 
to pain and shame and loss; nor was it a proud, self-centered 
nature which stood aloof from human fellowship, 
although those with whom he associated were so far beneath 
his glorious perfection. Gracefully he condescended to 
men of low estate, and esteemed them brethren beloved, 
of whom he was not ashamed. His was a refined nature, 
keenly appreciative of all that is lovely and pure and good, 



R1801 : page 96 

and correspondingly sensitive to pain from everything to 
the contrary of these. Human degradation and human 
woe must continually have borne heavily upon him during 
all his earthly life. But in this awful hour all the griefs 
and burdens of the whole world were rolled upon his 
shoulders, and he was to suffer as though he himself were 
the sinner— to suffer death, extinction of being, trusting 
alone in the Father's grace for a resurrection. Into this 
one hour were crowded, not only the mental realization of 
death and the physical agony and shame, the cruelty and 
torture of a horrible death, but also the sense of desolation 
to be experienced when even his beloved disciples, overcome 
by fear and dismay, should forsake him; and the sorrowful 
reflections upon the irretrievable loss of Judas, and upon 
the course of the Jewish nation— "his own" people, who 
despised him and were about to call down upon their own 
heads the vengeance of his blood, saying, "His blood be upon 
us and on our children." He foresaw the terrible calamities 
that in consequence must soon overwhelm them. 
Then the degradation of a whole guilty world, which must 
continue to groan and travail in pain until by his sacrifice 
he should gain deliverance for them from sin and death, 
caused him to feel the burden of responsibility to an extent 
which we can only approximate, but cannot fully comprehend. 
And in addition to all this was his knowledge of the 
fact that every jot and tittle of the law with reference to 
the sacrifice must be perfectly fulfilled according to the 
pattern in the typical sacrifice of the day of atonement.* 
If he should fail in any part of the work, all would be lost, 
both for himself and for men. And yet, though a perfect 
man, he realized that the flesh, however perfect, was unequal 
to the task. 

How much depended upon our Lord's fortitude in that 
awful hour, alone and defenceless in the darkness of overwhelming 
night, awaiting the certain arrival of his betrayer 
and the will of his persecutors maddened with hate and full 
of the energy of Satan! Oh, how the destinies of the world 
and of himself seemed to tremble in the balances! Even the 
perfect human nature was not equal to such an emergency 
without divine aid, therefore it was that he offered up prayers 
and supplications with strong crying and tears unto him 
who was able to save him from death, by a resurrection. 
The necessary comfort was provided through the Prophet 
Isaiah (42:1,6), by whom Jehovah said, "Behold my servant 
whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul delighteth: 
...I, the Lord, have called thee in righteousness, 
and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee [from falling 
or failure], and give thee for a covenant of the people, for 
a light of the Gentiles.... He shall not fail nor be 
discouraged." 

When the fearful ordeal in Gethsemane strained the powers 
of endurance almost to their utmost tension his prayer was 
only, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, 
not my will, but thine be done." Then, though the cup 



might not pass from him, an angel came and ministered to 
him. Just how, we know not, but probably by refreshing his 
mind with the precious promises and prophetic pictures of 
the coming glory, which none of his disciples had sufficiently 
comprehended to thus comfort him in this hour when the 
gloom of thick darkness settled down upon his soul, crowding 
out hope and bringing a sorrow exceeding great, 
"even unto death." Ah, it was Jehovah's hand upholding 
him, blessed by his holy name! according to his promise, 
that he might not fail nor be discouraged. 

The result of that blessed ministry was a reinforced 
courage which commands the deepest admiration. It was 
not a courage born of stoical indifference to pain and shame 
and loss, but a courage born of that faith which is anchored 
fast within the vail of the divine promises and power. 
With his eye of faith upon the glorious victory of truth and 
righteousness, when he should see of the travail of his soul and 
be satisfied— satisfied with the eternal joy and blessedness 
of a redeemed world, with the welcome and wealth of the 
Father's blessing, and the love and gratitude of every loyal 
creature in heaven and in earth— yes, comforted and encouraged 
thus with a realizing sense of the rewards of faith and 
faithful endurance to the end, he could now calmly and 
even courageously, go forth to meet the foe. Yes, this was 
the victory by which he overcame, even his faith, and so we 
also are to overcome. 

Now commenced the realization of the dreadful forebodings 
of Gethsemane. Mark his calm, dignified fortitude, 
as he addresses Judas and the Roman soldiers, and its effect 
upon them. They were so overpowered with the grandeur 
and nobility of this wonderful man that they could not 
have taken him had he not voluntarily placed himself in 
their hand. Notice, too, his kind consideration for the 
bewildered and weary disciples, and his loving excuse for 
them, "The spirit truly is willing, but the flesh is weak," and 
his request to the Roman soldiers at the time of his arrest 
that they might be permitted to go their way (John 18:8), 
that so they might escape sharing in his persecutions. So 
through all the trial and mocking, and finally the crucifixion, 
his courage and solicitude for the welfare of others never 
failed. 

As we thus view our Lord under a trial so crucial, and 
mark how the hand of Jehovah upheld him, let it strengthen 
the faith of all who are endeavoring to walk in his footsteps, 
to whom he says, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the 
world: and this is the victory that overcometh, even your 
faith. (John 16:33; 1 John 5:4.) Has not the Lord, Jehovah, 
commissioned his angels also to bear up the "feet" of 
the body of Christ, lest at any time they be dashed against 
a stone (lest some overwhelming trial should prove too 
much for them)? (Psa. 91:11,12.) Yes, as surely as his 
hand upheld the Head, our Lord Jesus, so surely will he 
bear up the feet. "Fear not, little flock: it is your 
Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom," though 
through much tribulation ye shall enter it. The angels are 
all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who 



shall be heirs of salvation. Though their ministry is unseen 

R1802:page96 

by us, it is not therefore unreal, but potent for good. 
Our fellow-members, too, in the body of Christ are all the 
Lord's active messengers to each other, thus in turn sharing 
the privilege of bearing up the feet. 

But to have this help in time of need we must invoke 
it. Every day and every hour is indeed a time of need; 
hence our necessity of living in an atmosphere of prayer— 
to pray without ceasing. And if the Lord needed often 
to seek retirement from the busy scenes of his active life to 
be alone with God, to keep the close bond of loving sympathy 
established, surely we need to do so; and in so doing 
we shall always find grace to help in time of need. In 
seasons of heavy trial the darkness may indeed so deepen 
upon the soul, as in our dear Lord's case, as almost to shut 
out the stars of hope; yet if, like the Lord, we hold on to 
the omnipotent arm of Jehovah and meekly say, "Nevertheless, 
not my will, but thine be done," his grace will always 
be sufficient; and with the Psalmist we can say, 
Though my flesh and my heart fail, yet God is the strength 
of my heart and my portion forever (Psa. 73:26); and, 
with the Lord, our hearts will respond— "The cup which 
my Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?" 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, page 39. 



R1802:page97 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-This morning, in thinking 
over the subject of "present experience," or "present 
privilege," I thought, I will write of it to one of the brethren; 
then I thought, I will write it to the Church at New 
York; then again I thought, No: I will write it to Brother 
Russell for the Church in general. So here it is:— 

KNOWING AND DOING. 



Practical and perfect obedience (on our part to God) 
"is a consummation devoutly to be wished." It is, it seems 
to me, one of the most timely, vitally important and intensely 
interesting subjects that can engage our attention at 
this season of the Christian year, when we have again been 
privileged to "Do this in remembrance of me." 



It is not enough simply to resolve or determine to do 
right or to obey God. We may sing: 

"I want to touch lightly the things of this earth, 

Esteeming them only of trifling worth! 
From sin and its bondage I would be set free, 
And live, my dear Savior, live only for thee!" 
But unless we go further, and actually make advancement 
in character, we will prove failures, and finally be completely 
shipwrecked. 

"If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them." 
(John 13:17.) Our Lord, here, as in other places, lays special 
stress on obedience, as do also all of the New Testament 
writers. Many seem content simply to know these things. 
Alas! how many there are who stop with a knowledge of God's 
plan, as it is now revealed and understood, seemingly unmindful 
of the latter clause of this text. Their lives are not 
conformed to the Word, nor to the likeness of Christ. (See 
Rom. 6:17, Diaglott; Rom. 8:29; 12:1,2.) It would seem 
at first that they really desire to be moulded and fashioned 
into the image of God's dear Son, but they go no further. 
They are not willing to pay the price: obedience is the price. 
They are not willing to endure the self-sacrifice and self-denial 
required by their covenant; for the "High Calling" 
costs all we have, though it is also worth all it costs. But 
these forget, or disregard, our Lord's words: "Happy are 
ye, if ye do them!" 

How prone we all are to desire and to acquire knowledge, 
at the expense of our spiritual development, and of 
the chief "fruit of the spirit," love— forgetting that "knowledge 
puffeth up, but love edifieth." Knowledge does not 
bring, nor produce, happiness. Obedience does. This we 
know, not only from our text, but by experience as well. 

We must bear in mind, however, that obedience is 
prompted by love; even as he said: "If ye love me, keep 
my commandments;" or "If a man love me, he will keep 
my words." Our love, then, is the measure of our obedience, 
and vice versa. 

Perhaps some one will say, "Oh! but you forget that 
he takes the will for the deed," and that it is written: 
'Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.'" 
No, we do not forget: we are well aware of that glorious 
truth; but we claim that there is great danger, right here, 
of "presumptuous sins."— Psa. 19:13; read also Rom. 2:1-6; 
6:12-22. 

Let us now notice some other texts on the importance 
of obedience. In Mark 3:34,35, our Lord does not say, 
whosoever shall hear, or understand, or desire to do, nor 
even try to do, but "whosoever shall do the will of God, 
the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother." What 
a privilege! Is it not worth striving for? 

Luke 6:46: "And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and 
do not the things which I say?" 

John 15:14: "Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever 
I command you." What an honor to be the Lord's friend! 

Matt. 7:21-27: Here we are taught that works are 
not always obedience; in other words, "Obedience is better 



than sacrifice." Many there are who are consecrated to 
a system, or to a work, who are not fully consecrated to him. 
How earnestly we should desire and strive to be "wise" in 
his estimation! 

James 1:25: "Blessed," not in his profession, not in 
his desire, nor yet in his determination; but blessed in his 
doing. 

John 14:21-23: Here is an experience to be coveted. 

Gal. 6:9— not in well-meaning, but in well-doing. So 
in 1 Pet. 4:19. 

Col. 3:23: "And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as 
to the Lord, and not unto men." Oh, to measure fully 
up to this experience! 

Heb. 2:3: Simply to neglect is fatal. We must stand 
(Eph. 6:13,14), or progress. To stand, in this "evil day," 
requires the "whole armor;" and, to progress, we have to 
(beside having on the whole armor) "pray always" and 
"watch," as in verse 18. 

When tempted in any line or to any degree, "Let us 
fly to the Word."— Matt. 4:4. Here are some of the 
"exceeding great and precious promises," upon which we 
may stand. Please read them carefully.— 2 Cor. 12:9,10; 
2:14; 1 Cor. 10:13; 1:26-31; 2 Cor. 9:8; Phil. 4:19. 

We will never (while in the flesh) be exempt from temptations; 
but it is not a sin to be tempted: "He was tempted 
in all points like as we are, yet without sin!" We must 
expect a constant and a hard fight. Satan is so persistent. 
The poet says truly: 

"Yield not to temptation; for yielding is sin. 
Each vict'ry will help you some other to win." 

So also there is truth in the old proverb, "We cannot 
prevent the birds from flying over our heads; but we can 
prevent them from building their nests in our hair." And 
the Scriptures exhort us to "Resist the devil, and he will 
flee from you." "Neither give place to the devil." "Above 
all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith ye shall be 
able to quench all the fiery darts of the wicked (one)." 
"Take us the little foxes (i.e., wicked thoughts, etc.,) that 
spoil the vines." "Love thinketh no evil!" (Oh, for 
instant and constant victory!) Whatsoever things are pure, 
lovely, etc., think on these things. See also 2 Cor. 10:5. 

"All for Jesus, all for Jesus! all my being's ransomed powers. 
All my thoughts, and words, and doings; all my days and all my hours." 

As one recently wrote, "By never permitting wrong 
thoughts to have a place (in our minds or hearts), one can 
overcome much more easily. I speak from experience." Or, as 
another said, speaking from another standpoint, "We realize 
more and more the necessity for the development of 
positive traits of the Divine character, as well as the maintenance 
of our loyalty and integrity (to him) in the crucial 
tests to which the world, the flesh and the devil subject us. 
Oh, the sweet joy and peace that brighten our pathway tonight!" 
We must not only "cease to do evil," but we must 
"learn to do well"— really do good works; be "rich in 
good works;" "always abounding in the work of the Lord." 

We all desire to be more spiritual-minded; but how 



can we? Answer: By feeding constantly on the Word, 
and by following closely in Christ's footsteps. (1 John 2:6; 

R1802:page98 

3:3; 1 Pet. 1:22; Acts 10:38.) A recent letter voiced 
my sentiments: "How I long for a higher life, a closer 
walk with God, a more realizing sense of Christ's presence. 
It does seem as though I were not living as high as I ought, 
or as in my privilege. I see so clearly the necessity of the 
willing sacrifice. I feel the need of higher, spiritual teaching." 

Praise God! that we are growing up "in the unity 
of the Spirit" and to "the unity of the Faith." (Eph. 4:1-13.) 
Verse 13 should describe our present experience; 
or, better, our present experience should approximate that 
description. And, "speaking the truth in love, may [we] 
grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even 
Christ." 

As a fitting close for this subject of obedience, I present 
this, as our motto for the coming year— "What would 
Jesus do?" And for a definite and complete answer, how appropriate 
his own words: "I do always those things that please 
Him!" (John 8:29.) Amen! And may God Almighty 
help us so to do! 

Your Brother, "all for Jesus," JAMES A. WEST. 



R1803 : page 98 

DEAR BROTHER:-It is evident that not a few of your 
readers are solicitous in regard to their spiritual state and 
prospects; and well they may be, for the time is short, and 
the issues are tremendous. 

In my own mind it lies in this way. When the Lord 
would open my eyes to the truth, he found in me a will at 
variance with his. I was born with it, and my evil acts 
were generated by it. My whole life and activity were inspired 
by self-will; and what was externally correct was vitiated 
at heart, because done in alienation from the life and 
will of God. The carnal mind minded not the things of God. 

But, on acquaintance with himself and myself, I saw 
that, not only is his will sovereign, but righteous— holy, 
just and good; while mine, being variant from his, was essentially 
vicious, and could end only in ruin. "For desire, 
when it hath conceived, bringeth forth sin; and sin, when 
it is finished, bringeth forth death." It follows that the 
universal welfare, in earth and heaven, demands the universal 
prevalence of God's holy will. His claim to our loyalty 
and obedience is co-incident with our truest welfare, 
and enforced by true love. Hence I renounced my self-reliance, 
self-assertion, self-seeking, and sank my whole self-will 
into his righteous will. I desire nothing more than his 
will, I accept nothing less. That he has a will about it, that 
covers all my case, enthuses me. I am of value in his sight 
when I am of his mind and will, and act on his plan; he 



is mine, and I am his; and I can trust his infinite wisdom 
and power to do all for me that is in his heart of love. Why 
should I ask more? how can I accept less than he so 
freely offers? I find it my wisdom to refer it all to his own 
wisdom and sovereign pleasure. Neither do I envy any 
other one's fortune. He has a dispensation for you, and 
also one for me— both conceived in consummate wisdom, 
and provided for of sovereign grace. Your fortune is fitted 
to you, and mine is suited to me. And when the Lord's 
will is done in you, and in me, and in every other one wise 
enough to submit theirs to his, then every star will shine in 
its own place and magnitude— even though one star may 
differ from another star in glory. 

Every life, therefore, is a standing success when free 
and whole-souled choice has been made of the whole will 
of God— no matter what its worldly circumstances. The 
endeavor after the obedience of love— as complete as its 
surrender of will— will be accepted of the Lord, despite the 
imperfections arising out of nature's infirmities. He is accepted 
in the Beloved, complete in Christ, and justified freely 
by the grace of God through the redemption that is in 
Christ Jesus. 

For myself, therefore, I do not specify, nor bargain 
with the Lord. What he offers freely I accept thankfully. 
I will neither go beyond nor stop short of all his will. I 
take him at his word, and trust him for all that grace of life 
that is in Christ for us, and which his holy spirit administers 
in every soul that offers itself to him. When he fills 
me, all else is shut out; and when his work is done, all is 
done. The redeemed of the Lord are guided into all truth. 
All are complete in him, and satisfied with him. He sees 
in them of the travail of his soul, and is satisfied. 

Great things are present, but greater ones are ahead. 
How blessed to be on the Lord's side, and to have the Lord 
on our part in these tremendous times, and thus to escape 
the things that are coming upon the earth! 
J. R. LENTE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Since receiving the tracts 
we have been at work among our Methodist friends, and as 
a result our supply (4,000) of No. 25 is exhausted. We still 
have a number of Do You Know? but will be glad to have 
at least 5,000 more of No. 25, and such others as you feel 
disposed to send. 

Our friends here all seem glad to help spread the truth, 
and I am glad to say that it is having a sanctifying influence 
on our own lives and hearts, and that we rejoice that we 
have the privilege of serving our Master, even though it is 
in doing some of the small things. But, as I said to Sister 
Wise last night, the plan of the ages has become a part of 
my very life. How precious does the old story become to us, 
who are in Christ Jesus ! How gratifying it is to note the 
unfolding of God's great plan day by day! Truly the Lord 
is good! Your Brother in Christ, C. A. WISE. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-While Brothers Wright 
and Causer have been finishing here, I have been down to 
Bedford. It is a little place, of about three thousand. 
I was there not quite nine days, and took 195 orders, and 
think I will have better success in delivering there than here, 
where I have had to work against more opposition than ever 
before; for even some of the colored ministers oppose the 
truth very bitterly. While I cannot say that this opposition 
and loss of orders have made me feel good, I realize that 
in view of the life of our Lord and his faithful followers, and 
the things which they suffered in living a godly life, if I 
am a follower of the Lord I cannot expect it otherwise; 
and so I strive to take it patiently; and my earnest desire 
is that when opposition to the truth waxes stronger I 
may, by the grace of God, endure faithfully to the end. 

When I view the favor that my Heavenly Father has 
bestowed upon me, in leading me out of gross darkness into 
his marvelous light, in opening my eyes to an appreciation 
of our high calling and in enabling me to apply the precious 
truth to myself, I am greatly comforted, and I experience 
that peace and joy which the world cannot give or take 
away. And not by words alone would I show my appreciation 
of God's grace to me. By my actions, by my daily 
life in his service, would I prove what is that good, acceptable 
and perfect will of God. 

Please take from my account One Hundred Dollars and 
apply it where it is most needed. I thought to save what 
money I could in view of going to New Zealand in the interests 
of this gracious gospel (as you remember I spoke to 
you about it), but seeing the amount of work to be done 
here, I would rather submit to the leading of the Lord as 
circumstances may direct. S. J. RICHARDSON. 

R1803 : page 99 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-It is about 
a year since I came into the light of harvest truth. How 
wonderfully God has been leading me— more and more fully 
into the light. 

I sometimes ask myself these questions: Am I the same 
man that I was one year ago? Why is it that all my earthly 
surroundings have so changed? I seem to see everything 
in a different light. Earthly objects do not seem so real 
as before. Is this the experience of all to whom God reveals 
his plan? 

Oh! it does seem that God has drawn me to himself, 
that I have caught a glimpse of the glories of the heavenly 
kingdom; and as the truths of the spiritual kingdom are revealed 
to me more and more, I can say from the heart, 
"Heaven is my home." Heavenly hopes grow brighter as 
earthly hopes fade away. And, while here, I rejoice to be 
counted one of the harvest laborers, though but a humble 
one. I can never do enough. 



Sometimes it is necessary for me to surrender or stand 
boldly for the truth. Through the grace that is given unto 
me, I always choose the latter. If I had built my faith on 
Millennial Dawn only, I should long ago have proved an unfaithful 
member of the "one body." Thank God! I have 
searched his Word to learn whether these things are true or 
not. My dear friends, it is God's work in which we are 
engaged. I never start out selling Dawns or distributing 
tracts without first asking him to bless my efforts to aid in 
spreading the blessed truths of the coming kingdom. I 
have sold thirteen of the DAWNS ordered of you, and 
have loaned several among my neighbors. I sell four or 
five in a half day, and eight or nine when I can give a whole 
day to the work— which is not often. I could sell many 
more than that only many poor people are not able to buy. 
May God bless them. The good news of the kingdom is 
received more gladly by the common people than by the 
rich, even as at the first advent. 

Dear friends, may God's richest spiritual blessings be 
showered upon you. Forgetting the present "light afflictions," 
let us press forward toward the great prize. 

Yours in the blessed hope, W. B. LINDSLEY. 



DEAR BROTHER:— For more than a quarter of a century 
I had been an active worker in church and Sunday 
School and a diligent Bible student; but as I always approached 
and viewed the Bible through erroneous doctrines, 
the effect produced on my mind was one of confusion. When 
I either read or heard from the pulpit of God's promises to 
gather his people together into their own land, or that every 
one should be brought to a knowledge of the truth, or other 
similar statements, this thought always thrust itself into my 
mind: "What benefit is this to the thousands of millions 
who are already dead, and who will yet die, before this 
gracious time comes?" As I could never find an answer to 
this, I fell at last into a state of spiritual apathy, content to 
drift along and teach doctrines which I did not comprehend 
and only half-believed, my only consolation being that these 
things would all be cleared up in the next life. 

Eighteen months ago a DAWN, VOL. I., was put in my 
hand by a neighbor. It opened at the chapter on Restitution, 
and after reading a few sentences my interest was 
aroused. As I went along, again and again I said to myself, 
"It is too good to be true." And when I reached the 
end I resolved that I would not leave a stone unturned until 
I had satisfied myself whether or not your views and statements 
were in harmony with the Word of God. 

Within six months I had read VOL. I. more than a dozen 
times, and VOLS. II. and III. four or six times each, comparing 
the references with the Bible, to see if you had used 
any of them in a strained sense. Afterward I read the entire 

R1804:page99 



Bible through, so as to view it as a whole; and I became 
thoroughly satisfied that your statements are in harmony 
with the original Scriptures, with the accepted character 
and attributes of God, and also with reason and common 
sense. And this cannot truly be said of any other system 
of religious belief with which I am acquainted. 

Since I have been thus enlightened, the Bible appears 
to be an entirely new book. Once it was a duty to read, 
now it is a pleasure. It seems as if for twenty-five years I 
had been trying to read it at night by the light of the stars 
only, and that now the light of the glorious sun shone full 
upon it. 

Mrs. W. and I are still alone in our immediate neighborhood, 
but we feel and know that we have God on our 
side; and within a radius of a few miles we have the encouragement 
and fellowship of more than a score of others 
who are living and rejoicing in the light of present truth. 
This is a privilege which has not been always enjoyed by 
some of us. Bro. Edmonds says he was entirely alone for 
more than six years after he was led into the light, and he 
now appreciates the privilege of meeting those of like precious 
faith almost daily. 

We are trying to let our light shine among our friends and 
old religious associates, but the results thus far have not been 
very pronounced. I have a number of DAWNS out, but 
nearly all my friends take hold of the matter in a very sleepy 
manner. Some only read snatches here and there, and 
of course miss all the force of their systematic reasoning. 
One who has given me the most encouraging hopes has 
carefully read VOLS. I. and II., and is now engaged on VOL. 
III. He is a Methodist, but says he has been satisfied for 
years that the orthodox teachings were wrong, yet felt somehow 
that it was not specially his business. 

I can get any number of listeners when I talk on the 
new truths, but I can not get the same persons to search and 
prove the truths for themselves. The restitution prospects 
are embraced the most eagerly, and those who are afraid to 
believe usually hope that it may prove true. The last new 
tract, "Do You Know," is a most excellent one, and I 
think I can make good use of one hundred among such as 
I know to be thoughtful and religiously inclined, with a 
request to read as a personal favor. 

I have prepared a series of discourses on these Bible 
truths, and purpose inviting in my friends and neighbors to 
listen to them; and if they do not bear any fruit now, they 
will in 1914. 

My dear Brother, as a slight encouragement on your 
toilsome way, I wish to assure you what a blessing the visits 
of the WATCH TOWER are: how eagerly we look for them, 
how they are devoured and re-read again and again, and 
what palatable and strengthening food we find them. 

Your brother and friend, SMITH WALKER. 



DEAR FRIENDS: -Please send TOWER for one year 



to . He was a notorious infidel, but now, thank 

God! he is firmly grasping the truth. The other day he 
told me, "Each day I see a little more plainly than I did 
the day before." Yours fraternally, W. HOPE HAY. 



MY DEAR BROTHER:-"One of the characteristics of 
religious activity in our day is the mobilization of young 
workers in church work. The annual national and international 
assemblies of these societies attract world-wide attention 
and interest. These assemblies bring together as 
many persons as the national political conventions, and few 

R1804 : page 100 

cities now have halls large enough to accommodate them." 

The above editorial, from the Philadelphia Ledger, goes 
to substantiate the truth of the final massing of the sects. 
One word particularly drew my attention— "mobilization." 

I am much pleased with the interest manifested by the 
brothers and sisters here. They are taking a firm hold on 
the truth; yet the adversary still darkens the intellect of 
some with reference to "Babylon." Brother Sears has done 
a most excellent work— I think a harvester's work. 

You will find enclosed an order slip for DAWNS. An 
old acquaintance of the family stopped me on the street this 
afternoon, and greeted me thus: "What is the name of 
that book you have been reading, that has so changed your 
views in religious matters, and where can I procure a copy?" 
We walked up the street together and had (I trust) a very profitable 
talk. He told me, among other things, that he was 
somewhat of a skeptic at present. On leaving I handed him 
some tracts. I find there is a good field in this direction, 
and keep a record of the tract given to a person and the 
date, so that I know how to approach that one again. 

Yours in the Faith once delivered to the saints, 
L. J. WILCOCK. 



R1799 : page 100 

THE MEMORIAL CELEBRATION. 



BY many the sentiment was expressed that the Memorial 
celebrated on the evening of the 7th at 
Bible House chapel, Allegheny, was the most impressive 
and enjoyable of any ever held here. The program mentioned 
in our last issue, page 2, was closely followed. The 
morning discourse was from the words:— 

"And they crucified him, and parted his garments, 
casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by 
the Prophet, 'They parted my garments among them, and 



upon my vesture did they cast lots.' And, sitting down, 
they watched him there."— Matt. 27:35,36. 

Sister Russell took notes of the discourse, and at 
some future time portions of it may be reproduced in 
the TOWER. The morning session, although unusual and 
less convenient for some of the friends, was well attended, 
—about one hundred and twenty-five being present— and, 
on the whole, the arrangement worked very favorably, giving 
a quiet afternoon for meditation. 

Previous opportunities having been afforded for baptisms 
among the usual congregation, the majority of those immersed 
were visiting Brethren and Sisters from near-by towns. One 
Brother, however, came nearly four hundred miles. Twelve 
were buried in the likeness of the Lord's death, emblemizing 
in water the burial of their wills into the will of their 
Redeemer, and thus outwardly confessing him and pledging 
themselves before men to be dead with him, that they may 
share also in "his [the first, i.e., the chief] resurrection." 

The evening service was well attended— about two 
hundred being present. We missed the pleasure of meeting 
with a number of earnest ones from abroad, enjoyed when 
we used to have the general Conventions at this Memorial 
date; but we believe that our loss was the gain of the little 
companies scattered here and there who specially need the 
very talent which used to be with us on such occasions. 
This service was introduced by a praise and voluntary testimony 
meeting in which a number told of the Lord's goodness, 
their deep appreciation of present truth, and their increased 
determination to let the love of Christ constrain them 
to his service— the service of his truth and of his Brethren. 

The Memorial Supper followed at eight o'clock. The 
simplicity of our Lord's ordinances (Baptism and the Memorial 
Supper) was remarked;— so different from the rituals 
and ceremonies of men as practiced, not only by the 
heathen religions, but also as practiced by some who bear 
the name of Christ: no altar, only a linen-covered table; 
no candles, but instead the true light of life— Christ; no 
incense, except the true incense which God accepts through 
Christ's merit— the prayers of the saints; no priests, except 
"the royal priesthood" memorializing the death of the 
great "High Priest of our profession [order];" no gorgeous 
robes, no vestments, except the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. 

Then we noticed the appropriateness of the emblems, 
the unleavened bread representing the sinlessness, the purity, 
of our dear Redeemer— the fruit of the Vine representing 
the blood of the New Covenant. We noticed how necessary 
is this bread from heaven; it is indeed bread of eternal 
life— none can ever get eternal life without it. (John 6:53.) 
We considered how we had already eaten the true bread, 
Christ, and how we appropriated his virtue and merit— by 
accepting by faith, as his gift of love, the blessings secured 
for us by his death— "a ransom for all." 

We considered the Lord's statement concerning the 
"cup" of which our Lord said, "This is my blood of the 
New Covenant, shed for many for the remission of sins." 



We saw how our Lord's words contradict the words of many 
who speak in his name, and who declare that his blood, his 
death, has nothing to do with forgiveness of sins. We saw, 
too, that his words contradict the teachings of some who 
declare that all men will be everlastingly saved, and who fail 
to note that there are special conditions specified; viz., the 
New Covenant. We noticed also that his words contradict 
equally the view of others who claim that all except the 
"little flock" of this Gospel age will be eternally lost; for 
our Master declares that his blood was shed for the remission 
of the sins of many under the terms of the New Covenant. 

Then the emblems were partaken of, and we departed 
for our homes, after singing, 

"Nearer, my God, to thee, nearer to thee"— 
thinking meanwhile upon what our Lord endured for us, 
and judging that it is but a reasonable service now that we 
suffer with him and lay down our lives for the brethren in 
such little services as we can render; thus testifying our 
love and devotion to him who redeemed us. 



page 101 

VOL. XVI. MAY 1, 1895. No. 9. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Item— Celebrations of the Memorial 102 

An Excellent Plan 102 

Views from the Tower— 103 

The Religious View 103 

The Social View 104 

Perfect Through Suffering 105 

Priestcraft Opposed to Liberty 109 

Bible Study: Jesus before the High 

Priest 110 

Bible Study: Jesus before Pilate Ill 

Encouraging Letters Ill 

page 102 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 

R1805 : page 102 

CELEBRATIONS OF THE MEMORIAL. 

WE have heard from about 70 celebrations of the Lord's Memorial 
Supper by various little companies of the consecrated. These varied 
from two to two hundred in Allegheny, and two hundred and fifty in 
New York, where the Brooklyn friends also met. As usual on such 
occasions, there were a number of immersions. Altogether the occasion 
seems to have been specially blessed to almost all from whom we have 
heard;— not excepting a few isolated ones who met with the Lord alone. 

However, let us not forget that this is specially a season of temptation, 
and let us continue to "watch and pray," to "stand" and to assist 
others to stand. "Let him that thinketh he standeth [securely], 
take heed lest he fall." 

R1808 :page 102 



AN EXCELLENT PLAN. 

FOR a few years past we have supplied the Scripture text calendars 
at very low prices; but this year, being unable to secure them at prices 
that would suit the majority of our readers, who are poor, we got none. 
Many have expressed regret at not having them, and in our own family 
we at first experienced quite a loss; but now have found a substitute 
which serves us much better in some respects. It is this: We sing one 
of the hymns from Poems and Hymns of Dawn every morning before 
breakfast. This, with the rendering of thanks at the breakfast-table, 
constitutes our family worship for the day (being preceded by such 
personal prayer or communion with the Lord as each may desire,— and 
the same before retiring at night). 

Since very few of the hymns are original, and since they represent 
the choice thoughts of many of God's saints for the past three hundred 
years, we may speak freely of them and say that we consider them most 
beautiful, soul-cheering and spiritual-life awakening. They are prayer, 
thanks and praise combined, in which all our hearts and voices can and 
do unite. 

We commend this plan to you all. Try it for a week. The collection 
is so choice that you can scarcely make a poor selection, and if 
you continue it for a week you will probably want to continue it indefinitely 
—until we all join our hearts and voices in glory, singing, Allelujah! 
to him who loved us and bought us with his own precious blood. 
To those who cannot sing well now, who must wait until their 
stammering tongues are changed, but who can and do make melody 
in their hearts unto the Lord, we suggest the reading aloud of one of 
the hymns, or, better still perhaps, of one of the poems in the forepart 
of the book. 

Try this ! we believe that there is a blessing in it for all who are in 
heart-harmony with the Lord. It will help to lift your minds from 
earthly things and the cares of this life and to fix them upon the things 
of greater worth, the things eternal. 

page 102 

POEMS AND HYMNS OF DAWN is a book of 494 pages (150 
poems and 333 hymns). It is published at $1.00, but supplied to 
TOWER readers at wholesale rate, 50 cents by mail, $5.00 per dozen by 
express. But as the plan proposed above would require several books 
for each family, we will make a special offer, good until June 1, of 
THREE COPIES FOR $1.00, postage paid by us. 



DO NOT SEND MONEY UNLESS "REGISTERED." 

COMPLAINTS of money lost in the mails continue. Send only by 
Draft, P.O. Money Order or Express Order. Then if letters be stolen 
the money can be recovered. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., English and German; 
VOL. I. in Swedish and Dano-Norwegian, at uniform prices, 25 cents per 



volume in paper covers, $1.00 per volume in embossed cloth binding. 



R1804:page 103 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RECENTLY, says the Catholic Mirror, at a meeting 
of the Sunset Club, Chicago, Howard L. 
Smith, a prominent Protestant, surprised his hearers by 
predicting that 

"The Church of the future would be the Catholic 
Church. He based this not so much on his own knowledge 
of Catholicism. The Church of the future would be 
due to organization. The Catholic Church, he said, would 
overcome the broken sects of Protestantism as easily as the 
regular army would defeat a mob of strikers. Independence 
in religion was chaos in religion. Let each man be his 
own pope, and you have religious anarchy, which is the 
same thing as sectarianism. Catholicism and Agnosticism 
[Infidelity] would divide the twentieth century between 
them." 

How remarkable it is that the very liberty which the 
Bible commends is regarded by many as "religious anarchy." 
In the early Church each believer was expected to prove 
individually every item of his belief. They were to accept 
nothing as a congregation, nor as a denomination. Thus 
each was to be bound only to Christ, and, so far as others 
were concerned, each one was to stand fast in the liberty 
wherewith Christ makes free, and not to be entangled 
with any human yoke of bondage. They had no denominational 
"ties," no clerical "fetters," no creed "yoke," 
no traditional "chains." Each one united to Christ could 
not do otherwise than "love the brethren," and "love the 
truth," as well as love the Lord; and this love constituted 
the only bond that held their hearts and lives together. 
Love to the Lord made them attentive to his Word through 
the apostles, and watchful for his providential leadings in 
all who attempted to teach them in his name— attentive to 
prove all that they heard, to reject all not in harmony, 
and to accept and hold fast all that, according to that 
standard, they found "good." 

But now the general sentiment is union: small unions 
and large unions are proposed; and all who would return 
to the primitive method of individual liberty will more and 
more be anathematized as "heretics" and "religious anarchists," 
just as they were during the dark ages when the outward 
union was most complete. Let all who are the Lord's stand 
fast in the liberty which his truth alone can give; but let 
them avoid arrogance, and in meekness "speak the truth 
in love." 



The following from The Sun (Baltimore) explains itself, 
and indicates that the way back to Rome can be made 
sufficiently smooth for English high church clergy. 

"A gentleman writes from Italy: I hear that Pope Leo 
is devoting considerable time daily to the study of the 
literature bearing upon the question of Anglican orders. 
He is disposed to abolish the law of compulsory celibacy 
for the secular clergy, confining its obligation to members 
of religious orders who take vows of poverty, chastity and 
obedience. It is not generally known that secular priests 
make no vows, though the law of the Roman Church forbids 
them to marry, and annuls their marriages if contracted 
in defiance of its precepts. This is a point of ecclesiastical 
discipline which applies only to the secular clergy of 
the Latin rite. 

"It is well known that the Oriental clergy of the various 
Eastern rites who are in communion with Rome are allowed 
to marry, provided they do so before reception of the 
order of priesthood. His Holiness, therefore, in order to 
facilitate the reunion of the Anglican Church with the Roman, 
is favorable to the extension of the same privilege to the 
secular clergy of the Latin rite. In point of fact, the sovereign 
pontiff is well aware that the law of compulsory celibacy 
has become a dead letter among the parochial clergy 
throughout South America, from Mexico to Patagonia, and 
to a great extent also in Spain, Portugal, Italy, and the dependencies 
of those countries. Cardinal Vaughan and the 
Anglo-Roman Bishops generally are unfavorable to any 
change in the existing discipline, but Dr. Brownlow, Bishop 
of Clifton, and Dr. Hedley, Bishop of Newport and Menevia, 
are believed to entertain the same sentiments as the 
Pope on this question." 



R1804:page 104 

A Catholic priest was recently appointed to teach 
"The Philosophy of St. Thomas," in a Protestant University 

R1805 : page 104 

of Amsterdam. 

Lord Acton, a Roman Catholic, was recently appointed 
Regius Professor of Modern History in Cambridge 
University, in the place of the late Prof. Seeley. 

Comment is unnecessary. 



The Episcopal Church of the United States proposes a 
change of its constitution. It is proposed to district the 
United States into "Provinces," in each of which there shall 
be a legislative body competent to manage all of the affairs 
of the Province (as do the State Legislatures in civil affairs). 



It is proposed to have a more definite head and mouth than 
ever before for doctrinal utterances;— that all questions of 
doctrine shall be submitted to the House of Bishops, whose 
decisions shall be final. Furthermore, it is proposed to elect 
one of the bishops a chief, to be called Primus, and in position 
therefore to correspond to the Roman Pontiff. 

This means that four thousand ministers and nearly 
half a million communicants shall, even more completely 
than at present, give up the liberty wherewith Christ proposed 
to make them free, and come completely under a 
yoke of bondage. It means probably much more. It is 
probably an outline or skeleton of the great Protestant 
Union, sure to come, clearly outlined in God's Word as 
an image or likeness to Papacy. 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



In Manitoba about one-fifth of the population is 
Catholic, and four-fifths Protestant. It had been the 
custom to divide the school funds of the State and let each 
sect have its own schools; but this was abandoned in 1890, 
and a free secular school system was introduced, similar to 
that in vogue in the United States. The Roman Catholics 
have since been fighting to get their share and have their 
separate schools. They appealed to the Canadian Parliament 
in the matter, and afterward to the Privy Council of Great 
Britain, and have been supported in their demands. But 
the people of Manitoba are so pleased with their present 
unsectarian schools that they threaten rebellion rather than 
abandon them. 

A leading Manitoba paper says,— 

"The restoration will never be made: Manitoba has 
too keen a sense of justice, too much regard for truth and 
equity... .As a civilized people attempting to realize 
in a measure the ideals of the nineteenth century, 
Manitobans will not quietly submit to the preposterous 
demand that they should turn back the wheels of progress 
three hundred years." 



Both France and Spain have been on the verge of 
Revolution during the past month. Indeed nothing is more 
evident than that discontent and revolt are the order of the 
day in matters religious, political, social and family. What 
little there is of national cohesion in Europe seems to be 
largely the result of fear of each other. Take away that 
fear, and disband the armies as has been proposed, and the 
result would surely be general revolution and anarchy within 
two years, probably within one year. 

Thus we see the social "earth" ready for the great 
social conflagration predicted in God's Word— "the day 
that shall burn as an oven," in which "the proud and all 
that do wickedly [unjustly] shall be as stubble," the great 



"time of trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
But not yet: the conflagration must not come, the winds of 
war must not seriously blow, until the servants of God have 
first been "sealed in their foreheads" (intellectually) with 
the truth. Then the great storm predicted for twenty-five 
centuries will come "as a whirlwind." But meantime men 
speak of the assured peace of Europe, while France finds 
that her army is inferior to that of Germany by over one 
hundred thousand men, and proceeds to increase her army 
as an assurance of peace; and Great Britain finds that her 
navy is insufficient to maintain her dignity as the mistress 
of the sea, and will increase her navy. 



It seems a difficult matter for human brains to arrange 
laws which will protect the weaker elements of society from 
the mentally, physically and financially stronger elements 
without violating principles of justice and equality. For 
instance, the Illinois Legislature passed laws to prevent the 
employment of women in factories more than eight hours 
per day. The object was to benefit women by such restriction, 
and to do away with "the sweating system." But the 
Illinois Supreme Court has decided that the help cannot 
be constitutionally afforded in this manner; that such a 
law would be a restraint of a woman's rights to work as long 
as a man may work if she pleases,— a discrimination as between 
men and women the State constitution forbids. 

It is a sad case: competition and necessities on the one 
hand are grinding the life out of fellow beings, yet when 
benevolent people would render help justice, which all are 
bound to respect, says, Holding that men and women are 
equal, no legislation for or against either sex can be allowed. 



The U.S. Income Tax decision is somewhat similar. 
The tax is upon incomes above $4000 per year, under the 
general sentiment that those people who are by reason of 
superior ability or position so much more favorably situated 
than the masses should in justice pay a larger proportion of 
the expenses of government, etc. 

The U.S. Supreme Court has been called upon to decide 
as to the constitutionality of the law. A portion of 
the Court holds that the law is entirely unconstitutional— 
that no tax can be applied to one man that does not apply 
to another in equal proportion; that if, for instance, an Income 
Tax of two per cent be collected, it must apply proportionately 
to every man, whatever his income. The remainder 
of the Court upheld the law so far as it relates to 
profits or income not already taxed; but held that income 
from bonds and from real estate, having already paid 
taxes, cannot constitutionally be taxed again more than the 
real estate, bonds, etc., of others. 

R1805 :page 105 



In a word, the Constitutions, State and National, were 
designed to secure liberty and equality to all, male and female, 
rich and poor. If laws could be made to discriminate 
between males and females on one point, other laws 
might be made that would reduce one sex to slavery and 
make the other sex the masters. And if laws could be made 
to pinch the rich, the time might come when laws would be 
passed to pinch and enslave the poor. Hence these Constitutions 
were formed to prevent any partiality. 

The fact is that mankind are not at all equal; and hence, 
all being free, the inferior either in strength or intellect, as 
well as the superior in heart and benevolence, are apt to suffer 
more or less from the intellectual and financial giants, 
and need a paternal government that will recognize the inequalities 
and protect without enslaving the inferiors. But 
where can such a government be found? Who can be trusted? 
The one and only hope before the groaning creation 
is that set before us in the words: "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." Ah, 
yes! when that Millennial Kingdom comes, it will be indeed 
"the desire of all nations," although now they know it not. 



The London Spectator, after telling of the ravages of 
Influenza during the past winter doubling the death 
rate, suggests that the world is resting in a fancied security 
as to safety from plagues such as have visited the world in 
the past,— for instance, "the black death," with which 
physicians could do little,— that such or worse may come 
again, and gives some reasons for fearing them. It mentioned 
a fever approaching Europe from Russia, and now 
says:— 

"The disease which, when we wrote, had just crossed 
the German frontier, has now reached the low quarters of 
Berlin, causing many deaths and much suffering. It is a 
fierce fever which attacks the mouth, causing the loss of all 
teeth in a few hours, after which it kills, or departs leaving 
its victims toothless. Dr. Virchow believes it to be the 
'foot-and-mouth disease of cattle,' probably transmitted 
to the human subject by diseased milk. It is, however, infectious, 
and moves Westward. We shall know more about 
it in a few days; but if it reached our shores, it would be 
a terrible addition to our stock of painful complaints,— and, 
we repeat, there is no reason, except our short experience 
of exemption, why it should not." 

The Scriptures indicate that pestilences, as well as physical 
convulsions, will mingle with anarchy in making up 
the sum of the great trouble approaching, which will be a 
judgment from the Almighty to reduce the world to humility 
and submission, and make mankind ready to hear "Him 
that speaketh from heaven," whose voice shall thus "shake 
the earth [society], and also the heavens [ecclesiasticism]." 
-Heb. 12:26-29. 



R1806 :page 105 

PERFECT THROUGH SUFFERING. 



"Who, in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and 
supplications with strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save 
him from death, and was heard in that he feared; though he were a 
Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; 
and, being made perfect, he became the author of eternal 
salvation unto all them that obey him; called of God an 
high priest after the order of Melchisedec."— Heb. 5:7-10. 

WE take up the examination of this scripture under 
the following five heads:— (1) In the days of his 
flesh; (2) What he feared, and from what he was saved; 
(3) He was a Son; (4) In what sense he was made perfect; 
and (5) To whom he is the author of eternal salvation. 
These words of the Apostle give us an insight to the 
experiences of our dear Lord which help us to appreciate 
the load he bore for us in the days of his flesh. We notice 
particularly this expression— 

"IN THE DAYS OF HIS FLESH," 

because there are some who claim that in our Lord's existence 
there can be no distinction between days when he was in 
the flesh, and days when he was no longer in the flesh; for, 
say they, his resurrection life is his humanity, his flesh, 
glorified. Others there are who claim that he had no existence 
prior to his human life. But the reverse of both 
these ideas is not only implied in this statement of the 
Apostle, but is also definitely expressed in other scriptures, 
e.g., "Forasmuch as the children are partakers of flesh 
and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same;" 
he "was made flesh, and dwelt among us;" "Though he 
was rich, for our sakes he became poor." Then he said, 
"My flesh I will give for the life of the world." (See Heb. 2:14; 
John 1:14; 2 Cor. 8:9; John 6:51.) Yes, his human 
body was the body of his humiliation, the "body prepared" 
for sacrifice (Heb. 10:4,5), and which was sacrificed; 
and which, being sacrificed, was never taken back: 
it was given as the price of our redemption. Therefore 
he no longer lives the life in the flesh, the human life, 
but, having sacrificed that, he is now highly exalted and 
ever liveth as our divine high priest. "Yea, though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now, henceforth, 
know we him [so] no more."— 2 Cor. 5:16. 

His humiliation, therefore, was not an eternal humiliation, 
but was followed by a glorious exaltation, even to the 
divine nature and to the glorious body which belongs to 
that nature— "the express image of the Father's person" 
(Heb. 1:3), who dwelleth in light which no man can approach 



unto, but which Christ's faithful followers may one 
day see; for it is written that "we shall be like him, and 
see him as he is"— not as he was. For this he prayed 
while he was yet in the flesh, saying, "Father, I will that 
those whom thou hast given me shall be with me where I 
am, that they may behold my glory."— John 17:24. 
And yet, though changed, our Lord is the very same 

R1806 : page 106 

Jesus; for, says the Apostle, "He that descended [into the 

grave] is the same also that ascended up far above all 

heavens, that he might fill all things." (Eph. 4:10.) 

The change of nature from the human to the divine 

no more destroyed his identity in this case than did his 

change from the spiritual to the human nature at his incarnation. 

Of himself he said after his resurrection, "I am 

he that liveth and was dead, and behold I am alive forevermore." 

-Rev. 1:4,18. 

It is with grateful hearts that we accept the statements 
of Scripture that the Son of God was indeed made flesh; 
and we thank God also that his days in the flesh were 
numbered and few. With him, as with us, they were "few 
days and full of trouble." Especially after his consecration 
to the work of sacrifice, they were days of affliction, 
sorrow, disappointment and trouble, days that led him 
often to the throne of the heavenly grace to find help in 
time of need. It was our Lord's custom, therefore, often 
to seek the place of prayer after the busy days of service 
were ended. The mountains and the deserts were his 
closets, and not infrequently he spent the whole night in 
prayer. 

It was from these seasons of secret communion with 
God that he drew spiritual strength, consolation and comfort. 
They were seasons of precious communion when he 
could open up his heart to the Father as to no one else; 
when he could tell him all his sorrows and burdens and 
fears; and when the Father manifested himself to him in 
tokens of loving approval and sustaining grace. 

WHAT HE FEARED, AND FROM WHAT HE WAS SAVED. 

What, says some one, in surprise, did our Lord have 
any fears? Yes, the above words of the Apostle indicate 
the great mental conflict through which the Lord passed on 
our behalf "in the days of his flesh." This conflict began 
in the temptations of the wilderness, immediately following 
his baptism, and reached its culminating point in the 
garden of Gethsemane, where, probably as never before, 
"he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying 
and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, 
and was heard in that he feared." 

That which the Lord feared was not that the love or 
the promises of God would fail. He knew that "without 
faith it is impossible to please God," that God is a covenant-keeping 
God, and that all his conduct and dealings 



are founded on the eternal principles of truth and righteousness, 

from which to vary in the least iota would be a 

moral impossibility. But he knew, too, that the plan of human 

salvation was all made dependent upon the obedience 

of the anointed high priest to every jot and tittle of the 

law concerning him, as shown in the typical service of the 

tabernacle.* Not only must the sacrifice be made, but it 

must be made and offered exactly as prescribed. If the 

typical high priest, Aaron, had at any time failed to conform 

to the directions given for the offering (See Lev. 9:16), 

if he had forgotten or ignored any part of the directions, 

or if he had substituted some feature of his own 

ideas, he would not have been allowed to sprinkle the blood 

of such imperfect sacrifice upon the mercy-seat; his offering 

would not have been accepted: he would have died, and could 

never have come out and blessed the people.— Lev. 16:2,3. 

Thus we see that in undertaking the great work of 
redemption, the high priest not only bore in himself the 
issues of life and death for the whole human race, but for 
himself as well. Figuratively speaking, he took his own 
life also in his hands. No wonder, then, if, under the 
weight of his responsibility, the Lord feared. The tension 
of the great trials to which he was subjected was too great 
for even the perfect human nature unaided by divine grace. 
And therefore it was that he so often sought the place of 
prayer. Consider the great fight of afflictions through 
which he passed— the subtle and deceptive temptations in 
the wilderness,+ the contradictions of sinners against himself, 
and the base ingratitude of those he came to save: 
consider also his poverty, his loss of friends, his labors 
and weariness, and homelessness, his bitter and relentless 
persecutions, and finally his betrayal and dying agony. 
Surely the tests of endurance and of obedience to the exact 
requirements of the law of sacrifice under these circumstances 
were most crucial tests. What carefulness it wrought 
in the Lord; for he feared, lest the promise having been 
left him of entering into the rest that remaineth and the 
glory to follow the day of atonement, he should come short 
of the full requirements of his office as a priest to render 
acceptable sacrifice. So also, says the Apostle (Heb. 4:1), 
should we fear lest a promise being left us of entering into 
his rest, any of us should come short of it. 

When the Lord came to the last night of his earthly 
life, then it was that the questions came to his mind with 
increased force, Have I thus far done everything in exact 
accordance with the will of God? and now, in full view 
of the agony it will cost, am I able to drink the bitter cup 
to its very dregs? Can I endure, not only the physical 
agony, but also the ignominy and shame and cruel mockings? 
and can I do it all so perfectly as to be entirely acceptable 
with God in my own righteousness? Can I endure 
to see my disciples scattered and dismayed and my 
life-work apparently destroyed, my name and the cause of 
God covered with infamy, and my enemies triumphant and 
boastful? 

Such was our Lord's last conflict. Doubtless the powers 



of darkness were busy in that awful hour, taking advantage 

of the circumstances and of his weakness and weariness to 

discourage his hope and to fill his mind with fears that 

after all he should fail, or had failed to do the work acceptably, 

and that a resurrection therefore was by no means 

certain. No wonder that even the perfect human heart 

sank before such considerations, and that an agony of emotion 

brought great drops of bloody sweat. But did he 

yield to the discouragement and give up the struggle when 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS, page 78. 
+See our issue of Aug. 1, '94. 

R1806 : page 107 

the crucial test was thus upon him? No; he took these 
human fears to his Heavenly Father, "to him who was able 
to deliver him out of death," in order that his human will 
might be reinforced by divine grace to go forward and 
complete his sacrifice acceptably to God— to freely submit 
to be led away as a lamb to the slaughter, and, as a sheep 
before her shearers is dumb, so to open not his mouth in 
self-defence.— Isa. 53:7. 

And his prayers to the Father were not in vain: "he 
was heard in that he feared." Though his words were few 

R1807 : page 107 

because no words could express the emotions of his soul, 
his chastened spirit was all the while making intercession for 
him with groanings that could not be uttered. (Rom. 8:26.) 
And God sent an angel to comfort and minister unto him; to 
assure him still of the divine favor, and thus to give him 
fresh courage, strength of mind and steadiness of nerve to 
endure all that was before him, even unto death. With this 
assistance of divine grace our dear Lord went forward from 
that moment with undaunted courage to finish the work 
that was given him to do. Calmly he could come now 
and say to his beloved, but weary and bewildered, disciples, 
"Sleep on now, and take your rest." The bitterness of the 
mental conflict was now over, and the light of heaven shining 
into his soul had chased away the deep gloom that had 
hung over him like a funeral pall, making him exceeding 
sorrowful, even unto death. Yes, "he was heard in that 
he feared," the fear was all taken away, and, strong in 
the strength which God supplied, he felt that he was able 
to offer the acceptable sacrifice, to meet every jot and tittle 
of the requirement of the law in doing it, and hence that 
his salvation out of death, his resurrection, was sure. 
This fear on the Lord's part was not a sinful fear: it 
was a fear such as we also who are striving to walk in his 
footsteps are told to have, lest we fail to realize the precious 
promises vouchsafed to us upon conditions that are 
positive and unalterable. (Heb. 4:1.) It was a fear begotten, 



not of doubt of the Father's ability and willingness 
to fulfil all his promises, but of a knowledge of the 
righteous principles which must in every case govern 
the Father's course of action, of the inflexible law which 
righteously affixed the reward of eternal life and glory to 
his fulfilling of his covenant of sacrifice, while at the same 
time he began to realize that of himself as a human being, 
though perfect, his heart and flesh would fail unless reinforced 
by divine grace. The Psalmist expressed this fear 
of the Lord, and the source from which his help came, when 
he said, "My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the 
strength of my heart and my portion forever." (Psa. 73:26.) 
It was a filial fear, a fear entirely compatible with his 
relationship to God as a recognized Son; for 

THOUGH HE WERE A SON 

yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. 
His continual recognition by Jehovah as a Son was a guarantee 
of his perfection, and to sin at any time would have 
been to forfeit that relationship. On the same principle, 
we, the Church, are recognized as sons of God, because we 
have the righteousness of Christ imputed to us by faith. 

And yet, though he was a recognized Son, and hence perfect, 
without sin, the Apostle speaks of him as being made 
perfect— as being perfected in some sense through a process 
of experience— of experience of humiliation and suffering. 
In what sense, then, we inquire, was he perfected? The 
answer is implied in the words of the text— "Yet learned 
he obedience by the things which he suffered; and, being 
made perfect [in this lesson], he became," etc. Although he 
was a recognized Son of God in whom the Father was always 
well pleased, and one who had never disappointed in the 
slightest degree the fondest hopes of that righteous Father; 
although he had always recognized the Father as the 
source of his being, and the fountain of all wisdom, goodness 
and grace, and as that superior Being to whom he 
owed the deepest gratitude for life and all its manifold 
blessings, in whom also dwelt all wisdom and honor and 
glory and power, and whose perfect will was therefore the 
supreme law, the expression of the most perfect righteousness 
and truth, the profoundest wisdom and the deepest 
love and grace; to whom, therefore, was due the most loyal 
and loving obedience at all times and under all circumstances; 
and although he was a Son who had always recognized 
and delighted to do the Father's will; yet he was not 
counted perfect in the sense of that established and demonstrated 
character which was the necessary requirement for 
the priestly office to which he was called. For this office 
he must be proved beyond all peradventure by the severest 
tests, and that before many witnesses, in order that all might 
know the strong foundation upon which they could build 
their hopes. It was for this purpose that his sense of loyalty 
was put to the severe test which it met in Gethsemane. 
Possibly even our Lord himself did not realize the strength 
of his righteous character until brought face to face with this 



last trial. There he was tried and proved to the uttermost, 
and under the fiery ordeal his character, always perfect to 
the full measure of its testing, gained by divine grace its 
glorious perfection of completeness. 

Thus, through suffering, he learned obedience to the 
perfect will of God down to the lowest depths of self-abnegation; 
and God permitted it so to be, because such proving 
was necessary, both for the development and manifestation 
of that perfection of character which would be worthy 
of the high exaltation to which he was called. 

It should ever be borne in mind that perfection of 
being and perfection of character are two different things. 
Perfection of being is the work of God, while perfection of 
character is the work of the intelligent creature, wrought 
out in obedience to divine law and under the divine direction 
and supervision. Adam was a perfect being, innocent, 
free and glorious in his pristine beauty; but in the work 
of character-building he soon failed, and hence lost his perfection. 
Character cannot be developed wholly without 
trial. It is like a plant: at first it is very tender; it needs 
an abundance of the sunshine of God's love; frequent 

R1807 : page 108 

watering with the showers of his grace; much cultivating 
through the applied knowledge of his character as a good 
foundation for faith and inspiration to obedience; and then, 
when thus developed under these favorable conditions, it is 
ready for the pruning hand of discipline, and is also able to 
endure some hardness. And, little by little, as strength of 
character is developed, the tests applied to it serve only to 
develop more strength, beauty and grace until it is finally 
fixed, developed, established, perfected— through suffering. 

In the case of our Lord, this valuable plant of character, 
perfect in its infancy, maintained its perfection through 
all the tests applied to it, until it was finally made perfect 
in completeness, being established, strengthened, settled. 
This brings us to the last topic of our text, viz.,— 

TO WHOM IS CHRIST THE AUTHOR OF ETERNAL 
SALVATION? 

"And being made perfect, he became the author of 
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; called of 
God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec." 

There is much food for thought in this introductory 
phrase, "And being made perfect,"— and that, too, as previously 
shown, through the painful discipline of suffering. 
Being thus made perfect, he is now a suitable one to fill 
the office of a high priest, a mediator between God and 
men. This office, it is declared, he will fill on behalf of 
all men who obey him. The disobedient and wilful, who 
do not love the right ways of the Lord, and who have no 
desire to walk in them, will receive none of the benefit of 
his mediation; but to those who do obey him he will be 
"a merciful and faithful high priest;... for in that he 



himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor 
[to assist, comfort, relieve] them that are tempted. 

Ah, that was why he was first made perfect through 
suffering. The heavenly Father knew through what suffering, 
ignominy, shame and sorrow his beloved followers all 
through the Gospel age must pass. His omniscient eye 
foresaw the fagot, the torch, the rack, and the thousand refinements 
of cruelty with which Satanic ingenuity would 
fight the Church on her journey through this wilderness to 
the promised land. He foreknew how the fiery darts of the 
wicked, even bitter words, would wound them (Psa. 64:2,3), 
and therefore "It became him [Jehovah]... to make 
the Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings." 
(Heb. 2:10.) He was tempted in all points like as we are, 
yet without sin, so that we might know that we have a high 
priest who can be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, 
and so come boldly unto the throne of grace that we 
may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. 
(Heb. 4:15,16.) Ah, how carefully and wisely our heavenly 
Father foresaw and considered the interests of all his 
people! Through these glimpses of his character and dealings 
we can see how true were our Lord's words to his disciples, 
—"The Father himself loveth you." 

But, aside from the process of perfecting for the office 
of priesthood,— through suffering,— there is the fact of the 
perfection of our High Priest, to be considered for our comfort, 
satisfaction and consolation. He is one who, though 
when surrounded by sin and tempted in all points to sin, 
yet "knew no sin; neither was guile found in his mouth." 
He was "holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners," 
yet acquainted with our griefs and bearing our sorrows. 
Through bitter experiences he was perfected as our 
High Priest— to mediate for us (1), by presenting to God 
an acceptable sacrifice which made our salvation a legal possibility; 
(2), by undertaking to cleanse, purge and purify 
us until we also can stand approved of God and blameless 
—a glorious Church, without spot or wrinkle or any such 
thing. 

The absolute perfection, both personal and official, of 
our great High Priest, and the fact that he was ordained 
of God for this office, is the strongest possible demand and 
incentive for the Church's obedience to him, just as the 

R1808 :page 108 

heavenly Father's perfection and office were the all-sufficient 
reasons to our Lord for his obedience to the Father. God 
has not set over us a novice, nor one actuated by selfishness, 
nor by any ignoble motive; but he has made us a great 
High Priest whose every command is wise and good and in 
love calculated to lead us on from grace to grace until we 
also, like him, shall be established, strengthened, settled. 
The discipline through which he leads to this glorious 
end must of necessity be, in some measure at least, such as 
he himself experienced, a discipline of suffering. And since 
the Church is called, not only to perfection in righteousness, 



but also to share with Christ in the priestly office as 
members of his body, it is theirs also to follow him in the 
pathway of humiliation and sacrifice, even unto death. To 
obey him now, in this age, signifies all of this; for this is the 
will of God and the will of Christ, even our sanctification. 
-1 Thes. 4:3. 

In submitting ourselves fully to this great High Priest, 
the Church has the fullest assurance of his love, of his perfect 
integrity of character and purpose, of his superior wisdom 
and grace, and that in all things he is actuated by the 
purest and loftiest principles of virtue, love and benevolence. 
Never once has he been swayed from the most exact 
line of perfection, though assailed by the fiercest temptations. 
Every exhibition and testimony of his character 
inspires the fullest confidence, so that obedience to him signifies 
progress toward perfection at every step of the way. 
And to those who follow in this way he is the author of 
eternal salvation. Praise God for such a High Priest!— 
glorious in his perfection and glorious in his office, one 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but himself having 
no infirmities, no shortcomings, no sins. If he were 
an imperfect human being with only some superior qualifications, 
but liable like ourselves to err, to fail in judgment, 
or to be moved by selfishness or inferior considerations of 
policy, or who with a beam in his own eye would seek to 
extract the mote from ours, well might we fear to commit ourselves 
to his direction, and wonder why the Almighty gave 
us such a high priest. But our High Priest is not so. His 

R1808 : page 109 

perfection is testified by Jehovah himself, and his great love 
for us has been manifested in a thousand ways, chiefly in 
that he gave himself for us. 

Previous to his incarnation the evidences of our Lord's 
loyalty to the will of God— which always was the law of 
righteousness— were the acts of delightful service in cooperation 
with God in the works of creation and in things 
pertaining thereto. The humbling to human conditions 
was a step down from that exalted service, yet cheerfully 
and gladly undertaken. Then followed the trials of his 
earthly life; and last of all came the severe test of Gethsemane 
and Calvary. Here was a test of his fidelity to 
God which would cost him all that he had. Beyond this 
he could hope for nothing, save by the mercy and love of 
God, to whose wisdom, love and power he commended his 
spirit. (Luke 23:46.) It was indeed a crucial test, and 
though at the time he evidently could not see the necessity 
for every feature of it (Matt. 26:39,42,44), he nevertheless 
knew that the love of God was too great to allow a 
needless pain to afflict his beloved Son, and therefore he 
trusted him where he could not at the time trace his inscrutable 
ways. 



R1808 : page 109 

PRIESTCRAFT OPPOSED TO LIBERTY. 



SOME of the friends write us that their friends, 

ministers, etc., upon learning that it is the custom 

amongst us to celebrate the Memorial of our Lord's 

death, in little groups, or even alone when there are no others 

who appreciate and desire to commemorate it, have expressed 

astonishment, and pronounced such doings sacrilegious; 

—declaring that only the "clergy" have the right to administer 

to themselves or others the emblems of our Lord's 

broken body and shed blood. 

We reply that the entire expression of our Master's will, 
and the only authority upon the subject, is found in the New 
Testament; and there we find no restriction, no limitation, 
except such as every true Christian can answer to,— faith 
in the precious blood of Christ, and consecration to the Redeemer's 
will and work. 

The entire theory and arrangement marked by the 
terms "clergy" and "laity" is of Papal origin, and was 
arranged with the special object of binding and blinding 
God's children by taking from them the very liberty 
wherewith Christ made them free. Our Lord made 
no restriction as to who should serve it or give thanks for 
it, but intimated that all were to be ready to serve and in 
honor to prefer one another. His simple expressions were 
"eat ye all of it," and "drink ye all of it." Neither did 
the Apostles place any restrictions on the matter, nor say 
that when the clergy may please to prepare and bless and distribute, 
the laity may eat of the Lord's Supper. What 
restrictions did they place, if any? Like the Lord, they 
placed none, but advised that "a man examine HIMSELF" 
as to his worthiness to partake of the emblems. (1 Cor. 1 1:28.) 
It was not the "clergy" that were to examine 
and determine who might partake, but each one whom the 
Son had made free was to use his own freedom and examine 
himself before God and in the light of God's Word. 

The Apostles knew nothing about "clergy" and 
"laity," and those words do not occur in the Holy Scriptures: 
they were a part of Papacy's invention for keeping 
the masses subject to the priests. The Apostle Peter, whom 
they falsely style the first pope, contradicts all such popish 
ideas by declaring that the entire Church, including the 
very humblest one united by faith to Christ the Head, constitute 
together God's Royal Priesthood, God's Holy Nation, 
God's Peculiar People.— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

As a part of the scheme of the Papal priesthood for 
their own exaltation as a special or "clerical" class, it was 
assumed, without the slightest warrant of Scripture, (1) that 
there was a special or "clerical" class; (2) that only such 
are authorized to teach, preach, baptize, bury the dead, read 
the Scriptures, or arrange for a celebration of the Lord's 
Supper. The evident design was to fasten with the cords 



of priestcraft and superstition the infant a few days old (for 
the baptism of believers was changed to sprinkling of infants), 
and to keep those tightly drawn until the last spark 
of consciousness expired; and then the theory of masses and 
prayers for the dead was not only to get money but also to 
teach that the priestly cords extended beyond the present life, 
beyond the grave, and that the eternal blessedness or misery 
of every being was at their disposal. Can we wonder that 
our ignorant priestridden fathers of the dark ages feared the 
priests and regarded them as beings of a different nature 
than themselves? 

One of the strongest of these superstitious cords was 
the one associated with the Lord's Supper. This cord was 
doubled and twisted several times and made very strong and 
sacred, under the claim that literal bread and wine had to 
have a miracle performed upon them so as to change them 
into the actual body and blood of the Lord Jesus; for it 
was and is yet claimed by Papacy that in their Mass Christ 
is recreated by the priest, and then killed or sacrificed afresh 

R1809 : page 109 

each time the Mass is celebrated for those special persons 
or sins for whom the Mass is performed. 

The doctrine of the Trinity added to the homage 
paid to the priesthood; for it was said, and with reason, 
that if the priest can create Christ out of bread and wine 
(by merely pronouncing a few Latin words over it), he must, 
if Christ be God the Father, be considered able to create 
the great Creator of the universe by virtue of special power 
and authority of office conferred upon him. No wonder 
the people, the "laity," worshipped the "clergy," and 
reverenced and obeyed them as though they were God. 

R1809 :page 110 

But the people were not thereby lifted up and blessed; for 
nothing but the Truth sanctifies, and the Truth makes free 
and is in opposition to bondage. 

The Great Reformation of the sixteenth century made 
a wonderful and blessed change in many respects, not only 
with those who became Protestants against these enslavements 
of priestcraft, but also in that those still fully enslaved 
were thereafter less tightly bounden. 

But even those who thought that they had gotten free 
had been only partially released. Some of the cords were 
snapped asunder at once, but others were replaced by smaller 
and less noticeable cords, which nevertheless are very strong 
upon Protestants. They still retained the words "clergy" 
and "laity;" and, although robbed of much of their power, 
those words still imply a wide gulf between two classes of 
sheep in the Great Shepherd's fold. 

Hindrance to Bible study was a cord that was snapped 
promptly, but some Protestants still seek to restrain that liberty 
by implying that only the clergy are competent to explain 
the meaning of the Bible. The Protestant clergy still seek 



to give the inference that none but the "clergy" are commissioned 

to preach, but they rarely express themselves 

plainly upon the subject, knowing that the Bible recognizes 

no such special "rights" as they would wish the common 

people to infer. So, too, generally by inference and custom, 

they give the impression that baptism and burying of 

the dead belong to them. And while Protestants wholly 

reject the Papal doctrine of the Mass, and with it the thought 

that Christ is recreated by the officiating minister or priest, 

so as to be sacrificed afresh, yet they carry with them a portion 

of the shadow of the error. They have a feeling that 

in some way which they cannot explain, and for some reason 

not given in the Bible, it would be sacrilege for any one 

not of the "clergy" class to pass the emblems of the Redeemer's 

body and blood. Well, priestcraft is surely in 

danger wherever the Word of God is clearly understood; 

and ZION'S WATCH TOWER is published for no other purpose 

than to help God's benighted children out of the blindness 

and bondage put upon them by Satan, and to assist them 

into the light and liberty wherewith the Son makes free. 



R1809 :page 110 

JESUS BEFORE THE HIGH PRIEST. 



--MAY 12, MARK 14:53-64;-MATT. 26:47-75; 
LUKE 22:47-65; JOHN 18:2-27.- 

Golden Text— "He is despised and rejected of men."— Isa. 53:3. 

MARK 14:53. Jesus was first led to Annas (John 18:13), 

who, although deposed by the Romans, 

was the rightful high priest according to the law, the office 

being for life, and he was probably so regarded by the Jews, 

who, therefore, sought counsel of him first. His son-in-law, 

Caiaphas (the same who had prophesied that it was expedient 

that one man should die for the people— John 18:14), 

was the acting high priest appointed by the Romans. Apparently, 

Annas agreed with the general sentiments of the 

rulers, and, after asking Jesus a few questions about his doctrine 

and his disciples, sent him bound to Caiaphas.— 

John 18:19-24. 

Since it was contrary to the Jewish law to hold a session 
of the Sanhedrin for the trial of capital offences by 
night, and this being the night of the paschal supper, making 
it still more objectionable, it is clear that this was an 
irregular meeting of this assembly of the nation's representatives, 
drawn together by common consent to participate in 
the crime of condemning their Messiah, Jehovah's Anointed. 
From it, however, were carefully excluded, evidently, 
a few such men as Joseph of Arimathea, Nicodemus (John 19:38,39; 
7:50,51) and probably a few others known to 



be favorably inclined toward the new teacher. They probably 
knew nothing of it. 

Verses 55-59. What an astonishing fact is here stated: 
that the great men of the most favored nation on earth, 
—the learned men, the wise men, the rulers, the men of 
years and experience, the religious teachers— should thus 
deliberately, and of long premeditation, wickedly conspire 
against the purest and most noble character that had ever 
graced the earth. Not only had they frequently deputed 
emissaries to catch him in his words as he taught in public, 
but finally they had bribed an apostate disciple to betray 
him and a band of Roman soldiers to arrest him, although 
there was no charge against him. And then this august, 
learned and dignified assembly, having secured their hated 
prisoner, busied themselves to find some two witnesses whose 
testimony should agree together, according to the requirement 
of the law (Deut. 19:15), in order to his condemnation. 
They found many who willingly bore false witness 
against him, but none whose witness agreed together. 

Verses 60-62. Failing in their effort to satisfy this requirement 
of the law, the high priest then endeavored to 
force Jesus to criminate himself, saying, "Answerest thou 
nothing? what is it which these witness against thee?" 
But he (wisely) held his peace and answered nothing, knowing 
that the truth was not desired and would avail nothing 
with these men who so warmly cherished murder in their 
hearts. And, further, he had no disposition to defend himself, 
knowing that his hour was come for the sacrifice of his 
life. But when further urged to express himself by the inquiry 
—"Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?"— 
knowing that his reply would be like the signing of his death 
warrant, he deliberately answered, "I am," and added this 
prophecy— "And ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the 
right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." 

This prophecy compassed the certainty of his death 
and resurrection, and pointed to his return in the end of 
the Gospel age in power and great glory— the power and 
glory of his Kingdom, which he had previously affirmed was 
not to be of this world, or dispensation, of which Satan is 
the prince (John 14:30), but of the world to come, wherein 
dwelleth righteousness.— Heb. 2:5; 2 Pet. 3:13. 

This frank and fearless acknowledgment of his divine 
origin and appointment as the long predicted Messiah, the 
Savior of Israel and the world, was taken as blasphemy, and 
the hypocritical high priest, whose very robes were symbolic 
of the blessed one who stood in their midst fulfilling to the 
letter the predictions of the prophets, rent his clothes in 
token of astonishment and horror at such blasphemy, saying, 
"What need we any further witnesses? Ye have heard 
the blasphemy: what think ye? And they all condemned 

R1809 :page 111 

him to be guilty of death"— the prescribed punishment for 
blasphemy. -Lev. 24:16; Deut. 18:20. 
Thus fell the Jewish hierarchy into the ditch of unbelief 



and crime, and the masses of the people, who had 

shifted upon them their personal responsibility in the matter 

of receiving and rejecting Christ, considering first whether 

any of the Pharisees or of the rulers believed on him, fell 

with them, crying, "His blood be on us and on our children." 

Well hath the Psalmist said, "It is better to trust in 

the Lord [in the word of his truth] than to put confidence 

in man; it is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence 

in princes." Let Christians of the present day heed 

this in this corresponding period of the Gospel age, when 

again the unfolding of truth in its due time is bringing the 

professed people of God to a crisis "which shall try every 

man's work [of faith], of what sort it is." If we lean upon 

human props, we shall surely fall; but the word of the Lord 

endureth forever. 



R1809 :page 111 

JESUS BEFORE PILATE. 



-MAY 19, MARK 15:1-15;-MATT. 27:1-30; 
LUKE 23:1-25; JOHN 18:28-40; 19:1-16.— 

Golden Text— "But Jesus yet answered 
nothing, so that Pilate marvelled." 

SINCE the informal meeting of the Sanhedrin 
described in the preceding lesson could not give 
a legal sentence before sunrise, this morning meeting and 
consultation were merely for the purpose of ratifying the conclusions 
then reached. They then delivered Jesus bound unto 
Pilate, the whole company escorting him thither to make sure 
that their purpose should be accomplished.— Luke 23:1. 
Verses 2-5. The wicked shrewdness of the Sanhedrin, 
in preferring the charge of blasphemy, for its effect upon 
the people before whom they desired to appear very zealous 
for the law, while an entirely different, but equally false, 
set of charges was brought against him before Pilate, the 
Roman governor, who cared nothing for their religious ideas, 
is very manifest. The accusation brought before Pilate involved 
the charge of treason, a charge most likely to arouse 
the indignation and wrath of the Roman rulers. They accused 
him of seditious agitation, of prohibiting the payment 

R1810 :page 111 

of tribute money, and of assuming the title of King of the 
Jews, and thus apparently of conspiring against Caesar and 
the Roman government. 

While the second charge was entirely false (Matt. 22:21), 
the other two had an appearance of truth, and to these 
were added numerous petty individual charges. But to none 



of them did the Lord make reply, so that Pilate marvelled 
that he made no effort at self-defence in the midst of such 
danger. 

Verses 6-14. The several efforts of Pilate to release 
his innocent prisoner, who, he discovered, had been delivered 
to him for envy, were unavailing before the boisterous 
mob who, instigated by their rulers, loudly clamored for 
his death, and that by the most ignominious and cruel 
method, crucifixion, so that his memory should ever be 
covered with infamy. 

Verse 15. Then Pilate, who was influenced more by 
considerations of policy than of principle, willing to satisfy 
the people, delivered Jesus to be scourged and crucified, yet 
at the same time protesting the innocence of his prisoner 
and washing his hands in token of his own innocence in 
thus delivering up to them this just person. Not until he 
himself was threatened by the mob to be reported to Caesar 
as one hostile to the government and a traitor to his trust 
in encouraging seditions and conspiracy against the government, 
did he relinquish his efforts to save Jesus.— John 19:12-16; 
Matt. 27:24,25. 



R1810 :page 111 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Sincerely desiring to render 
some assistance in the service of the truth revealed in 
the Divine Word, but realizing that there are now few opportunities 
open to me to engage in the present harvest 
work, I have concluded to furnish some means by which 
others better qualified may be enabled to carry forward that 
work. I own two 80-acre tracts of unimproved land in 
southern Illinois (Jefferson County). It is my wish that 
this land should be sold. Accordingly I have deeded these 
160 acres of land to you, and desire that you sell them to 
the best possible advantage, and use the proceeds according 
to your best judgment in spreading the true gospel of a 
ransom for all, to be testified in due time, with a full opportunity 
for all to be blessed thereby with everlasting life by 
obedience to the terms of the New Covenant, sealed with 
the precious blood of Christ. 

May the Lord graciously accept, use and bless my offering. 
Your Sister in Christ, CAROLINE BALDWIN. 

[Sister Baldwin's gift to the Lord's cause is accepted 
and greatly appreciated. The land is for sale; and the 
proceeds will be used to the best of our judgment in the 
Lord's service. May the divine blessing rest upon both 
giver and gift.-EDITOR.] 



DEAR BRETHREN: --About sixty brethren and sisters 
assembled here [Chicago] to commemorate the death of 
our Lord Jesus Christ. 

Brother John and I spent a few minutes in trying to 
show the necessity of our Lord's death, as a man, for the redemption 
of the human race. You are well aware that a 
great deal is being said, to-day, about the example of Christ, 
but very little about his sacrifice. In fact, his sacrifice is 
being almost entirely ignored. Why is this? Is it not because 
we are living in the day when "a thousand shall fall 
at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand?" Is it not 
because the cross of Christ has become foolishness to the 
thousands, although it still remains "the power of God 
and the wisdom of God" unto them which are called? 
God forbid that we should in any way detract from or belittle 
the perfect example which our blessed Lord left us. 
His example was wonderful. Indeed, too much cannot be 
said about it. It will be well for us to consider Jesus in his 
perfect character and perfect example, and endeavor to become 
like him, following in his footsteps. For if we fail to 
do so, we will be sure to come short of the promised reward, 
which will be given simply to the overcomers. But 
while we are considering Christ's character and example, 

R1810 :page 112 

which were absolutely perfect, let us not forget that we 
were not redeemed by these. 

The Word of God very plainly teaches that our Lord 
Jesus was (1) perfect in character; holy, harmless, undefiled, 
separate from sinners (Heb. 7:26); that he was 
(2) perfect in his organism; for he kept God's perfect law, 
which would have been impossible without a perfect organism, 
was "crowned with glory and honor" of perfect 

manhood (Heb. 2:9) and was "without spot or blemish" (1 Pet. 1:19); 
that he was (3) perfect in his example, which 
we should endeavor to follow. (1 Pet. 2:21.) But the 
Word of God very plainly teaches, also, that while Christ's 
character, organism and example were all absolutely perfect; 
and without this perfection he would not have been acceptable 
to God as man's ransom or substitute in death; 
yet it required something else to redeem us. "The man 
Christ Jesus" must give himself "a ransom for all." 

We were "redeemed [not with the example, but] with 
the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish 
and without spot (1 Pet. 1:19)— which was "shed for 
many [all] for the remission of sins." (Matt. 26:28.) 
"We have redemption [not through his example, but] 
through his blood." (Col. 1:14.) He has been set forth 
to be "a propitiation through faith [not in his example, 
but] in his blood."-See Rom. 3:24-26; 1 John 2:2; 4:10. 

Thank God for "the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son," 
which "cleanseth us from all sin!" (John 1:7) for without 
the shedding of blood there could be no remission of 
sins.-Heb. 9:22; Matt. 26:28. 

We tried to show how we "ate of the flesh of the son 



of man" and "drank his blood," and thereby passed from 
death unto life (justification); how we became part of the 
one loaf by consecration; and how, after having become 
part of the loaf, we are to be broken, "suffer with Christ," 
in order that we may "reign with him." 
Your brother in Christ, M. L. McPHAIL. 



DEAR BROTHER:— The congregations in Brooklyn, 
Yonkers and New York, including some from other near-by 
places, united for baptism service and the Lord's Supper. 
The baptism service was held at a Disciples church in the afternoon. 
After remarks by Brother Blunden, sixteen symbolized 
their consecration by immersion. In the evening, previous 
to the Memorial Service, Brother Martin explained portions 
of the Gospels, showing how our Savior spent himself 
unto death for us. Brother Blunden was requested to take 
the charge of the Memorial service, which he did, introducing 
the subject and explaining very briefly its meaning. 
There were at least two hundred and fifty present, and, with 
very few exceptions, all were in the race for the prize. 

It was a grand, spiritual feast for us all. Not ajar nor 
an inharmonious spirit amongst us. All seemed to receive 
a blessing. Yours in the one faith, EDWIN C. MOTT. 



page 112 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-At the request of the Church 
at Philadelphia, I met with them, after making arrangements 
with Bros. Gillis and Jackson to be with the little company 
at our house. At 2 P.M. we met to consider the subject of 
baptism, and at 4 P.M. we adjourned for this service to a 
small church building kindly put at our disposal. Four 
brethren and six sisters symbolized by water the burial of 
their wills into the will of their Redeemer and Lord. 

Between forty and fifty participated in the Memorial 
service, which was preceded by a praise and testimony 
meeting. The testimonies, in which nearly all took part, 
showed how firmly every brother and sister was grounded 
on the true foundation, Christ Jesus. 

The Church in Philadelphia is doing a good work. 
How wonderfully the truth is spreading ! May every one of 
the saints see his opportunity (the time is getting short) 
to use our talents in the Harvest work. While we cannot 
all serve in the same way, every one of us can use the talents 
which he or she possesses. May we all be up and doing, 
and not sleep as others, but work while it is called to-day, 
for "the night cometh wherein no man can work." "Not 
every one that saith unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter 
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doeth the will 
of my Father which is in heaven." 

Your brother in our Redeemer, HENRY WEBER. 



R1810 :page 112 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-I am glad that 
a few of us are still striving to walk the narrow way and 
trust that another year will still find his work in our hands. 
The interest here is increasing. 

We are very much interested in a little girl, not quite 
13 years old, that I found in my canvass. When I called 
at her home, she met me at the door, and insisted on my 
coming in. She said, "I am very much interested in 
Bible study, and would like to talk to you." I found her 
to be very earnest and well versed in the Bible. Since then 
she has read DAWN nearly through, and accepts it as far as 
she can understand. She is such a happy Christian, and 
says she has nothing to live for only to do the Lord's will. 

Yours in the Master's service, MRS. L. P. BEELER. 

[The above, and other cases show the readiness with 
which a child's mind, unprejudiced by human philosophies, 
can grasp the truth. Let us not fail to let our light shine 
before the children, also. 

Seeds sown in childhood, whether good or bad, take 
deep root and yield most profusely. It is a great mistake 
to suppose that spiritual development must wait until carnality 
has taken deep root, so that the remainder of life 
will be one of degradation or a fierce battle to overcome 
and root up what was sown in childhood.— EDITOR.] 



page 112 



DEAREST FRIENDS: -Please find enclosed the amount 
of our Good Hopes for the quarter. 

We had a two days' visit from Bro. McPhail. He 
came first to my house, and we at once notified all we could 
find who we thought would be interested and had a meeting 
in the evening; and I am glad to be able to say that 
it was just grand, especially bringing to view the grandeur 
of the High Calling. The next day another meeting was 
held, with a goodly number, some of whom are new readers 
of DAWN. The Chart was explained, and in all a very interesting 
time was had; and a happy few were left here 
with new hopes and renewed vows and fresh strength to 
help in the struggle against the wiles of the Adversary. 

For my part, I must say I never before saw more 
vividly than right now my duty to the truth and the necessity 
of living up to my consecration; and I earnestly pray 
that I may be able to lay aside every weight and the sins 
that so easily beset me and run with patience the race which 
is set before us. Truly it has been said by the Apostle that 
there is nothing in this world now, nor ever was, to be 
compared to the glory to which we are invited; and if we 
appreciate properly our privileges, there should be nothing 
allowed to stand in the way of our obtaining that to which 



we are called. In all I think Bro. McPhail's visit was beneficial. 
I felt better in his company than I have for a long 
time. It seemed to have a holy influence over me. We 
had a pleasant separation, wishing each other all the blessings 
that could attend us in our efforts to serve the Master. 
Your brother in Christ, S.M.TAYLOR. 



page 113 

VOL. XVI. MAY 15, 1895. No. 10. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items— Scripture Reading 114 

Special Lot of Dawns 114 

Bible Astronomy 115 

Poem: Take Time to be Holy 122 

Bible Study: Christ Died for the 

Ungodly 122 

Bible Study: The Resurrection of our 
Lord 123 

page 114 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 

R1811 :page 114 

SCRIPTURE READING. 

IN our last issue we mentioned as an excellent substitute for the 
Daily Text Calendar the singing of one of the Hymns of Dawn or the 
reading of one of the Poems of Dawn. By this suggestion we did not 
mean to intimate that more elaborate family worship would be improper 
for those who have the time and opportunity. All that is left to the 
judgment and convenience of the head of each family. Some who read 
one or two verses possibly get as much good out of them as do others 



from reading two or three chapters. 

We speak not by Scriptural authority, but simply according to our 
own judgment, when we advise brethren or sisters who are the heads of 
households (1) to have, as a family, some general recognition of the Lord 
every morning;— as, for instance, a hymn of praise, or a text or chapter 
of Scripture, with a short prayer, either at the breakfast table, or before 
or after breakfast. But (2) we advise that such general worship be 
not made burdensomely long, but on the contrary, brief and crisp. Let 
each who desires have his longer and special seasons for reading, 
meditating and praying to the Lord, alone, and in a way and at times 
that will not conflict with the interests and feelings of others. 

page 114 

THE OLD LOT OF CLOTH-BOUND MILLENNIAL DAWN. 

OUR new stock of cloth-bound DAWNS is of uniform shade of 
cloth in all volumes, and stamped on sides as well as backs with 
silvery instead of gilt metal. 

THE old lot stamped in gilt and not perfectly matched in shade of 
cloth we are closing out at the special price of $1.00 per set (3 vols.), 
including postage, or 75 cents per set at your charges. 



R1811 :page 115 
BIBLE ASTRONOMY. 



A SMALL tract entitled "Bible Astronomy" was 
recently sent to us by some of our readers, with 
the request that we help them to see whether or not the 
theories it aims to support are a part of the gospel, as its 
author and circulators evidently believe. As the special 
mission of ZION'S WATCH TOWER is "the edifying of the 
body of Christ and the perfecting of the saints for 
the work of the ministry," and as the question, What 
constitutes the gospel? is a most important one, we take 
pleasure in reviewing it here from a Bible standpoint; and 
from that standpoint only, for two reasons,— (1) because 
only from the Bible standpoint can we determine whether 
the theories proposed are a part of the gospel; and (2) because 
the editor of the TOWER is not an astronomer, and if 
the subject were to be discussed from a scientific standpoint 
we should want the most accurate information, from the 
most advanced astronomers of our day, and from all other 
reliable sources. 

Astronomy is an abstruse science, and one which has 
commanded some of the ablest minds in all ages; and those 
engaged in it to any purpose have usually devoted to it 
the best energies of their lives. Its development has been 
a very gradual one, through much painstaking study and 
research, and through many centuries, and it has had 
its apostles in almost every nation. While much of interest 



attaches to the discoveries and deductions of those 

early days, comparatively little progress was made 

until, in more recent times, the invention and numerous 

improvements of the telescope brought the starry 

heavens into closer range of observation, and the advancements 

in mathematical sciences rendered many astronomical 

calculations possible which previously could not 

be obtained. These, together with the accumulated discoveries, 

deductions and suggestions of all past time, have 

undoubtedly greatly advanced the science, and placed it 

on a footing which not only commends its teachings to human 

reason, but as well honors the great Creator of all 

things, whose wonderful work in the material universe is 

seen to be commensurate with his great "plan of the ages" 

revealed in the Scriptures. The seal of divinity seems to 

be stamped upon both. Nor should it be a matter of surprise 

that, while God has been disclosing the wonders of 

his grace to his people, he has also been paving the way, 

through scientific research and modern invention, for a 

more correct idea of his no less wonderful creation. 

While it is true that gross error with reference to spiritual 
things has marked the presumably advance steps of the 
great ecclesiastics and their followers, we are not to presume 
that the same is probably true in science, art and 
mechanics. On the contrary, quite the reverse is true; and 
for manifest reasons. It is because spiritual things are spiritually 
discerned and cannot be received by the natural 
man, and because "with the heart (as well as with the head) 
man believeth unto righteousness," that the efforts to probe 
spiritual things with the natural mind and the uncircumcised 
heart are so fruitful only in errors and absurdities. But the 
great truths of nature are not so learned. Nature yields 
her secrets to the mind of the natural man, who, with candor 
and simplicity, by diligent and persistent research, inquires 
for them. Therefore progress in science and discovery, 
and development in art are to be expected as the 
results of diligent and earnest study on the part of the natural 
man who has the intellectual ability and the favorable 
opportunities for such occupation. To deny such progress 
in the world is only to deny the evidence of our senses. 
Who has not noted the real, practical and beneficial advancement 

R1811 :page 116 

along all the lines of human attainment,— law, 
medicine, architecture, mechanics, etc., etc. And all this 
advancement, let us bear in mind, is part of God's plan in 
this day of his preparation for the setting up of his 
Kingdom. 

The tract before us presents a number of scriptures in 
support of a theory which regards the earth as occupying a 
most important place in the material creation, and the sun, 
moon and stars merely as inferior accessories, the only object 
in whose creation was to minister to the earth, which 
is supposed to be a plane floating upon the water;— which 
in turn must be supported by something tangible, and that 



in turn by something else, ad infinitum. 

The theory, in the main, is a very ancient one, antedating 
all modern discovery and invention. It, however, 
has no claim to the name "Bible Astronomy," for 
it did not have its rise in Moses or the Jews, but was promulgated 
by the Egyptian astronomer, Ptolemy, who flourished 
at Alexandria about A.D. 130, but whose system has 
long since given place to that now universally accepted by 
all the learned scientists, known as the Copernican system, 
because the revolution was due chiefly to the labors of 
Copernicus. 

The theory to which the writer of this tract has given 
the dignified name, Bible Astronomy, is more generally 
known as "the flat earth theory." What we now 
propose to show is that the scriptures cited to prove that 
the earth is what it terms a circular plane, and not a 
globe, do not prove it. When we shall have done this, the 
subject will still be open for discussion from the scientific 
standpoint, to the extent of present scientific development, 
by those who have the time and talent to devote to it; 
but it will be seen to be entirely separate from the "gospel 
of the Kingdom," which all of the saints are called to 
preach, and to which they have consecrated their all of 
time and energy. Our observation of those consecrated 
ones who have permitted other themes than "this gospel" 
to engross time and attention leads us to advise such to be 
very jealous in husbanding time and talent for the ministry 
of the gospel, leaving all other subjects, however interesting, 
to others now, and to the future life for ourselves, 
when all knowledge shall be ours. Those who for any 
avoidable cause turn aside from the ministry of the true and 
only gospel we have invariably observed are quickly turned 
out of the way or greatly hindered in their course toward 
"the prize of our high calling." The Apostle Paul's decision 
on this point is worthy of the adoption of all the 
saints; viz., "I determined not to know [talk of or discuss] 
anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified." 
(1 Cor. 2:2.) Many questions, indeed, might be asked, 
even by those very ignorant of the subject in general, which 
we could not answer, not being astronomers; but let no 
baits of curiosity allure us from the narrow way. We sacrifice 
these pleasures of the pursuit of scientific knowledge 
to the great ends for which, as new creatures in Christ, we 
are striving. By and by it will be our delightful privilege 
to know all things, and to enjoy ourselves to the full 
in beholding the glory of the Lord, when we shall be like 
him, and see him as he is, and know as we are known. 

Those who think that the Bible teaches that the earth 
is flat, except for its mountains and valleys (a circular 
plane), do not claim that any texts of Scripture describe 
the earth's shape in these terms; but they draw the inference 
that such is its shape from eight classes of texts, which 
we will indicate and examine. From them they gather 
(1) that the sky or firmament is substantial, firm, not 
ethereal, and a water reservoir; (2) that the firmament or 
sky is a substantial vault, supporting the throne of God and 



indeed all heaven; (3) that the terms, "up," "down," 
"sunrise" and "sunset," frequently used in the Bible, are 
proofs that the earth is the center of the universe; (4) that 
the account in Genesis teaches that the sun and stars were 
created merely for ornaments and conveniences to the earth; 

(5) that the Bible phrase, "waters under the earth," and 
similar expressions, teach that the earth rests upon the sea; 

(6) that the expression, "pillars of the earth," indicates a 
solid foundation; (7) that the record that on one occasion 
the sun and moon stood still proves that the earth is not a 
globe; and (8) that the earth is so founded as to be immovable. 
(9) We will examine a text which they singularly 
overlook. 

Let us now consider these proof texts:— 

R1812:page 116 

(1) THE SKY SUBSTANTIAL AND A WATER 
RESERVOIR. 



Those scriptures which speak of a firmament above the 
earth they construe to mean something substantial, or firm 
—not ethereal— as follows:— 

"God made the firmament, and divided the waters 
...which were above the firmament."— Gen. 1:7. 

"The windows [margin, 'flood-gates'] of heaven were 
opened" (Gen. 7:11), so that the waters from above the 
firmament poured forth at the time of the flood. 

Reply.— The idea of firmness comes to the English 
translation from the Latin, and not from the original Hebrew. 
The Hebrew word from which "firmament" is translated 
is raqui, which does not contain the thought of firmness. 
Its true signification is expanse.— See Young's Analytical 
Concordance. 

The air, a gaseous substance, composed chiefly of oxygen 
and nitrogen, envelops the earth to a distance of about 
fifty miles from its surface. The above texts tell us that 
God separated the cloudy vapors from the waters upon the 
earth, thus creating the expanse ("firmament") or aerial 
heavens. (See "the fowl of heaven," that "fly in the 
midst of heaven," many times referred to in the Scriptures.) 
The word expanse ("firmament") or heavens is also given 
a wider application at times and made to embrace the infinitude 
of space. It has been suggested, and apparently 
with good evidence, that before the deluge the volume of 
water above the firmament or aerial heavens was much 

R1812:page 117 

greater than now, and that the waters below the firmament 
were correspondingly less: that the earth at that time 
probably had a ring of water, similar to the several rings of 
Saturn. The theory is that precipitation of the waters of 
that "ring" produced the deluge, and that the increased 



weight of the waters upon the ocean caused the upheaval 
of additional mountain ranges, especially in America. 

(2) THE SKY A SUBSTANTIAL VAULT. 



It is claimed that certain texts imply the flatness of the 
earth by referring to the sky as a vault and as a curtain, and 
that God's dwelling, the "chambers" where he "sitteth," 
is just beyond the sky curtain, which is spangled with 
stars and emblazoned with our sun. To prove this, the 
following texts are cited:— 

"He buildeth his chambers in the heaven, and hath 
founded his vault upon the earth."— Amos 9:6. Revised 
Version. 

"Canst thou with him spread forth the sky, which is 
strong as a molten mirror?"— Job 37:18. R.V. 

"He that created the heavens and stretched them 
forth."-Isa. 42:5. R.V. 

"He that sitteth upon the circle of the earth,... 
that stretcheth out the heavens as a curtain, and spreadeth 
them out as a tent to dwell in."— Isa. 40:22. 

Then the question is asked, "Do not these verses describe 
the firmament, not as unlimited space, but as a firm, 
solid structure resting upon foundations?— a lofty dome or 
vault of marvelous workmanship, stretched out over the 
circular plane of the earth, and enclosing it 'as a tent to 
dwell in?'" 

We think not. The language is highly figurative and 
poetic, such as abounds in the prophets, as well as in the 
poetry of Job and the Psalms. It is similar to what can be 
found in the poetry of to-day, in which such expressions as 
the vaulted sky, the blue dome of heaven, the canopy of 
heaven, etc., are of frequent occurrence and are never misunderstood. 
And every Hebrew scholar can testify that 
each of these texts was written in poetic form— as indeed 
is nearly all that the prophets wrote respecting God and 
his mighty works. Those who are not Hebrew scholars 
can, if they doubt it, confirm our statement that these passages 
are poetic, by a glance at Young's Bible translation. 

In evidence that such language is in common use by 
the poets of our day, who apparently do not question 
the testimony of modern astronomy, we quote as follows, 
italicising the corresponding words:— 

"This moveless scene, heaven's ebon vault, 

Studded with stars unutterably bright, 

Through which the moon's unclouded grandeur rolls, 

Seems like a canopy which love has spread 

To curtain her sleeping world."— Shelley. 

"Mysterious Night! when the first man but knew 
Thee by report, unseen, and heard thy name, 
Did he not tremble for this lovely Frame— 
This glorious canopy of Light and Blue? 



Yet 'neath a curtain," etc.— J. Blanco White. 

"Thou dost not strive, O Sun, nor dost thou cry 
Amid thy cloud-built streets."— Faber. 

"This majestical roof, fretted with golden fire."— Shakespeare. 

"And they were canopied by the blue sky."— Byron. 

"Clouds on clouds, in volumes driven, 

Curtain round the vault of heaven."— T. L. Peacock. 

(3) UP, DOWN, SUNRISE, SUNSET. 



It is claimed that the terms, "under the sun," "under 
heaven," "up," "down," "sunrise," and "sunset," used 
frequently in the Bible, are proofs that the earth is the 
center of the universe, around which heaven and the sun, 
moon and stars revolve. 

We reply that this is an unwarranted claim. It is admitted 
by all that the sun seems to rise up in the East, and 
to go down in the West; and by common consent all, even 
astronomers and almanac -makers, speak of the matter in 
such terms. 

But, be it noticed, these terms of general usage do not 
favor the "flat earth" theory. Those who contend that 
the earth is a circular plane, and who bring forward these 
texts, do not believe that the sun, moon and stars go up 
and down: their contention is that they go around above 
the earth in a circle, merely passing for a time out of view, 
because the earth, they say, is so large, and the sun, moon, 
etc., are so small. The use of such an argument and the 
quoting of such scriptures therefore is directly in opposition 
to their theory. 

Similarly, the expression, "four corners of the earth," 
is sometimes used to prove that the earth is not a globe; 
but, we ask, Would this expression prove that the earth is 
a circular plane? A circle no more has corners than has a 
globe. The fact is that this expression of the Scriptures 
is in exact harmony with our modern usage, of speaking of 
the four "points"— North, South, East and West. No 
sensible person would look for a "point" or a "corner" 
in those directions any more than he would look for literal 
North and South "poles." Language is a vehicle for carrying 
thoughts; the thoughts must not be jolted out and the 
empty vehicle alone have consideration. 

(4) SUN AND STARS EARTH'S ORNAMENTS AND 
CONVENIENCES. 



It is claimed that the statement of Gen. 1:16-18 proves 
that the sun, moon and stars were made merely for the convenience 



of the earth and that all reference to other worlds 
being omitted proves that this is the only world and that the 
sun, stars, etc., are merely its useful and ornamental appendages. 
"And God made two great lights; the greater light to 
rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night; the stars 
also. And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to 
give light upon the earth, and to rule over the day and 
over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness." 

"To him that made great lights, ...the sun to rule 
by day,. ..the moon and stars to rule by night." 
-Psa. 136:7-9. 

R1812:page 118 

"In them [the heavens] hath he set a tabernacle for 
the sun, which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, 
and rejoiceth as a strong man to run his course. His 
going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit 
unto the ends of it."-Psa. 19:4-6, R.V. 

Reply.— We agree most heartily to the statements of 
these scriptures. The sun is beautifully and poetically described 
by David, but he says nothing about the earth being 
"flat," nor that the circle was around a plane, and not 
around a globe. In fact, he is not giving a lesson in 
astronomy, but a flash of poesy. There is no more excuse 
for misunderstanding the poetry of the Psalms than for misunderstanding 
such poetry as follows:— 

"Thou who gazest ever true and tender 
On the sun's revolving splendor."— Shelley. 

"Her two blue windows faintly she upheaveth, 
Like the fair sun, when, in his fresh array, 
He cheers the morn, and all the earth relieveth." 
—Shakespeare. 

As for the account in Genesis, it is true that the sun 
and stars were caused to give light to the earth, and were 
intended so to do; but there is nothing to indicate that 
they could not lighten other planets, or that in this they 
entirely fulfilled the ends of their creation. It is true also 
that the sun does rule the day, and the moon the night, 
and that they are so set as to mark times and seasons; but 
there is no intimation that this is the limit of their usefulness. 
Only that which specially pertains to man and to the 
earth, his home, is mentioned. God was not attempting 
to teach astronomy: he was, we believe, leaving such things 
for mankind to investigate. The fields of science, art, discovery 
and invention are all open for man's pleasant and 
profitable exploration, and will and do reward the patient 
and persistent exercise of his powers, as God intended. 
This we believe is God's method of dealing: he makes 
known to man gradually the riches of his grace. Thus, 
too, it is with spiritual things, as our Lord intimated to his 
disciples, saying, "I have many things to tell you, but ye 



R1813 :page 118 

cannot bear them now." In due time, and in the best 
manner, the heights and depths, the lengths and breadths 
of the divine creation and plan are being made known. 

(5) THE WATERS UNDER THE EARTH. 



It is also claimed that the earth rests upon the sea, and 
not the sea upon the earth, notwithstanding the fact that 
deep-sea soundings have very generally been able to touch 
the solid earth with measuring lines. It is claimed that 
this is taught by the following Scriptures,— 

"Him that stretched [spread] out the earth above the 
waters."— Psa. 136:6. 

"Heaven above,. ..earth beneath,. ..waters beneath 
the earth. "-Deut. 5:8. 

These passages merely refer to the dry land, higher than, 
or above, sea level. The former passage in the Douay version 
is rendered with equal propriety, "established the earth 
above the waters." To appreciate this passage turn to 
Gen. 1:9,10, and learn how God stretched forth the dry 
land and established it as dry land— by gathering together 
the waters into seas, by convulsions of earth casting up 
mountain ranges and depressing other parts for the gathering 
of the waters, seas. 

The same explanation suits the second passage. The 
waters are not above, but below, beneath, the level of the 
"dry land," called the earth. (Gen. 1:10.) And if further 
evidence be desired a reading of the connections of the 
passage will remove every vestige of doubt as to what 
waters are meant. Thou shalt not make unto thee any 
graven image of any thing in heaven on high, or in earth 
that is lower, or in the sea that is still lower. Israel was 
commanded to make no images of God or angels, heavenly 
beings, nor of men and beasts, earthly creatures next in 
order, nor of fish or sea monsters, still lower. Can any 
one suppose that in thus forbidding image-making and 
image-worship, the Lord ignored the waters seen, which 
constitute two-thirds of the earth's surface, and specified 
waters underneath the dry land, which (if there at all) could 
not be more than one-half the quantity not underneath it, 
and of whose living creatures men could know nothing? 
Surely any one can see that the meaning is, the waters under 
or lower than the level of the earth. "God called the 
dry land earth."— Gen. 1:10. 

(6) THE PILLARS OF THE EARTH. 



"The pillars of the earth are the Lord's, and he hath 
set the world upon them."— 1 Sam. 2:8. 
"Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the 



pillars thereof tremble."— Job 9:6. 

The first of these proof-texts is from the prayer of Hannah 
at the presentation of Samuel to the Lord's service. 
(Verses 1-10.) It is a poem or psalm, and seems to have 
been inspired and prophetic. Compare its language and 
sentiment with the poetic-prayer-prophecy of Mary, our 
Lord's mother.— Luke 1:46-55. 

The passage from Job is also poetic, and prophetically 
refers to the shaking of the coming time of trouble. That 
Job refers to the shaking of the "pillars" of the present 
social structure, and Hannah to the establishment of the 
saints as the "pillars" of the new order of things called 
the "new heavens and new earth," will be clear to all who 
read their contexts, after noting the significance of the 
word "pillar" in Scripture usage.— Gal. 2:9; 1 Tim. 3:15; 
Rev. 3:12. 

(7) SUN AND MOON STOOD STILL. 



In proof that the earth is not a globe, the account of 
Joshua 10:12-14 is cited, and also Hab. 3:1 1,— "The sun 
and moon stood still in their habitation." 

Reply.— In our issue of March 15, '92, following our 
return from the scene of Joshua's battle and miracle, we 
offered a suggestion respecting it, to the effect that daylight 
was unusually and miraculously prolonged by the rays 

R1813 :page 119 

of the sun being refracted upon the earth by a special arrangement 

of clouds for the purpose, so that its light, 

supplemented by that of the moon, similarly prolonged, 

practically turned that night into day. In no other view 

can we find use for the moon. Certainly if the sun shone 

at noonday brightness, the light of the moon would be 

useless and would not have been invoked. But, even if 

the earth was slowed up in her diurnal motion so as to actually 

lengthen out the day, it would be equally proper, as 

in speaking of any other sunset, to say that the sun "hasted 

not to go down." 

As for the passage from Habakkuk, it is totally different: 
it is an item in his prophetic poem, which is full of symbols 
and figures of speech. It undoubtedly refers to a future 
even when "the sun and the moon shall be confounded," 
when "the sun shall be darkened, and the moon shall not 
give her light," etc. No one can read this chapter from 
the third verse onward without recognizing this. Young's 
Literal Translation renders verses 10-12 thus,— 

"Seen thee— pained are the mountains [kingdoms], 

An inundation of waters hath passed over [Isa. 28:15,17], 

Given forth hath the deep its voice [Luke 21:25], 

High its hands hath it lifted up. 

Sun— moon— hath stood— a habitation, 



At the light thine arrows go on, 

At the brightness the glittering of thy spear. 

In indignation Thou dost tread the earth, 

In anger Thou dost thresh the nations. 

Thou hast gone forth for the salvation of Thy people." 

Surely if Joshua's battle, etc., has anything at all to 
do with the matters here represented, it was only as a type. 

(8) EARTH FOUNDED AND IMMOVABLE. 



It is claimed that the Bible mentions the foundations of 
the earth and pillars of the earth in such a way as would 
preclude the idea that the earth is a globe hanging in space; 
and in such a way as to prove that it is an immovable 
structure resting upon strong pillars. In this they seem to 
forget their other claim that it is founded upon the seas and 
rises and sinks with the tides. Pillars would surely be a 
poor arrangement, architecturally speaking, for resting upon 
the water. Would not a "flat earth" rest more solidly 
on the waters without the pillars? Besides, upon what 
would the pillars rest? and what would support the waters? 
Then again, If the earth floated in the seas, and rose and 
sank at "tide times," how would that agree with the text 
they quote so freely— The earth "is established that it cannot 
be moved?" 

Let us look carefully at the texts offered to prove this 
final point,— that the earth is so firmly founded, and on 
pillars, that it could not be rolled through space as a globe. 

(a) "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations 

of the earth? Whereupon are the foundations [margin, 
'sockets'] thereof fastened?"— Job 38:4,6. 

(b) "Of old thou hast laid the foundation of the 
earth. "-Psa. 102:25. 

(c) "Who laid the foundations of the earth that it 
should not be removed forever."— Psa. 104:5. 

(d) "The world also is stablished, that it cannot be 
moved."— Psa. 93:1. 

(e) "He hath founded it upon the seas, and established 
it upon the floods."— Psa. 24:2. 

Reply.— The intelligent and thoughtful need only to 
be reminded that stone foundations are not the only ones, 
—that principles, as well as things, can have foundations; 
as, for instance, "Justice is the foundation of God's throne 
[government]." Some men lay the foundations of schools 
and colleges by gifts of money, regardless of where the 
school buildings may be, if any, and they more truly lay 
the foundations than do the men who handle stones and 
tools for foundations for the buildings. 

For our interpretation of the text marked (a) see 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., page 312. We believe the 
reference to be to the Great Pyramid, whose measurements, 
"lines," passages and general arrangement have made it 
world-renowned as a sign or symbol, in whose construction 



God has laid down scientific lessons in astronomy and 
geometry, as well as relating to his great plan of salvation. 
Into what would our "flat-earth" friends say the socket-stones 
of their flat earth were made to sink so as to make a firm 
foundation?— into the seas, as per the last text (e) cited? 

The next four texts, as we will show, have no reference 
whatever to the literal earth, but to the symbolic earth,— 
society. 

As already shown,* not only lions, bears, trees, etc., 
are used as symbols, but so also the earth is a symbol of 
social order— society, its mountains representing its kingdoms, 
its heavens representing its highest or religious powers, 
its rivers representing its purifying truths which come from 
its heavens, and its seas representing the restless, unrestrainable, 
discontented and anarchistic classes. In illustration 
of these symbols see Psalm 46. 

With reference to this symbolic earth, society, the 
Lord's Word shows us that in its present form, it is to be 
"dissolved," "melted," "moved," "shaken," "turned 
upside down," "removed as a cottage," that it is to "reel 
as a drunkard," etc. (Psa. 75:3-10; Isa. 24:1-4,17-20; 
2 Pet. 3:10-12.) Not the literal, physical earth, but the 
symbolic earth— society as at present organized— will "reel," 
"melt" and be "dissolved." The Scriptures clearly show 
that these are figures of speech, descriptive of the awful 
social trouble now impending— "a time of trouble such as 
was not since there was a nation" (Dan. 12:1); that 
the fire is symbolic, "the fire of God's jealousy" or 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., page 316. 

R1814:page 119 

anger, and that after the "earth" (society) has been devoured 
with this fire, the earth with the people on it will 
still be here, and God will then "turn unto the people a 
pure language, that they may all call upon the name of the 
Lord, to serve him with one consent."— Zeph. 3:8,9. 

But that will be in the "new earth" symbolically, although 
upon the same earth literally. The "new earth" 

R1814:page 120 

will be the new organization of society, with its "new 
heavens" or new religious system;— the Church or government 
of righteousness for which we pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come, thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." 
Under that Kingdom there will be no more sea— no longer 
a restless, law-opposing, anarchistic class, because the 
former things, the evils of the present social order, will 
have given place to the perfection of righteous government, 
long promised in God's Word. 

It is this new earth, or reconstructed social order, that 
the Psalmist, in the Scriptures above (c, d, e), declares shall 



never be moved; while (b) shows that the present order 

was well founded by the Lord though by the fall it became 

"the present evil world" (Gal. 1:4), so that it must give place 

to "the world to come, wherein dwelleth righteousness" 

(Heb. 6:5; 2 Pet. 3:5-7,13), but that the time will come 

when it must be changed, supplanted by the new arrangement 

of Christ's Kingdom— the new heavens and new 

earth. Read the connections, and see that this is the case. 

"Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of 

the earth; and the heavens are the work of thine hands: 

they shall perish, but thou remainest; they all shall wax old 

as doth a garment, and as a vesture shalt thou fold them 

up, and they shall be changed." (Heb. 1:10-12.) Turning 

to 2 Pet. 3:10,11,13, note that the symbolic heavens, 

as well as the symbolic earth, is to pass away— to give 

place to a new order, social and religious. Then turn to 

Heb. 12:26,27 and note the same teaching of the dissolution 

of present arrangements, and in verse 28 read about 

the unmovable Kingdom which must be established before 

that new heavens and earth is established which the Prophet 

David declares "cannot be moved." Then turn to Isa. 34:2-5 

and Rev. 6:14-17, and see the symbolic representations 

of the way in which the change of dispensation will be effected 

—from "this present evil world," ruled by "the prince of this 

world," to "the world to come, wherein dwelleth righteousness." 

Then read in Rev. 20:1-5 of the blessings of 

that new "world" or order of things when it shall have come. 

After studying the subject thus far, you will readily see 
the force of the above quotation (e), in which the Lord 
declares that the new earth will be founded upon the seas 
and established upon the floods,— i.e., the new earth will 
be established where the sea now is: the class once symbolized 
by the "sea" shall be no more— "There shall be no 
more sea." 

A careful investigation of the Psalms in which these 
proof texts (b, c, d, e) are found gives convincing proof, 
in harmony with our exposition here given, that they are 
prophecies descriptive of Messiah's Millennial Kingdom. 

AN IMPORTANT PASSAGE OVERLOOKED. 



But the advocates of the flat earth idea seem to overlook 
the only text of Scripture which really has to do with 
the subject. It is found in that book of the Bible which 
contains more reference to the stars than any other, mentioning 
Orion and the Pleiades by their present names, and 
referring to their "influences"— the Book of Job. The text 
to which we refer is brief, but full of significance. It reads: 
Common Version, Job 26:7,— 

"He...hangeth the earth upon nothing." 
Revised Version,— 

"Hanging the earth upon [margin, over] nothing." 
Leeser's Translation,— 

"He suspended the earth on nothing." 



Douay (Roman Catholic) Version,— 

"He...hangeth the earth upon nothing." 
Young's Translation,— 

"Hanging the earth upon nothing." 

The harmony of these translations is good evidence as 
to the correctness of the expression; but if any one is curious 
further, let him refer, in Young's Analytical Concordance, 
to the various words— "nothing," "earth," and 
"hangeth." He will find, for instance, that the same 
Hebrew word here translated "hangeth" is defined by Prof. 
Young to signify "To hang up." He will find, also, that 
the same word is used thirteen times in referring to the 
hanging of men upon gallows. 

So far as the scriptures go, therefore, this one irrefutable, 
and not otherwise interpretable, text stands against 
the "flat earth" theory; and the texts supposed to favor 
that view, it has been shown, do not favor it. 

"GREAT AND MARVELOUS ARE THY WORKS 
LORD GOD ALMIGHTY." 



While the revelations of divine wisdom and grace concerning 
the intelligent creation of God command our 
deepest reverence, no less should his mighty works in the 
physical creation inspire us with reverence and awe. No 
doubt the successful pursuit of the knowledge of all God's 
works and ways will be a part of the delightful employment 
of men as they progress toward perfection, and come to 
realize their privilege of eternal life and all the advantages 
of leisure, facility and opportunity which the future will 
afford. While such pleasures, we believe, are not the present 
privilege of the consecrated children of God, whose 
talents are all engaged for the great harvest work, we note 
with pleasure the great delight which the learned and able 
scientists find in probing the wonderful secrets of nature, 
especially in the domain of Astronomy, and in observing, too, 
its elevating and ennobling influence upon them. They give 
to the subject the most painstaking labor, profound thought 
and careful investigation, and the devotion of their lives. 

We are glad that there have been and still are such 
men: and from the results of their labors we catch a measure 
of their enthusiasm and inspiration, and would also that 
they might catch a measure at least of ours, gathered from 
the "plan of the ages" revealed by the same great Author. 

The history of Astronomy dates back to very ancient 
times. It reached some degree of advancement among the 
Chaldeans and Egyptians, and later among the Greeks and 
Romans; but Thales, one of the seven wise men of Greece, 
who lived six hundred years before Christ, was the first 
great teacher of the science. Pythagoras, another Greek 

R1814:page 121 

astronomer, taught it shortly after. Hipparchus of Egypt, 



about three centuries before the Christian Era, and Ptolemy, 
of the same nation, about one hundred and seventy 
years later, were also justly celebrated teachers. 

Prior to the invention of the telescope and the advancement 
of mathematical science and other advantages of more 
modern times, the whole subject was involved in great obscurity; 
and various theories were propounded and studied 
to account, if possible, for the motions of the planets and 
the varied phenomena of the heavens. Judged from very 
limited knowledge and observation, it was for many centuries 
believed that our little earth was the chief factor in all 
God's universe, the center of importance and interest, to 
which the sun, moon and stars ministered as the sole end 
of their existence. But the labors of Galileo, Copernicus, 
Keplar and Sir Isaac Newton, in the sixteenth and eighteenth 
centuries of the Christian era, developed the telescope, 
discovered the laws of gravitation and of centripetal 
and centrifugal forces and suggested an order in nature 
which science and telescopic observation have proven 
to the satisfaction of all the learned scientists. These fully 
comport with our highest conceptions of the infinite power 
and wisdom of our God, beautifully harmonize with his 
mighty works of grace in the plan of the ages, and show 
us that our earth, although comparatively an insignificant 
portion of God's great empire, has been wonderfully cared 
for by him. 

With humbler ideas of earth and humanity, we gain 
correspondingly enlarged ideas of God and of his mighty 
works. These discoveries and scientific deductions are, we 
believe, in keeping with the general purpose of God, to 
bring men by various paths to a more correct knowledge of 
himself through his works and ways. That the men whose 
names we have mentioned were not superficial enthusiasts, 
but careful, candid and diligent students of nature, is manifest 
from the laborious methods by which they have arrived 
at and sought to prove their conclusions. 

In the light of scientific research, the sun is seen to be 
the center of a great system of worlds revolving around him 
in definite and invariable orbits and with a precision of 
time that never varies, some singly and some accompanied 
by revolving satellites, and others with peculiar rings whose 
substance is not yet clearly discerned, but is presumed to 
be liquid. In this system of worlds our earth is one of the 
smaller planets. 

Our solar system of planets is also found to be revolving 
together around some other great center; and far beyond 
the farthest limits of our system, by the aid of the 
telescope, other suns and systems are discerned, all presumably 
revolving with ours around some common center,— 
the group Pleiades. And the reasonable suggestion has 
been made that that center may be the heaven of heavens, 
the highest heaven, the throne of God. 

God has established laws so governing the motions of 
all the heavenly bodies that no clash or discord occurs 
among them. Each world has its appointed pathway and 
its regulated time, and the most exact calculations of 



R1815 :page 121 

astronomers find them always true to time and order. 
How wonderful is our God! Truly in this view "The 
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament 
showeth his handiwork. Day unto day uttereth speech, 
and night unto night showeth knowledge. There is no 
speech, there are no words, their voice is not heard; but 
their melody extendeth through all the earth, and to the end 
of the world their words." (Psa. 19:1-4.— Leeser.) The 
magnificent pageantry of the heavens daily and nightly 
should elicit our praise and adoration, and should inspire in 
our hearts holy and reverent devotion. Let the noiseless 
activity, the perfect obedience to divine law, and the blessed 
shining of the heavenly hosts, impress their wholesome 
lessons upon us— of zealous activity without commotion or 
ostentation; of perfect obedience to the will of him who 
doeth all things well, who is too wise to err and too good 
to be unkind; and of letting the glory of the Lord which 
has illuminated us shine from us in turn upon every beholder. 
Indeed, to those who have been brought into close 
fellowship with the Lord through a knowledge of his plan 
of the ages, all his works should be viewed with a keener 
sense of appreciation— from the tiniest organism seen through 
the microscope, to the worlds revealed by the telescope. 

With the Psalmist our hearts exclaim, "O Lord, our 
Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast 
set thy glory above the heavens;"— for, however grand and 
glorious are the wonders of creation, they proclaim only 
the superior grandeur and greatness of their Creator. Do 
we admire intellectual vigor, nobility of conception and 
skill in execution, comprehensive scope and minute particularity? 
We see it there! And while recognizing that 
even we ourselves are his workmanship— "fearfully and 
wonderfully made," and not beneath his notice and Fatherly 
care, we feel humbled as we recognize our Father's majesty, 
and in our hearts we say with the Psalmist, again, 
"When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, 
the moon and the stars which thou hast ordained; what is 
man that thou art mindful of him, and the son of man that 
thou visitest him? for thou hast made him [but] a little 
lower than the angels and hast crowned him with glory and 
honor. Thou madest him to have dominion over the [earthly] 
works of thy hands." (Psa. 8.) High indeed was the 
honor conferred upon man and the glory of his dominion 
(lost in Adam, redeemed in Christ) over the earth which 
God made "not in vain," but for human habitation. And 
while, as Job tells us, he "hanged the earth upon nothing," 
but launched it out in the abyss of space subject to those 
fixed laws which his wisdom established, we rejoice to know 
that "The Lord hath prepared his throne [power, dominion, 
control] in the heavens, and his Kingdom ruleth over 
all." (Psa. 103:19.) Surely no confusion or mishap can befall 
the remotest fragment of his vast empire, the Universe. 
Yea, Lord, we rejoice to realize that,— 



"The whole creation is thy charge, 
But saints are thy peculiar care." 

R1815 :page 122 

"HAVE FERVENT CHARITY AMONG YOURSELVES. 



In leaving the above subject we desire to impress upon 
all a few thoughts upon which all of God's people who 
possess his spirit and are guided by his Word can, we believe, 
fully agree. 

(1) Christian unity is not established upon harmonious 
views of astronomy. Each has the right to the use of 
his own intellect upon the subject of astronomy, or any 
other subject not a part of the divine revelation; and 

we trust that we have clearly shown that astronomy is not 
a part of that divine revelation. 

(2) If, aside from the Bible, a Brother or a Sister 
reaches a conclusion that another Brother or Sister considers 
wholly illogical and unreasonable, neither should 

think or speak of the other as a fool; but each should remember 
that all present knowledge is more or less incomplete, 
and that all of our reasoning faculties are at present 
imperfect. Now we know in part, but when that which is 
perfect is come, we shall know even as we are known. 
"Have fervent charity [love] among yourselves." This 
will enable each to treat kindly what may appear to him 
most absurd views on non-essential subjects, so that when 
we know that another holds such views we may avoid, if 
possible, wounding the feelings of even the very least of the 
Lord's "little ones."— Matt. 5:22; James 5:9, margin. 

(3) Remember always that astronomy and such other 
subjects as are not identified with God's plan, and not taught 
in his Word, are not of those for which we should contend. 
The Apostle declares that we should "contend earnestly for 
the faith once delivered to the saints;" but astronomy is 

no part of that faith. Neither is it a subject which we 

should feel it our duty to search or prove: we are to search 

the Scriptures upon the subjects relating to eternal life, 

and to prove all suggestions respecting the same by examining 

and comparing the Scriptures. Astronomy, therefore, 

is not one of the subjects upon which every man should be 

fully persuaded in his own mind. On the contrary, a man 

may be a saint and an overcomer, and believe the earth 

flat, square, round, or any other shape; or he may be all the 

more likely to run the race to glory successfully while confessing 

that he does not know positively, and is so intent 

on following after Christ's example,— feeding the sheep and 

the lambs upon the bread of eternal life— that he has not 

the time needful to study and prove and teach any other 

gospel. The Apostle's resolve is a good one to follow. 

He says,— "I determined to know [teach] nothing among 

you save Jesus Christ, and him crucified." 



R1810 :page 122 

TAKE TIME TO BE HOLY! 



Take time to be holy! speak oft with the Lord; 

Abide in him always, and feed on his Word; 

Make friends of God's children, help those who are weak; 

Forgetting in nothing his blessing to seek. 

Take time to be holy! the world rashes on; 
Spend much time in secret with Jesus alone; 
By looking to Jesus, like him thou shalt be; 
Thy friends in thy conduct his likeness shall see. 

Take time to be holy! let him be thy guide, 
And run not before him, whatever betide; 
In joy or in sorrow, still follow the Lord, 
And, looking to Jesus, still trust in his Word! 

Take time to be holy! be calm in thy soul, 

Each thought and each motive beneath his control. 

Thus, led by his spirit to fountains of love, 

Thou soon shalt be fitted for service above. — W. D. LONGSTAFF. 



R1815 :page 122 

CHRIST DIED FOR THE UNGODLY. 



-MAY 26, MARK 15:22-37;-MATT. 27:31-66; 
LUKE 23:26-56; JOHN 19:16-42.- 

Golden Text— "While we were yet sinners, 
Christ died for us."— Rom. 5:8. 

VERSE 22. The sentence of crucifixion having 
been obtained, the excited mob, inspired with Satanic 
zeal, hurried the prisoner to the place of execution, 
which was reached about nine o'clock Friday morning. 
What an awful night he had passed! Beginning with the 
sad scenes of the last supper with his disciples, call to mind 
the agony of Gethsemane, the hurried march to Annas, then 
to Caiaphas, to Pilate, to Herod and back again to Pilate; 
how during all the night he was most shamefully treated.— 
mocked, buffeted, spit upon, reviled, ridiculed, falsely 
accused and finally crowned with cruel thorns and 
scourged. 

After such experiences it seems marvelous that any vitality 
remained for the ordeal of crucifixion. It would seem 



that the intense and long continued nervous strain and weariness 
and physical suffering would have exhausted the forces 
of nature; but our Lord, as a perfect man, had extraordinary 
powers of endurance, though he had voluntarily sacrificed 
much of physical strength in the labors of his ministry. 
That he was greatly exhausted, however, is manifest 
from the fact that the bearing of his cross to the place of 
crucifixion was imposed upon another.— Luke 23:26. 

Verse 23. Wine mingled with myrrh was offered as 
an anaesthetic to relieve the sense of pain. It is said that 
some of the women of Jerusalem undertook this office of 
mercy on behalf of criminals to be executed by the terrible 
methods of the Romans. Jesus acknowledged the kindness 
of the offer by tasting it, but declined it further, preferring 
to have his mind awake and clear to the last. Had he taken 
it, we should have missed the tenderness which committed 
his mother to the care of John, and those last words so full of 
meaning to us— "It is finished." And Peter would have missed 
the look of sorrow that reminded him of the Lord's love and of 
his disappointment in him, that quickly called him to repentance, 
and we should all have failed to realize how much the 
Lord's thoughts were upon others even amidst the agonies 
of such a horrible death. 

Verses 25-28. The crucifixion occurred at about nine 
o'clock A.M., and ended in death at 3 P.M., the circumstance 
of the company of the two thieves being in fulfilment 
of Isa. 53:12— "He was numbered with the transgressors." 

The saying of the mocking priests and scribes, "He 
saved others; himself he cannot save,"— had indeed a 
deeper significance than they realized. He could not save 
others and save himself too; for only by the sacrifice of 
himself could he hope to save others; and therefore it was 
that he bore the penalty of our sins in his own body on the 
tree; that of himself he laid down his life, which no man 
had power to take from him except as he permitted it, which 
willing permission was so manifest in his conduct— in knowingly 
receiving the betrayer's kiss in Gethsemane; in freely 
surrendering himself to the Roman soldiers; in maintaining 

R1815 :page 123 

silence in the presence of his accusers; in freely confessing 
before them his claims of Messiahship, which they 
counted blasphemy; in silently accepting the sentence of 
crucifixion without an effort or a word in self-defence. Truly, 
"as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened 
not his mouth." Why? Because he desired to save others, and 
knew that their salvation required the sacrifice of himself. 

And so, as the Prophet (Isa. 53:5,12) declared, "He 
was wounded for our transgressions; he was bruised for our 

R1816 :page 123 

iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, 
and with his stripes we are healed." "He poured out his 
soul unto death,. ..and bore the sin of many, and 



made intercession for the transgressors." Oh, what love, 
what fortitude was here displayed! Yet men "esteemed 
him smitten of God and afflicted." And this was probably 
one of the severest of our Lord's trials— to be esteemed 
as an offender against God and as under the divine wrath. 

In the same way the afflictions of the Lord's people are 
often misinterpreted by the world, as well as by the unthoughtful 
among professed Christians. But let such consider 
that "the disciple is not above his master, nor the 
servant above his lord;" that all who will live godly shall 
suffer persecution; that during this age evil is in the ascendancy, 
and therefore the righteous suffer; that Satan is 
the prince of this world; and that until he is bound righteousness 
shall not be exalted. This is the time for the righteous 
—the embryo Kingdom of heaven— to suffer violence, 
and when the violent may take it by force. And if Christ 
our Lord and Head thus suffered, let all who suffer with him 
for righteousness' and truth's sake be comforted with the 
same divine assurance that comforted him. "Rest in the 
Lord, and wait patiently for him;. ..and he shall 
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment 
as the noonday."— Psa. 37:6,7. 

Some of the friends of the Lord were also present on 
this occasion with their love and sympathy— Mary, the 
mother of Jesus, Mary Magdalene, and Mary, the wife of 
Cleopas, and other women who followed the mob, some of 
whom probably offered the wine and myrrh, to whose weeping 
and bewailing Jesus replied, "Daughters of Jerusalem, 
weep not for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children; 
...for if they do these things in a green tree, 
what shall be done in the dry?" (Luke 23:27-31.) This 
he said in reference to the atrocities which should mark 
the overthrow of their nation and the destruction of Jerusalem, 
which would display the same wicked spirit which 
was then being manifested toward him. And it was even 
so; for the troubles upon that people were not alone from 
enemies without, but also from civil strife; for every man's 
hand was against his neighbor. It is said that at the time 
of the siege of Jerusalem hundreds of Jews were crucified at 
once, and left hanging in sight of the city walls. 

Verses 33,34. The darkness that brooded over the 
land from the sixth to the ninth hour seems to have been 
a supernatural darkness; for an eclipse of the sun was impossible 
during the full moon of the passover time. It was 
doubtless sent as an expression of the divine wrath, and as 
typical of the darkness of alienation from God into which 
that long favored nation had plunged by this act. 

The expression of verse 34 manifests the dread realization 
of imminent death. Jehovah's sustaining power must 
necessarily be withdrawn and the bitter dregs of the cup of suffering 
be drained to make the sacrifice complete. But when 
the heart and flesh failed, it was difficult to realize the significance 
of this: hence the startled inquiry, "My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Through all his 
sufferings the divine grace had thus far sustained him, but 
now he must sink beneath the rod and be cut off from the 



favor of Him in whose favor is life, that so, by his stripes, 
we might be healed. 

Verse 37. This last cry, which summoned and exhausted 
all the remaining vitality was the last triumph of victorious 
faith. Though he realized that the divine favor, which 
had always hitherto sustained his being, must now be withdrawn 
because he stood in the sinner's place as the vicarious 
sin-offering, faith, still anchored to the promises of God to 
be realized beyond the vail of the flesh, sweetly and confidently 
commended his being to the Father. This the Apostle 
Peter tells all them to do who suffer for righteousness' sake, 
saying, "Let them that suffer according to the will of God, 
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as 
unto a faithful Creator."--! Pet. 4:19. 



R1816 :page 123 

THE RESURRECTION OF OUR LORD. 



-JUNE 2, MARK 16:l-8;-MATT. 28:1-15; 
LUKE 24:1-12; JOHN 20:1-18.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord is risen indeed."— Luke 24:34. 

THE resurrection of our Lord is shown by the Apostle 
to be the assurance of the resurrection of mankind.— 
"For as all in Adam die, even so, all in Christ shall be made 
alive;" "for he is the propitiation for our [the Church's] 
sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole 
world," all of which, therefore, both the just and the unjust 
shall come forth from the grave; and, by accepting Christ 
and yielding implicitly to his guidance, they may be made 
fully alive— be fully restored to the original human perfection 
lost in Adam. 

This, the Lord also taught, saying, "Marvel not at 
this: for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of man, and shall 
come forth." And Paul said, "There shall be a resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and unjust." So important 
is this doctrine of the resurrection, that the Apostle 
declares that without it the hope and faith of the Church is 
vain.— "If the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised. 
And if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain; ye are yet 
in your sins. Then they also which are fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished. ...If the dead rise not, let us 
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die."— 1 Cor. 15:16-18,32. 

This doctrine of the resurrection is, however, very little 
heard or thought of to-day among professed Christians, and 
likewise the promise of the Lord's second coming, at whose 
presence the work of resurrection is due to be accomplished. 
It is written that "to this end Christ both died and 
rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead 



and living." (Rom. 14:9.) It is his voice that shall awaken 

the dead, and his wisdom and grace that shall lead all the 

willing and obedient to the realization of full resurrection, 

or restitution, to all that was lost. This is the logical consequence 

of his great sacrifice, to be realized at his appearing 

and kingdom. 

The first work of his presence is the unobserved, thief-like 
gathering of his elect— the awakening of those that 
have slept in Jesus, and the perfecting and the change of 
those who are alive and remain to his own glorious nature 

R1816 :page 124 

and likeness. When this is fully accomplished, as it must 

be within this harvest period, then will follow the resurrection 

of the ancient worthies. Then the Kingdom of God, 

in both its heavenly and earthly phases, will be established 

and manifested to the world,— an event due at the close of 

this harvest period and time of trouble. 

Then the resurrection morning will have come, and 
the Sun of righteousness will have risen with healing in his 
wings. Yes, "the Lord is risen indeed;" and his resurrection 
is the sure pledge of the resurrection of all for whom 
he died— of the Church first, and afterward of the world.* 
-1 Cor. 15:12-23. 

The manner of the testimony as to the fact of the resurrection, 
as related in the gospels, is worthy of the special 
attention of Christians, as proving three things, (1) the fact 
of the resurrection, (2) the Lord's change of nature in the 
resurrection, and (3) his personal identity, notwithstanding 
the change of nature. 

The fact of his resurrection was attested in three ways; 
viz., (1) by an earthquake and the sudden appearance of 
an angel whose countenance was like lightning and his raiment 
white as snow, who rolled away the stone from the 
door of the sepulcher and sat upon it, and for fear of whom 
the keepers did shake and become as dead men. (Matt. 28:1-6.) 
It was attested (2) by the facts to which the angel 
called attention— the vacant tomb and the folded graveclothes, 
together with the statement that he was risen— 
"And the angel said unto the woman, Fear not ye; for I 
know that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not 
here; for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where 
the Lord lay." (Matt. 28:5,6. See also Luke 24:12.) 
And (3) it was finally attested by the risen Lord himself, who 
appeared to the women, and others subsequently, and talked 
with them.-Matt. 28:9; John 20:1-18. 

How great was the reward of these devoted women- 
last at the cross and first at the sepulcher, anxious to bestow 
upon the lifeless remains of their beloved Lord the last tokens 
of their esteem and love. They sympathetically lingered 
near the cross, beholding his dying agonies; they were 
the mourners that accompanied him to the tomb at night; 
and they were there again before break of day with their 
precious ointments. In their eagerness to do this loving 
service, they forgot the great obstacle of the stone at the 



door. But the sweet incense of their devotion arose to heaven, 
and God sent his angel to remove the obstacle, and 
their zeal was rewarded with the richest tokens of his grace. 
Theirs was the honor of personally receiving the heavenly 
benedictions— of the angel and of the risen Lord,— and 
of first bearing the glad tidings of the resurrection to the 
other disciples. 
The fact of the resurrection was further attested to the 



*See our issue of April 1 , '93 . 

R1817 :page 124 

other disciples by the Lord's sudden appearance in their 
midst at various intervals, and his personal testimony and 
teachings on such occasions. 

The Lord's change of nature in the resurrection was 
no less clearly testified than was the fact of his resurrection. 
In evidence of this note that in no instance of his appearance 
after his resurrection was he recognized by his 
personal features, although the disciples were all intimately 
acquainted with him, and they had been separated from him 
by death only three days. Mary mistook him for the 
gardener; the two on the way to Emmaus walked and 
talked with him for some miles, entertained him in their 
home, even dining with him, without recognizing him. 
In every case he was manifested to them, not by face, but 
by some familiar expression or tone, or teaching, which 
they promptly recognized as personal characteristics of him 
whom they so loved and revered. 

Now he could enter a room, the doors being shut, and 
disappear as mysteriously, as he did on several occasions; 
and this was in exact accordance with his description of the 
powers of a spiritual body— which could come and go like 
the wind, unseen (John 3:8), and with his statement— 
"All power in heaven and in earth is given unto me." It 
accords, too, with all the information we have concerning 
the appearance of angels among men. They came in sudden 
and unaccountable ways, vanished out of sight as mysteriously 
as they came, and could and did assume any appearance 
or features they chose. These things the Lord 
never did prior to his crucifixion. 

Observe further the different appearances of the Lord on 
different occasions. At one time he appeared as a gardener, 
again as a stranger, again with prints of nails in his hands and 
the spear wound in his side, etc. On no single occasion was 
he known by his features on previous occasions, but always 
by his words, his voice, or his conduct. 

Why were these changes of appearance adopted? They 
were for the purpose of emphasizing the fact that the bodies 
which they saw were not his glorious spiritual body, which 
no human eyes can look upon. And "it doth not yet appear" 
what a spiritual body is, "but we know that when he 
shall appear, we [the Church] shall be like him; for we 



shall see him as he is." (1 John 3:2.) Saul of Tarsus once 
caught a glimpse of that glorious body, which shone above 
the brightness of the sun at noonday (Acts 26: 13), but it 
left him blind until by a miracle his sight was restored. 

The removal of the crucified body from the tomb 
which was also miraculous, for it did not see corruption, 
nor was a bone of it broken (Psa. 34:20; 16:10) was necessary 
to establish in the minds of the disciples the fact of 
his resurrection. Had it remained there it would have been 
an insurmountable barrier to their faith; nor could the astonished 
guards, nor the Jews, nor the world, have believed 
that he was risen; because they could understand nothing 
of the spiritual nature and the mysterious change. 

To presume that Christ's glorious body is but the reanimated 
body of his humiliation, is to deny the assertion 
of the Apostle that "it doth not yet appear" what a spiritual 
body is (1 John 3:2); and to claim that that "glorious 
body" is ingloriously marred with the wounds of spear 
and spike and cruel thorns; and that the flesh which he 
gave for the life of the world— as our ransom price— he took 
back, thus rendering null and void the finished work on 
Calvary; and it is in direct contradiction of the statement 
of the Apostle that, "Though we have known Christ after 
the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him [so] no more." 

Let us not, dear fellow-aspirants and called ones to the 
sharing of his glory and nature and Kingdom, lose sight of 
these blessed assurances of our glorious inheritance with 
him, who is now a partaker of the divine nature and "the 
express image of the Father's person" (Heb. 1:3), whom 
no man hath seen, nor can see, and who dwelleth in light 
which no man can approach unto. (1 Tim. 6:15,16.) 
Praise the Lord! "when he shall appear we shall be like him, 
for we shall see him as he is,"— not as he was; for indeed 
if he is as he was, then also shall we be even as we are now. 
If he bear still the ignominious scars of Calvary, then shall 
we also bear the scars that mar us; and every mutilated 
martyr will be disfigured to all eternity. Think you, has 
mortal man the power thus to harm the saints of God? 
Nay, verily: they shall be, "even as he is,"— "without 
spot or wrinkle or any such thing."* 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., page 103. 



page 125 

VOL. XVI. JUNE 1, 1895. No. 11. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: How is the Work 

Progressing? 126 

Views from the Tower 127 

Priestcraft Opposed to Liberty 

[Concluded] 130 

The Heavenly Treasure 132 

The Precious Faith 134 

Bible Study: The Walk to Emmaus 135 

Bible Study: Peter and the Risen Lord 136 

page 126 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1819 :page 126 

HOW IS THE WORK PROGRESSING? 

This question is asked by many whom we meet and its answer will 
be appreciated by many if not by all of our readers, so we reply publicly, 
—The great Harvest Work prospers! But we will particularize. 

(1) The Colporteur work prospers. For a time, particularly during 
the winter months, the general business depression affected this 
service considerably, but with the revival of general business comes an 
increased activity in the colporteur branch of the service, and we feel 
confident that the first volume of MILLENNIAL DAWN will turn the 
half -million mark before the close of the present year. One day in 
May brought orders for over 1000 copies of this volume alone. The 
second and third volumes are doing well also. 

We are glad to add, Those laboring in this branch of the service 
seem to be more than ever zealous for the truth; they are giving more 



attention than formerly to those whom they judge to be of the "wheat" 
class, watering and hoeing the seed they plant. One result is a constant 
increase of the subscription list of the WATCH TOWER. This we 
encourage, for we believe that in the busy whirl of our times, line upon 
line and precept upon precept are necessary to those already established, 
much more to beginners. 

(2) "The New Branch" of the work is prospering also. Quite 

a number have responded to the Eight Qualifications, saying that by 
God's grace, they believe themselves to possess them to some degree 
and were striving and would strive to possess them more fully day by 
day. Of some of these we have personal knowledge and acquaintance, 
and others of them are "well reported of the brethren" for their character, 
faith, zeal and moderation. To all such we have given Letters 
of Introduction, such as we described in our issue of Oct. 15, last. 
And to such we have felt free to entrust the addresses of the interested 
ones of their own and nearby towns. In consequence, numerous little 
meetings— "Dawn Circles" for Bible study— have been started, which 
we believe are proving helpful. 

Brother M. L. McPhail, as special traveling representative of the 
Society, during the last seven months has visited the TOWER readers in 
about fifty different places in Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Ohio, Virginia, 
W. Virginia, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Canada, Michigan and 

R1820 : page 126 

Pennsylvania. The reports from his meetings indicate that much good 

is being accomplished thereby, and we are urged to send him soon as possible 

again. Brother McPhail is the only one giving all of his time to the 

harvest work in this way, who does not combine the colporteur work with 

the other to some degree. He is the only one therefore whose home and 

traveling expenses are borne in full by this Society. While it is a considerable 

drain upon the Society's funds, we feel that Bro. McPhail's fullness 

of the truth and its spirit, combined with his meekness, zeal and energy, 

specially adapt him to this service. We will keep him going while we can. 

(3) The general condition of the Church is good, and indicates 
itself in various ways, the most pronounced of which are the efforts to 
live the truth and to make it known to others. 

(4) The progress of the sifting of the "chaff" and "tares" from 
among the "wheat" is very noticeable, and must be expected to continue, 
because this is the time of "harvest," the time of sifting. But, 

painful though it be, this is a necessary process, and marks progress 
toward the grand consummation when all the overcomers shall be 
gathered at the right hand of the Master and hear him say, Well done! 
good and faithful servants, enter ye into the joys of your Lord. 



R1817 :page 127 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWERS. 



THE Pope's encyclical desiring union with Episcopalians 

and all Protestants has fallen rather flat. The 

sentiments of all except the "high-church party" are probably 



voiced by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all 
England and Metropolitan, who says:— 

"I have no hesitancy in saying that, in my opinion, 
any corporate union with Rome, so long as she retains her 
distinctive and erroneous doctrines and advances her present 
unprimitive and unscriptural claims, is absolutely 
visionary and impossible." 

The Scriptures indicate that there will be no general 
union with Papacy, but merely sympathy and cooperation: 
that the union or federation will be of Protestant sects, the 
Church of England joining with the others. 

This sentiment for union of Protestants is expressed 
by the Archbishop in a recent "Pastoral" letter addressed 
to his arch-diocese, asking the members of the Church of 
England to offer prayers on Whitsunday for Unity. He says, 

"When we consider the terrible separation of the past, 
when we now see so many communions,— Presbyterian, 
Non-Conformist and Roman Catholic, at home and abroad 
in America— we are moved to desire to seek Christian unity. 
Who can doubt that this change is of the Lord?" 

We answer, that there is great reason to doubt its being 
an inspiration of the Lord. On the contrary, we believe 
that the union proposed would be of advantage to 
error and of disadvantage to the truth. Nor do we believe 
that it is inspired by right principles. 

We will give our reasons for this position. 

(1) The federation proposed is not a union or harmony 
of faith reached by growth in grace and knowledge, 
but a union in which vital faith in the teachings of our 
Lord and his apostles is to be ignored, because of a general 
growth of doctrinal ignorance and doctrinal unbelief, and 

a corresponding loss of grace which permits the skeptical 
to glory in their carelessness of divine instruction, as well 
as in their ignorance and unbelief. 

(2) On the contrary, the union which the Scriptures 
inculcate is a union of faith and oneness of loving interest 
based upon knowledge— of God as our Father and Creator, 
of Christ as our Ransomer, and of each other as joint-heirs 
with Christ in the great work of blessing the world with a 
knowledge of God and his gracious will. It, however, has 
no physical union, no fences, no bonds of human dogma, 
form or custom. Each individual stands absolutely free in 
the liberty wherewith Christ makes free, and is bound only 
by the love of Christ which alone constrains such as are free 
indeed. In this sense there is too little union amongst 
Christians in the various sects, though there is already 

too much in the sense of mechanical, sectarian bondage, 
not of hearts, but of profession; and the proposed greater 
confederation would only increase this physical bondage, 
and hence be even worse than the present for the personal 
liberty of those under it. 

(3) The union proposed is largely a business move. 
There is a strong belief in the proverb, "In union there is 
strength," and strength is desired for various reasons:— 
(a) As strong denominations have an influence which 

smaller ones do not possess, so it is hoped that all denominations 



would be socially dignified by confederation. 

(b) Church people represent the wealth, culture and civilization 

of the world; and it is feared that the times are 

rapidly developing a revolution against the present social 

system and they feel the need of cooperation to preserve 

the present order, on which they perceive that their interests 

financial as well as social are dependent, (c) It has 

been their theory that they, by civilization, would convert 

the world and inaugurate the Millennium of peace and 

general blessing (quite the contrary of the Bible's presentation 

R1817 :page 128 

of God's program); and now that it is evident that 

civilization is not synonymous with conversion, but that 

the nominally Christianized masses in civilized countries 

are more to be feared than many times their numbers of 

the unchristianized or uncivilized (for they improperly confound 

civilization with Christianization), they are anxious 

to consolidate and put on a good appearance in numbers 

as well as in financial and social strength. If carried out, 

as desired, the confederation would take the place once occupied 

by Papacy, when it ruled the world with a high and 

R1818 :page 128 

mighty hand as "God's Kingdom ruling on Earth." 

(d) A few others may have other motives, but the foregoing 

represent the general interest in Christian federation. 

We submit that a union for such reasons is not authorized 
by the Scriptures: that the Scriptural union is one of 
hearts, produced not by such motives of selfish expediency, 
but by the sanctifying influence of a knowledge of the truth, 
producing love to the Head and to each member of the 
body— the only proper bond of Christian union. And 
we again point out that the result of the mechanical union 
to be accomplished very soon will be antagonistic to the 
Lord's plan— unfavorable to the development of the little 
flock of saints, as well as an obstacle to the introduction 
of Christ's Millennial Kingdom as he has foretold its 
establishment. 

Nevertheless, the very unfavorableness of the arrangement 
will serve to prove and test and make ready the 
Lord's people. (Rev. 13:16,17; 20:4.) And as the last 
obstacle to the general blessing of the world, united Christendom 
(financial, social and religious) will be utterly 
wrecked and both the present heavens (ecclesiasticism) and 
the present earth (society) shall pass away with a great 
noise (confusion). 

The true Christian Union is that in which each individual 
believer in the ransom for all is fully consecrated to 
the Lord; and all thus united to the head and imbued by 
the truth with his spirit must be one— even as the Father 
and the Son are one.— John 17:21. 



The Socialists of Paris recently, on the anniversary of 
the Commune, at their Maison du Peuple, introduced a 
"Passion Play," representing the Savior's death at Calvary. 

"In the dialogue the unrepentant thief reproaches 
Christ with the incompleteness of His mission, which, while 
inculcating goodness and almsgiving, did not boldly preach 
the right to live. The practice of that right had brought 
him to a more ignominious cross than that which would be 
a sign of glory unto all time. The pathetic reply of Christ 
is that He died as a malefactor for having tried to teach 
men to love one another. He wished for the happiness of 
all, but a deaf ear had been turned to His doctrine. From 
the Golgotha which they shared with Him the eternal light 
would come. The Redeemer then says to the thieves, "I 
bless you both." "And I forgive you," replies the bad thief. 

The Socialists and all reformers feel that they have some 
share in Christ Jesus. This is because he is "the Savior 
of the world." So, too, among the Jews, "the common people 
heard him gladly," and probably more of them than of 
the aristocracy became his disciples. But not all of the 
common people, then or now, accepted him heartily. Now, 
as then, the interest of the poor, like the interest of the 
rich, is mostly a selfish interest. Few see the King in his 
beauty— the beauty of holiness. Few seek him as the bread 
of eternal life. Most seek the bread that perisheth. (John 6:26-37.) 
By and by all the blind eyes shall be opened, 
and all may at least taste of the heavenly bread. 



The dramatizing of Bible subjects is becoming quite 
general in Paris. Mrs. Booth, commanding the Salvation 
Army there, finding that the old methods of the Army no 
longer attract the multitude, has introduced tableaux of Bible 
subjects, the first being "The Ten Virgins." The success 
was great; and now one of the leading theaters has tried the 
public taste with a play based on the narrative of John the 
Baptist, Herod, Herodias and Salome, of Matt. 14:3-10. 
The play was enthusiastically received, and will probably be 
followed by the dramatization of other Old and New Testament 
incidents. 

From Paris the fad will doubtless spread to London, 
New York and elsewhere; and this reminds us that theatricals 
were early associated with religion. In Greece, according 
to the earliest records, it was in connection with 
religious festivals that dances and performances had their 
origin. And beginning about the fifth century and lasting 
down to the twelfth century the theatricals of Europe were 
almost, if not entirely, what were termed Miracles and 
Moralities, or simply "Miracle Plays," and were performed 
in the churches and occasionally on the streets or in 
convents. 

At first the actors were priests; later on, monks, nuns, 
etc., joined. It was not until the eleventh century that the 
"laity" were associated. In these plays heaven and hell, 



angels and archangels and even Deity were represented; 
and although started with the desire to teach the world religious 
matters in an entertaining manner, the effect was 
bad, the influence degrading. And such will probably 
be the effect again. Indeed, God is at present selecting 
the "royal priesthood" only, and they are not such as need 
to be entertained and wheedled into the truth, but such 
as so hunger and thirst after righteousness that they will 
"overcome" otherwise unsurmountable difficulties in order 
to attain it and the divine favor. Hence God's plan is the 
preaching of faith in Christ crucified and obedience in 
walking the narrow way he trod, to glory and immortality. 
It is during this age, to many, foolishness; but to us who 
believe it is the power of God and the wisdom of God. 



A new Roman Catholic Cathedral is to be built in 
London, capable of accommodating 10,000 people. 
The land is valued at $1,300,000. One contributor has 
donated $100,000 toward the building fund. There 
seems to be plenty of money for the propagation of error; 
but amongst the saints there are not many great, or rich, 
or influential; God is choosing chiefly the poor of this 

R1818 :page 129 

world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the Kingdom which he 
has prepared for those that love him supremely. 



In France a movement has been started to tax the 
revenues of Roman Catholic communities. As a result 
Catholics, especially ecclesiastics, are exasperated. Socialists 
are delighted, hoping for an insurrection which will 
give them a greater opportunity. 

How evident it is that self-interest is, in the main, 
controlling all classes in France and elsewhere. As the 
trouble progresses this will become evident to all, and the 
masses will by and by look and long for rulers who will 
unselfishly and lovingly rule the world in righteousness. 
They will come to desire the very Kingdom which God 
has promised and which, unknown to the world, he has 
been preparing for more than eighteen centuries. Yes, 
"the desire of all nations shall come,"— the Christ, head 
and body, glorified and in Kingdom power,— the Seed of 
Abraham in which all the families of the earth shall be 
blessed.-Gal. 3:16,29. 



Three candidates for the ministry, recently before the 
New York Presbytery, were asked their opinion of the fate, 
after death, of Socrates and Plato. One declared that they 
were eternally lost, another felt sure that they had another 



chance with clearer knowledge in the next world, while the 
third did not know if he had any opinion on the subject. 
The Presbytery decided that in each case the examination 
was satisfactory;— probably because, like the third candidate, 
they had no conviction on the subject. 

But why do not thinking and educated men use their 
brains upon so important a subject, which has to do with 
billions of the dead and millions of the living? Above 
all, why do they publicly avow in their Confessions of Faith 
that which not more than one in three of them really believes? 
Why not be honest, conscientious, truthful? Why 
we cannot surmise, except it be as one minister hereabouts 
declared, their "bread is not buttered on that side." But 
we do know that the untruthful and dishonest are not likely 
to get the truth. We presume that the Lord's estimate, like 
ours, is that such as are dishonest in their confessions are 
not worthy of more truth. The Lord is seeking a peculiarly 
honest people for his bride. "He seeketh such to 
worship him" as worship him in spirit and in truth, and 
not for money or reputation or social station. 



In Cleveland the Y.M.C.A., Epworth League and 
Christian Endeavor Societies are combining their powers 
politically in what is known as "The Good Citizenship 
League." This may be considered a hint of what is to 
come. At first, no doubt, the energy spent will be well 
directed for purity and honesty in politics, and in that all 
honest people will rejoice. But within probably ten or 
twelve years, when religious federation shall have made itself 
felt in politics, both in Europe and America, and 
when, believing it to be the only safeguard against Anarchism 
and Infidelity, all who love peace shall ally themselves 
with the "religious party," then will come the danger. 
For, feeling their power, the tendency will be to use it arbitrarily 
and to trample upon the rights of others; and this, 
the Scriptures show, will be done, and will lead to the 
general collapse of the present social order. 



Henry Varley, the Evangelist, who has been laboring 
in Oakland, Cal., was invited by the Ministers of 
San Francisco to come next to help them. But, after 
preaching and holding Bible-readings on various other subjects 
for some time, Mr. Varley took up the subject of our 
Lord's second coming and spent several sessions in pointing 
out that it is the center of the hope set before us in the 
Scriptures. This was too much for the San Francisco 
ministers, and they, at their regular Monday meeting, decided 
that if Mr. Varley wished to preach on Christ's second 
coming they would be obliged to cancel their arrangement 

R1819 :page 129 



to have him speak by turns in their churches, much as 
they would like to have him revive them and their flocks. 
They appointed three of their number a committee to visit 
and interview Mr. Varley, and to make known their terms. 
But, to his credit, Mr. Varley declined to leave out one of 
the chief features of the gospel and thus to prove himself 
ashamed of Christ and his Word, and went to Metropolitan 
Hall where he could preach the Word of God without restraint. 
God bless him! Yes, God always blesses those 
who are not ashamed of him and his Word. 

But how strange that men who know anything about 
the Bible, who know that the Lord encouraged his Church 
with the assurance, "If I go away, I will come again and 
receive you unto myself; and who know that the Apostles 
hoped, and exhorted the Church to hope, for "the grace 
that shall be brought unto you at the revelation of our 
Lord Jesus Christ;" and who, sometimes at least, pray after 
this manner, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth as in heaven;"— how strange that they above all men 
should be so blinded, that they should hate the subject of 
his return, and despise those who trust therein while the 
promises of God are to those who love his appearing. As 
at the first advent, so now, the scribes and doctors of divinity 
are blindest of all, and cannot even discern the signs 
of the present times. 



Emperor William's Anti-Socialist Bill in the German 
Congress was defeated. It was intended to increase the 
Emperor's power, and practically would have treated as a 
criminal any one who would have questioned or criticized 
his person or governmental policy. The Roman Catholic 
party was relied on to assist in making the bill a law; but 
it amended certain portions to favor the Church of Rome, 
and merely put it into a shape which pleased only themselves. 
No doubt they acted under instructions: Papacy 
wants to be paid by still greater concessions for assisting 
the Emperor to make his throne secure. We shall not be 

R1819 :page 130 

surprised if we find similar clerical parties in these United 
States within ten vears. 



Germany was the first nation to enact compulsory life 
and accident insurance laws for all laborers, mechanics, etc. 
A certain portion of the premium, from one-fourth to three-fourths, 
according to the danger, is paid by the employer 
and the remainder by the employee. England and France 
are moving in the same direction. 

France, by a recent enactment, places herself in the 
lead in the matter of granting pensions for aged work-people, 
who have for ten years subscribed to Benefit Societies. 



The Socialists wanted the measure to apply to all, irrespective 
of the "Friendly Societies," but accepted the 
present measure as a recognition of principles for which they 
have long contended. 

All of God's people may well rejoice in all such well-directed 
efforts to assist the less fortunate members of 
Adam's family. Let us all more and more cultivate such 
sympathy in the present time, even though our hope for 
the groaning creation lies beyond the great time of trouble 
by which Messiah's Kingdom is to be introduced. 

JEWISH VIEW. 



"There are now 100,000 Jews in the Holy Land, one 
half of whom have arrived there in the past seven years." 

"Jerusalem is advocated as the initial meridian instead 
of Greenwich by no less a renowned society than the Academy 
of Sciences at Bologna." 

"Rabbi J. Leonard Levy lectured last Sunday morning 
before the Congregation Keneseth Israel upon "Jesus, 
the Light of Christendom." He said:— His moral doctrines 
are the purest. They are mainly from the Old Testament. 
His ethical precepts are the highest. They are 
for the most part from the oldest Jewish writings. He is 
a faithful copy of the lovable Hillel, that sweet, meek, 
gentle character. Our God is his God. Our people were 
his people; for our God is the Universal Father and our 
people the human family. I do not, cannot accept the dogma 
that was built around his name, yet I would be mentally 
blind if I withheld from him the highest tribute of admiration 
and respect. 

"The greatest tribute that can be paid to him is to be 
worshiped by 350,000,000 of grateful people. What a wonderful 
influence he has had upon the world! To the tempted 
he has been a fortress; to the struggling, a support. 
Again and again he has told them, I, too, was tempted; 
I, too, suffered, but I bore my cross; go do ye likewise.' 

"Where he is remembered in his spirit, men are nobler 
and women are purer. Where he has entered the human 
heart, charity abounds and hope is strong. Where he is 
imitated in his spirit, woman is revered and childhood is 
sacred, and there grows the sweetest flower that ever bloomed, 
the violet of meekness spreading its perfume in the human 
heart."— Jewish Exponent. 



A young Israelite, a cultured man, thoroughly acquainted 
with the Jewish faith, became acquainted with several 
Christian families, and conceived the idea of writing a novel 
in which Jewish and Christian family life would be illustrated 
and contrasted. In order to more fully grasp the Christian 
idea he purchased and read a copy of the New Testament. 
His study convinced him that Jesus was indeed the 



Messiah looked for by his people. 



In Berlin, a Hebrew artist sought new subjects for pictures, 
and, searching for them, turned to the New Testament. 
As he read, the moral beauty of the Savior and the 
simple purity of his teachings deeply impressed his heart. 
The more he read, the more he became convinced that Jesus 
of Nazareth was indeed the Son of God, the Messiah. 

Gradually, as the full number of the elect Gospel Church 
—"the Bride, the Lamb's wife"— is nearly completed, the 
"blindness" which for over eighteen centuries has rested 
upon "Israel after the flesh," according to divine prediction, 
begins to pass away in a manner that must be marvelous 
even to that people.— See Rom. 11:25-31. 



Considerable uneasiness is felt in Austria by the recent 
triumph at the elections of the Anti-Jewish Party, whose 
motto is "Hang or expel the Jews, and confiscate their 
property." This party has triumphed in Vienna and has 
charge of the city government, and it is feared will similarly 
triumph in the national Congress or Reichsrath. 

As we have already pointed out, Jewish persecution in 
Austria must be expected; for large numbers of them reside 
there, and the Lord will no doubt use persecution to 
awaken them, and turn their hearts and minds toward him, 
that those who yet trust his promises may begin to think 
of him whom they have pierced and to return to the land 
of promise.-Jer. 32:37-40; 46:27,28; Rom. 11:25-31. 



R1821 :page 130 

PRIESTCRAFT OPPOSED TO LIBERTY. 



[CONCLUDED FROM OUR ISSUE OF MAY 1.] 
THE EARLY CHURCHES UNFETTERED. 



NOT only were the individuals of the early Church free, 
but each congregation was free from the control 
of every other congregation. Even the Apostles, although 
by divine appointment they were competent to direct all 
of the affairs, did not do so arbitrarily, but always respected 
the rights and liberties of each congregation and of each 
individual Christian. They did reprove, rebuke and exhort, 
but it was with longsuffering and patience, and by pointing 
out the errors of doctrine or practice, just as the humblest 



of the brethren had a right to do. 

The entire arrangement of the early Church was based 
upon (1) confidence in the Lord, and in each other as partakers 
of his spirit; (2) love for the Lord and for all 
who possessed his spirit; (3) obedience to the Lord's 
will, in whatever manner expressed. They recognized the 

R1821 :page 131 

Scriptures as the substance of the Lord's revelation, but 
they did not forget that God declared that he would provide 
teachers, helps, etc., in the Church for its upbuilding 
in the truth and in its spirit. They were therefore on the 
lookout for those whom God might be sending as such 
helpers; yet they were cautioned not to receive every spirit 
or doctrine, but to try or prove by the Word of God 
whether or not the teachings and teachers were from God 
or false teachers transforming themselves to appear as servants 

R1822:page 131 

of the light. Accordingly, even the Apostle Paul gave 
proofs of his teachings by repeatedly referring to the Old 
Testament Scriptures. 

Knowing the superior ability of the Apostles, and noting 
to how large a degree the Lord had confidence in them 
and used them, the early Churches readily accepted the 
judgment of the Apostles as to which of their number would 
be best qualified, naturally and spiritually, to be their 
"Elders," or to have the chief direction and oversight of 
the work in their midst. And the Apostle shows that he 
judged of fitness in the same manner that we now should 
judge, and not by some super-human intuition.— See 
Titus 1:6-11. 

But it is very evident that the Apostle appointed no 
"Elders" in any Church contrary to the will of the congregation. 
It was by the will of the Church that the Apostle 
chose for them; they having more confidence in his 
experience, disinterested judgment, etc., than in their own. 
Love and confidence were the grounds of obedience, and 
not arbitrary authority. These facts must impress themselves 
upon all who read the New Testament with their eyes open. 
The strongest utterance is merely advisory; it reads, 
"Obey your leaders and be submissive [then the reason for 
this advice is given], for they keep watch on your behalf, 
as those who shall render an account." (Heb. 13:17.) 
Even when the Apostles called or sent any of the younger 
brethren in the ministry, it was not as of arbitrary authority, 
but as of request which they were likely to follow, because 
of their confidence in him as a faithful and experienced 
servant of the Truth. (See 2 Cor. 8:17; 1 Tim. 1:3.) 
But those calls or requests were not always 
obeyed; and no offense was taken by the Apostle, if the 
brethren sometimes felt and acted differently from his suggestions 
or requests. (See 1 Cor. 16:12.) On the contrary, 
some of the "Elders" became self-seekers, and spoke evil 



of the Apostles, yet were not anathematized: the Church 
was merely cautioned as to how to judge, and another more 
suitable brother was suggested, not appointed (3 John 9-12) 
—indicating that full liberty was accorded to each congregation. 
But the caution was sometimes given that the 
spiritually minded would receive the Lord's counsel through 
his mouthpieces, the Apostles.— 1 John 4:6; 

1 Cor. 14:37,38. 

So also in introducing brethren to the Churches, force 
and authority are ignored, while the liberty of all is respected 
even by the apostles, who write not commandingly 
but entreatingly, not arbitrarily, but giving the reasons why 
those commended should be held in esteem. (See Phil. 2:29,30; 
Philemon 12,17; Col. 4:10; 3 John 8.) In all this 
the apostles did nothing more than what all the "brethren" 
had full privilege to do. (Acts 18:27.) And those who 
received the letters were bound to act upon such letters only 
by their love and confidence; hence probably a letter of 
commendation from St. Paul couched in the very same 
words would have had a greater influence than if from some 
others, simply because of the unbounded confidence of the 
Churches in his judgment and carefulness of their interests. 

As the territory was smaller and the means of travel 
much less complete, the letters used by the early Church 
were special, rather than general, and were sent to the 
Churches rather than carried by the visiting brethren. They 
were written, instead of printed, and were for one visit 
instead of for a year as are the Letters of Introduction 
now in use amongst us. 

The financial methods in the early Church, although 
not regulated by law, were simple and full of individual 
liberty as now with us. Pew-rents, church-fairs, etc., were 
unknown as means for helping forward the Lord's cause. 
The "Elders" in each little congregation did not serve 
for filthy lucre, but of ready minds. (1 Pet. 5:2,3.) So 
far as we can judge, they served the weekly meetings without 
thought of compensation;— probably continuing their 
usual work or business for a livelihood. The traveling 
"Elders," such as Paul, Barnabas, Silas, Peter, Timothy, 
etc., who gave their entire time to the service, sometimes 
"wrought with their own hands" to provide their necessities, 
but sometimes were supported in part by the voluntary 
contributions of those previously served with the truth. 
(See Phil. 4:10-18.) But they all seem to have strenuously 
avoided asking or receiving anything from those whom 
they were seeking to win to Christ. (See 3 John 7,8; 1 Cor. 9:12-15; 

2 Cor. 11:8,9.) However, the apostles desired, 

for the sakes of the givers, to see the truth take such hold 
upon them that they would take pleasure in giving for the 
spread of the Truth: and therefore he accepted for his 
own necessities and for the necessities of those who were 
his colaborers and under his supervision what the Churches 
he had served were forward to offer. And although he 
sometimes pointed out the duty and privilege of the Lord's 
people, he never directly requested money, so far as we 
know, except for the relief of the poor of the Church at 



Jerusalem;— probably at a time of dearth or famine. 

On the whole, dear brethren, we congratulate you that 
as representatives of the Lord to-day, on all these subjects, 
we all stand, so far as we can judge, in just about the 
same position as the early Church. The principles under 
which we operate are identical with those of the primitive 
Church, and the methods are modified only by changed 
circumstances and facilities. 

Each individual and each little gathering is free, absolutely 
free, except as voluntarily controlled by love, confidence 
and obedience to our Lord, and love to each other. 
We, too, look for the Lord to SET every member in the 

R1822 : page 132 

body as it hath pleased him (1 Cor. 12:26-31); and we 

seek to recognize such by the characteristics laid down by 

the Apostle. We, too, recognize character and consecration 

as essential prerequisites to a believer (one who trusts 

in Christ's ransom sacrifice), before he could be "apt to 

teach" the truth. We, too, introduce by Letters which 

none are bound to recognize. We, too, have a general 

fund used in publishing the gospel, much more cheaply 

than we could publish separately, out of which provision 

those who can use tracts can have them freely whether they 

can contribute or not; out of which the poor are supplied 

with the regular visits and preaching of ZION'S WATCH 

TOWER; out of which the MILLENNIAL DAWN as a preacher 

of present truth is sent the world over on loan to the poor 

or at low prices and in various languages to those who can 

circulate it and thus share in preaching the gospel according 

to present improved facilities. And we, too, while 

pleased to see evidences of a love of the truth which extends 

to the pocket-book and the bank account, feel that 

we have neither authority nor desire to beg in the name of 

our Master. 

Let us stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath 
made us free, and permit love, and love alone, to be the 
constraining power in our hearts and lives; and in all 
matters of small importance, let us say as St. Paul did about 
wearing the hair long or short;— "But if any one is disposed 
to be contentious, we have no such custom [as a law], 
neither have the Churches of God."— 1 Cor. 11:16. 



R1820 : page 132 

THE HEAVENLY TREASURE. 



"Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust 
doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up 
for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor 
rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through 



nor steal; for where your treasure is there 
will your heart be also."— Matt. 6:19-21. 

A TREASURE is something in which we take 

special pleasure and delight. It is in our 

thoughts and plans and hopes, an inspiration in our lives, 

and an incentive to energy, perseverance and endurance 

for the hope which it enkindles. There are few people 

in the world who have no treasures; yet they are generally 

such as yield but little satisfaction, being earthly and therefore 

perishable. Some find their treasures in wealth, fame, 

social distinction, houses and lands, friends, home, family, 

etc., and in these they center their hopes. But all of these 

are subject to change and decay, and may, if the heart be 

centered in them, at any moment desolate the life, plunging 

the heart at once into an abyss of sorrow which can 

only be measured by the former high tide of its joy when 

life was young and hope new, before the shadows of disappointment 

crossed the way. 

The wealth, laboriously gathered and husbanded with 
much care, may vanish in an hour; the fame, so dearly won, may 
change to censure at the caprice of fickle public sentiment; 
the social distinction, which once bade you to the uppermost 
seat, may by and by relegate you to the lowest seat, 
as one despised and forsaken; houses and lands may disappear 
under the sheriff's hammer; friends long trusted may 
suddenly turn the cold shoulder and prove untrue or even 
treacherous; the home you love must soon or later break 
up; the family will be scattered, or death will invade it, or 
even the love that glowed on the home-altar may flicker 
and become uncertain or extinct. So the high hopes of 
early life, centered in the earthly treasures, may in a few 
short years turn to ashes. How many have found it so! 
the moth of wear and the rust of time corrupt the fair 
earthly blessings; and thieves break through and steal the 
treasures of our possessions and our hearts, and desolation 
and gloom are the painful results. But it is not so with 
those whose treasure is laid up in heaven. 

The all-important question then is, How can we lay 
up treasure in heaven, and what kind of treasures are accepted 
in that sure and safe depository? 

We have the assurance of the divine Word that every 
thing that is pure and holy and good is acceptable there. 
The chiefest of all treasures there is the personal friendship 
and love of Christ, "the fairest among ten thousand and 
the one altogether lovely." If we have gained this treasure 
we have gained one that never changes, one whose love 
never grows cold and from which nothing can separate us 
—"neither tribulation, nor distress, nor famine, nor persecution, 
nor nakedness, nor peril, nor sword;" for his love 
and friendship are not like those of this world, which forsake 
us in the hour of need. Neither can "death," which 
often consigns to forgetfulness the friendships of this life; 
"nor angels," even with all the superior charms of their 
purity and glory; nor the "principalities and powers" of 
darkness that are arrayed against us to separate the betrothed 



virgin of Christ from her beloved Bridegroom; nor 
any of the "things present or to come;" "neither height" 
of temporary exaltation, nor "depth" of trouble and sorrow, 
"nor any other creature [thing]" in heaven or earth, 
separate from his special love the Lord's elect, who have 
found in him their chief treasure.— Cant. 5:10,16. 

Nor will any other creature in heaven or in earth receive 
from him those marks of special favor which are, and 
ever will be, the chief joy of his beloved bride. Though 
"the whole family of God in heaven and in earth" will 
be blessed through him, his wife co-operating with him in 
the work, she alone will be his companion, his confidant, 
his treasure. This close relationship of the Church to 
Christ was set forth in the Lord's words to his typical 
people (Deut. 14:2), which the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 2:9) 
shows belonged, not to them, but to their antitypes, the 
elect Church. To them he said, "For thou art an holy 

R1820 : page 133 

people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen 

thee to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the nations 

that are upon the earth." And the Apostle, after 

showing that the typical people of God stumbled and proved 

themselves unworthy of such special favor, applies the 

promise to the Gospel Church, saying, But ye are the 

chosen generation, the royal priesthood, the holy nation, 

the peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises 

of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvelous 

light: which in time past were not the people, but 

are now the people of God.— 1 Pet. 2:9. 

And to us God has made exceeding great and precious 
promises— promises, not only of redemption and deliverance 
from sin and death, and recognition as sons and heirs 
of God through Christ to the inheritance of eternal life, 
but more: he has called us by his grace to be the bride 
of his only Son and heir— the "heir of all things;" to be 
his intimate and eternal companion in all things; to be 
"joint-heirs" with him of all his possessions, so that "all 
things are ours" also, "if we are Christ's;" to be "partakers," 
too, of the "divine nature" and glory and kingdom; 
even to sit with him in his throne, and with him to constitute 
a "royal priesthood" in whom all the world shall be 
blessed. 

Hear the invitation (Psa. 45:10,11), "Hearken, O 
daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also 
thine own people and thy father's house [the world and its 
ambitions, hopes and aims]; so shall the King [Jehovah's 
Anointed] greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord, 
and worship thou him." What wonder is it if, when we 
receive such a message, we hesitate and feel that we are unworthy; 
that in our imperfection there can be no beauty 
in us that he should desire us, passing by even the angels 
in their purity and glory. Surely there must be some mistake! 
has not the invitation come like the vision of a dream 
to be dispelled when sound judgment has awakened to realities? 



Ah, no ! hearken again, and be reassured of the 

voice of Jehovah, our God; for long ago he led his inspired 

prophet to pen these lines for us, and now by his 

spirit he unseals our understanding and brings the matter 

to us with all the freshness of his own personality. But 

what "beauty" have I? I know that I have not all the 

graces of the spirit in their glory and perfection; but then, 

as I reflect, I realize that I wear the robe of Christ's righteousness; 

then have I not "the ornament of a meek and 

quiet spirit?" and have I not that faith wherewith it is 

possible to please God? Therefore I lay hold, with exceeding 

joy and gratitude, of even this gracious invitation, 

and, without presumption, I accept the blessed hope and 

press toward the mark of my high calling which is of God 

in Christ Jesus, humbly trusting that he who has begun the 

good work of grace in me will perfect it against that day 

when he would have me appear before him "without spot 

or wrinkle or any such thing." 

No sooner is the gracious invitation thus accepted than 
the pleasure of the Lord is expressed to the prospective 
bride. Hear— Ye "shall be mine in that day when I make 
up my jewels." "Thine eyes shall see the King in his 
beauty." "I will give thee to eat of the hidden manna" 
[John 4:32], and will give thee a white stone [a precious 
token of love], and in the stone a new name written [the 
name of the Bridegroom, henceforth to be ours— Acts 15:14], 
which no man knoweth [1 Cor. 2:14] saving he that 
receiveth it." "Lo, I am with you alway [in thought 
and loving oversight and care], even unto the end of the 
age." "Nevertheless, I tell you the truth. It is expedient 
for you that [personally] I go away to him that sent me: I 
go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a 
place for you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, 
that where I am, there ye may be also. If ye love me, 
keep my commandments. And I will pray the Father, and 

R1821 :page 133 

he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide 
with you forever; even the spirit of truth whom the world 
can not receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth 
him; but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you and shall 
be in you. I will not leave you comfortless: I will come 
to you. He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, 
and I will love him and will manifest myself to him: we 
will come unto him, and make our abode with him."— 
Mai. 3:17; Isa. 33:17; Rev. 2:17; Matt. 28:20; John 16:7,5; 
14:2,3,15-18,21-23. 

Hear again, as the Lord lifts up his voice in prayer to 
his Father, and our Father, to his God and our God (John 20:17), 
"Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast 
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my 
glory. I pray for them which thou hast given me; for 
they are thine, and all mine are thine, and thine are mine, 
and I am glorified in them."— John 17:24,9,10. 

Precious words! con them over again and again, beloved 



of the Lord, that all their sweetness may permeate 
your souls and reinforce your waning powers with new 
vigor, courage and zeal to press along the narrow way until 
your eyes shall "see the King in his beauty." 

Other treasures which we may lay up in heaven are 
those marks of just approval and distinction among all the 
good and holy which must result from zeal and faithfulness 
to the Lord and patient endurance of tribulation in his 
service in the present life. While an exceeding and eternal 
weight of glory is to be the inheritance of all of the elect 
body of Christ who are now laying up treasure in heaven, 
the Apostle Paul clearly intimates that that treasure may be 
augmented by special zeal and faithfulness under the peculiar 
trials of the present time. (2 Cor. 4:17,18.) Treasures 
also of mind and character we shall find laid up in heaven; 
for nothing that is good and true, and worthy of preservation, 
shall be lost to those who have committed their investments 
to the Lord's keeping. These are incorruptible 
treasures which neither the lapse of time nor the exigencies 
of circumstance will be permitted to wrest from us. The 
treasures in heaven will also include all those true and 
noble friendships founded in righteousness and truth here 
on earth, whether they be on the natural or the spiritual 

R1821 :page 134 

plane. For instance, one on the spiritual plane of being 

will not be disposed to forget or to ignore the loving loyalty 

of a former earthly friendship which often ministered a cup 

of cold water to a thirsty soul in time of need. Surely some 

special marks of favor from the highly exalted ones will 

manifest the appreciation of the old-time friendships (Matt. 10:41,42; 

Heb. 6:10), and the reciprocation of such grateful 

loving hearts will be a part of the treasure long laid up 

in heaven, then to be realized. Nor will the special friendships 

of those on the spiritual plane, begun and cherished 

here and now, lose any of their value and sweetness when 

mortality is swallowed up of life. 

Oh, how precious will be the heavenly treasures when 
we view them in the light of the new dispensation— as 
glorious realities uncorrupted and incorruptible! With 
what joy shall the faithful begin to realize them when first 
they hear the Master's welcome, "Well done, good and 
faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, 
I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into 
the joy of the Lord." Then will follow the welcome of 
all the glorified fellow-members of the anointed body; and 
if the jubilant songs of the angels hailed the advent of our 
Lord in the flesh, can we imagine them to be silent when 
the anointed "body" is received into glory, their work in 
the flesh having been finished? Surely not: if "there is joy 
in heaven over one sinner that repenteth," the glad notes 
of jubilee will be raised very high when the Church shall 
have finished her course and entered into her reward. And 
as the tidings spread to earth, through the established earthly 
phase of the Kingdom, all creatures in heaven and in 



earth will be rejoicing together.— Rev. 5:11-13. 

Who indeed can estimate the value of the heavenly 
treasures? Their value is past our present powers of reckoning; 
yet, with an approximate appreciation of them, let 
us keep our eye upon them and diligently lay up in heaven 
many of them, assured that there moth and rust can not 
corrupt, nor thieves break through nor steal. Let our 
hearts glory in the heavenly treasures, esteeming all things 
else as of minor importance. If our hearts are set upon 
the heavenly treasures only, then indeed the disappointment 
and trials of the present life cannot overwhelm us, though 
they may cause us pain and sorrow. The heavenly treasures 
include all that is pure and good and noble and true. Whatsoever 
things are true, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever 
things are lovely, whatsoever things are worthy of the 
aspirations of the spiritual sons of God, these are our real 
treasures; and let our hearts glory in them more and more. 
"Let us touch lightly the things of this earth, 
Esteeming them only of trifling worth," 
and let our treasures be laid up in heaven and our hearts 
dwell there. 

THE INFLUENCE OF THE HEAVENLY TREASURES 
UPON THE PRESENT LIFE. 



In this view of the heavenly treasures we can see what 
a marked influence such a hope and ambition must have on 
the present life. (1) It helps us to realize that the Lord, 
whose present and final commendation we so earnestly desire, 
is taking special notice of even the most trivial affairs 
of our daily life and of our conduct with reference to them, 
as well as when we pass through the great billows of temptation 
and trial that seem disposed at times to overwhelm 
us. (2) It helps us to realize that the future approval of 
even our present enemies is a treasure worth the seeking. 
By and by the present opponent may be converted from 
the error of his way, and when he shall look back and call 
to mind the patient endurance, faithfulness and uniform 
kindness of the man formerly despised, hated, reviled and 
persecuted, the persecuting spirit may turn to mourning 
and repentance, and the former hatred, to love and admiration. 
This the Apostle intimates, saying, "Beloved... 
have your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that 
whereas they speak against you as evil-doers, they may by 
your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in 
the day of visitation." (1 Pet. 2:12.) And this love, the 
reward of righteousness, will be a part of the treasure of 
the future. Even so we are told the nation of Israel will 
by and by look upon him whom they have pierced, and 
they shall mourn because of him. (Zech. 12:10.) This 
blessed satisfaction will be part of the Lord's treasure 
which, at his first advent, he laboriously laid up in heaven's 
keeping. It was the prospect of this treasure that assisted 
him to so patiently endure mocking, ignominy, scorn, 



ingratitude, pain and death. Under all his sufferings he 

did not grow discouraged nor faint, but confidently looked 

to the joy of the future set before him— the joy of a renewed, 

grateful and loving race. So also our heavenly 

Father has for six thousand years patiently borne with the 

ingratitude and wickedness of men, sending his rain and 

sunshine upon the just and the unjust, and at great cost providing 

for their redemption and restitution which by and by 

will reveal to him also the treasure of grateful hearts which 

shall to all eternity ascribe to him the praise of their salvation. 

Similar will be the joy of all the faithful sons of God 

who likewise now lay up treasure in heaven. 

Just as we now look back in loving remembrance upon 
the worthy character and noble example of a sainted father 
or a tender mother with a degree of appreciation which 
childhood could not realize, so will men by and by learn to 
appreciate every worthy character; and so every good and 
noble deed will eventually receive its due reward. 



R1822 : page 134 

YOUR PRECIOUS FAITH. 



"That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of 
gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire, might be found 
unto praise and honor and glory at the 
appearing of Jesus Christ."— 1 Pet. 1:7. 

FAITH has in it the two elements of intellectual assurance 
and heart reliance. The former is faith in the 
abstract sense; the latter is its concrete form. It is in this 
latter, fullest sense we read that, "With the heart man believeth 
unto righteousness." (Rom. 10:10.) Both the head 
and the heart— the intellect and the affections— are necessary 
to that faith without which it is "impossible to please 
God" (Heb. 11:6); though many fancy they have faith 
when they have only one of its essential elements. With 
some it is all emotion; with others it is all intellectuality; 
but neither of these can stand the tests of fiery ordeal: they 
must abide together if they are to endure to the end and be 
found unto praise and honor and glory at the appearing of 
Jesus Christ. 

An intellectual grasp of the fundamental principles of 
divine truth— viz., of the existence of a personal, intelligent 

R1822:page 135 

God, the Creator and Sustainer of all things, and of his 
purpose and plan of redemption through his only begotten 
and well-beloved Son, Jesus Christ— constitutes the foundation 
of faith; while trust and reliance to the extent of his 
promises, upon the personal God who is the author of our being 



and who, as a Father, invites the implicit confidence and 
love of his children, make up the superstructure of our faith. 

The trial of our faith to which the Lord and the apostles 
refer is therefore a trial, not only of our intellectual 
recognition of divine truth, but also of our heart reliance 
upon God. In both respects every true child of God will 
find his faith severely tried, and, as a soldier of Christ, let 
him not fail to be armed for the conflict. If an attack is 
made upon the intellectual foundation of our faith we 
should see to it that we have a, "Thus saith the Lord," 
for every item of our belief. Let the Word of God settle 
every question, and let no human philosophies, however 
ingenious, lead us into the labyrinths of error; for if the 
foundations of faith become unsettled, the superstructure 
cannot stand when the winds and the floods of adversity 
and temptation beat against it. Doubt and fear will cause 
it to tremble, and when it is thus weakened the vigilant 
adversary will surely send a blast of temptation against it, 
and great will be the soul's peril. 

R1823 : page 135 

Let us, therefore, look well to the foundations of our 
faith— study the doctrine and get a clear intellectual conception 
of every element of divine truth which the inspired 
Word presents to the people of God; let us become rooted, 
grounded, settled, established in the faith, the doctrines of 
God, and hold them fast: they are the divine credentials; 
and let us give earnest heed to them, lest at any time we 
should let them slip.— Heb. 2:1. 

But having the doctrines clearly comprehended as 
foundations of faith, we need also to look well to the superstructure 
of heart reliance, which is really in greater danger 
from storms and floods than are the foundations, being 
more constantly exposed. The Apostle Peter tells us that 
a tried, proved faith, a faith that has stood the tests of fiery 
ordeal and come off victorious, is very precious in the sight 
of God. That is, that every time we pass through a conflict 
and still retain, not only the truth, but also our confidence 
in God and reliance upon his promises in the dark 
as well as in the light, our integrity of heart and of purpose, 
and our zeal for truth and righteousness, our characters 
have grown stronger, more symmetrical and more Christ-like, 
and hence more pleasing to God, who is thus subjecting 
us to discipline for this very thing. 

Therefore, "Beloved, think it not strange concerning 
the fiery trial which is to try you, as though some strange 
thing happened unto you. But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are 
partakers of Christ's sufferings, that, when his glory shall 
be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy." 
(1 Pet. 4:12,13.) It is worthy of notice here that special 
reference is made, not to the tests of intellectual belief 
brought about by the presentation of false doctrine, but 
to reproaches and persecution for Christ's sake, either 
for adherence to his doctrines or conformity to his righteousness; 
for, the Apostle adds, "If ye be reproached for 



the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory 
and of God resteth upon you." He warns us to take heed 
only that we suffer not as evil-doers, "Yet," he says, "if 
any man suffer as a Christian [that is, either for Christian 
principles or Christian doctrine], let him not be ashamed, 
but let him glorify God on this behalf." 

The Prophet Daniel also says that particularly in this 
time of the end, "many shall be purified and made white 
and tried;" and Malachi (3:2,3) compares the trials of 
this time to the "refiner's fire" and to "fuller's soap," 
which are designed to refine and purify the Lord's people. 
The Apostle Paul urges that we fight the good fight of faith, 
and patiently endure afflictions to the end. (1 Tim. 6:12; 
2 Tim. 2:3.) And many are the words of consolation and 
blessed comfort offered by the Psalmist and others to the 
tempest-tossed and suffering people of God.— See Psa. 77:1-14; 
116:1-14; 34:19; 31:24; 2 Thes. 3:3. 

Are you then, dear brother or sister, hard pressed on 
every side with temptations to doubt that God's protection, 
love and care are yours, that his precious promises belong 
to you? have you grown discouraged and disheartened? 
do the foes seem too many and too strong for you? do the 
reproaches come with crushing weight, and do the clouds 
hang heavy over your seemingly defenseless head? Ah, it 
is just here that faith must claim her victory! Is it not 
promised, "This is the victory that overcometh,... 
even your faith?" It is your faith that is on trial now. In 
the calmer days when the sun of favor shone brightly upon 
you, you were quietly laying the foundation of a knowledge 
of the truth, and rearing the superstructure of Christian 
character. Now you are in the furnace to be proved: 
summon therefore all your courage; fortify your patience; 
nerve yourself to endurance; hold fast to your hope; call 
to mind the promises, they are still yours; and "cast not 
away your confidence, which hath great recompense of reward. 
"In quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength," "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him," 
and faith has gained her victory. Then in due time the 
Lord's hand will be recognized in making all things work 
together for good to you according to his promise. This 
proof of your faith, says Peter, is more precious than gold 
that perisheth, though it be tried with fire. 



R1823 : page 135 

THE WALK TO EMMAUS. 

-JUNE 9, LUKE 24:13-32.- 

Golden Text— "He opened to us the Scriptures."— Luke 24:32. 

ONE thought in connection with this familiar narrative 

is the privilege and blessing of the communion 

of saints. Wherever two or three are met together in my 



name, said the Lord, there am I in the midst. (Matt. 18:20.) 
These two disciples (not apostles: see verses 18,33) 
were earnestly discussing the sad events of the last few days, 
which so perplexed them all. They had trusted that he 
who had just been crucified was the true Messiah foretold 
by the prophets: he had seemed to fit the descriptions of 
the prophets so perfectly, but now he was very generally 
esteemed as "smitten of God and afflicted." Their sad and 
perplexed faces were indexes of their minds. They had 
loved the Lord and trusted in him, and they delighted to 
call to mind his sweet spirit, his wise counsel, his wonderful 
teaching and his great love for each of them personally. 
How strange it seemed that such a one should so perish! 

R1823 : page 136 

Yes, they loved the Lord, and delighted to speak one 
with another, and to think upon his name; and the Lord 
hearkened and heard it (Mai. 3:16,17): he was beside 
them all the while though they knew it not, and soon he 
seemed to overtake them, and gave them a stranger's greeting 
Then followed the marvelous opening up of the Scriptures 
to them. How familiar the stranger seemed to be 
with the law and the prophets; and how wonderfully he 
wove together the web of logical and Scriptural argument, 
to prove it necessary that Messiah must suffer these things 
before he could enter into his glory! Surely enough, it 
was all there in the sacred writings, but they had never seen 
it so before. How reasonable, too, when thus viewed! 

Then they told him of the strange news they had 
heard of his resurrection that very morning; and as he 
further explained how this also was so to be, as foretold by 
the prophets, they drew near home and the stranger was 
therefore about to take leave of them. But their interest 
in the conversation was too deep to part thus abruptly with 
him, and they urged him to tarry and partake of their 
hospitality. 

Earnest inquiry and generous hospitality were strong 
incentives to the Lord, as they always are. So he accepted 
the invitation; and soon they were made cognizant of the 
fact that the Lord himself was indeed their guest. And 
his blessing sank deep in their hearts, and they said one to 
another, Did not our hearts burn within us by the way? 

Let us take to our hearts the precious lesson of this 
incident, that we may enjoy more and more of the blessings 
of communion with the Lord and with each other. If our 
hearts are humble, earnest and true; if our delight is in the 
Lord and his truth; if our actions are guided by the noble 
principles of truth and righteousness; and if our candid, 
thoughtful endeavor is always to find the purest principles 
and the exact truth to the end that we may conform our 
lives thereto, then indeed the Lord will be pleased to dwell 
with us and to manifest himself to us as he does not unto 
the world. --John 14:21. 



R1823 : page 136 

PETER AND THE RISEN LORD. 

-JUNE 16, JOHN 21:4-17.- 

Golden Text— "Lord, thou knowest all things; 
thou knowest that I love thee."— John 21:17. 

IN addition to the special teachings of these several narratives 
of the Lord's appearance to his disciples after 
his resurrection, which were, first, to convince them of his 
resurrection; and, second, to convince them of his change 
of nature, which teachings we have noted in previous lessons, 
we would here call attention to the thrice repeated question 
of our Lord to Peter— "Lovest thou me?"— and Peter's 
reply, and his renewed commission to preach the gospel. 

Thrice had Peter denied the Lord— though under extreme 
temptation— and the denial was sincerely repented of 
with bitter tears; and now thrice would the Lord have him 
reaffirm his devotion to him, and receive three additional 
assurances of his ample reinstatement in his love and favor. 

"So when they had dined, Jesus saith to Simon Peter, 
'Simon, son of Jonas, lovest thou me more than these?' 
He saith unto him, 'Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love 
thee.' He saith unto him, 'Feed my lambs.'" 

The question arises, With what did our Lord bring 
himself into comparison in Peter's mind when he said, 
"Lovest thou me more than these?" Could he have referred 
to the other disciples present on that occasion? We 
think not; for the Lord had no disposition either to embarrass 
Peter and the others with a tone of sarcasm, nor to 
inspire nor encourage boastfulness. And Peter's prompt 
affirmative answer indicates nothing of either embarrassment 
or boastfulness, but instead, a loving sincerity, which was 
glad of the opportunity to respond promptly and warmly 

R1824 : page 136 

—"Yea, Lord; thou knowest that I love thee." 

With what then did the Lord institute the comparison? 
Evidently with the fishing tackle and the business prospects 
represented in them. Once, in obedience to the Lord's 
call, he had left these to follow him; and then, in the interval 
of perplexity since his resurrection, not knowing what 
else to do, he had gone back to the old business. So the Lord 
inquired how he felt about it now, since the reproach of 
the crucifixion. It was as though he had said, Are you 
willing again, Simon, in the face of all the public prejudice 
and hate and the reproach of the cross to leave all your 
business and social prospects and go out again to preach 
the Kingdom of God and the return in glory and power of 
the crucified One? Are you willing, too, to incur the additional 
reproach and persecution which zeal and faithfulness 
in my cause are sure to bring? 



Yes, Peter was ready, and so were all those dear disciples, 
again to forsake all and take up the cause of their 
crucified and risen Lord, and boldly and openly to proclaim 
the coming Kingdom and glory of him whom the 
Jews had taken and, with wicked hands, had crucified and 
slain. Only the doubt which seemed to be implied in the 
third repetition of the question grieved Peter. His was an 
ardent, warm nature, and he wanted the Lord to be fully 
persuaded of his love and zeal. It grieved him, therefore, 
to feel that possibly yet there was a shadow of doubt, a little 
cloud, between him and the Lord which his repentance 
had not fully removed. But the Lord quickly removed the 
cloud and enabled him to realize his full reinstatement as 
an accepted and beloved disciple, in full fellowship and cooperation 
with himself. 

The question thus addressed to Peter— "Lovest thou 
me more than these?" is the question addressed to every 
consecrated follower of the Lord, without a single exception. 
If we have given ourselves unreservedly to the Lord, 
the necessities of his work are before us, to prove the sincerity 
and strength of our love. Nor has the reproach of 
the cross yet ceased: indeed, in this end of the age, as in 
the beginning, the reproach of the cross is bitter and determined; 
and it is more and more so every year as prominent 
ecclesiastics lead the way toward the ditch of open and 
avowed infidelity. So to each of us comes the testing question, 
"Lovest thou me more than these"— more than the 
business pursuits and prospects, more than the social ties 
and pleasures, more than ease, or comfort, or friends, or 
fame, or wealth, or a good name, or any earthly good? 

Ah! it is truly a test question, and a question which 
no one can sincerely answer in the affirmative who has not the 
inspiring incentive of love in the heart. But pure, fervent 
love to Christ does quicken zeal, and enable those who have 
it to respond gladly and promptly, "Lord, thou knowest 
all things; thou knowest that I love thee," and sends them 
forth with joy to prove their love by their works. "If any 
man love me, let him take up his cross daily, and follow 
me." "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me 
before it hated you." "The servant is not greater than his 
lord: if they persecuted me, they will also persecute you." 
"In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall 
have peace." "Feed my sheep; feed my lambs." 



page 137 

VOL. XVI. JUNE 15, 1895. No. 12. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Missionary Envelopes 138 

The Work at Home and Abroad 138 

Views from the Tower 139 

Whose Glory is in their Shame 140 

St. Paul's Earnest Desire 142 

Secret and Beneficial Societies 143 

Bible Study: Our Lord's Ascension 145 

Bible Study: Review 146 

Bible Study: The Ten Commandments 147 

Into his Marvelous Light. (Letters.) 147 

page 138 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We are placing an order for another lot of our usual Missionary 
Envelopes, and make the proposition that any who can use 5000, can 
have them at less than half the usual cost,— with their card printed at 
the corner. This is to induce a very general circulation of this tract 
envelope. Order at once. 



R1825 : page 138 

THE WORK AT HOME. 

The colporteur work of late is encouraging. The older colporteurs 
are succeeding better than for some time; and several new ones have 
started recently. We are at present giving special attention to New 
England and the Pacific and Southern states. "Pray ye the Lord of 
the harvest that he will send forth more laborers into his vineyard." 

The Lord seems willing to make use of every modern invention 
for spreading the truth. Brother and Sister Bell who had hoped ere 
this to be in the colporteur work and who to this end have been trying, 
but without success, to sell their prune ranch on the Pacific coast, concluded 
that they must serve in some manner and at once. Bro. Bell 
assured us that he, by God's grace, possessed the eight qualifications 
mentioned in the Oct. 15, '94 TOWER, and that he continually strives 



to abound in those graces of the spirit. He received of the Society 
a Letter of Introduction, and at once began to visit and, so far as 
possible, to help the Church in the vicinity of his own home. On Christmas 
last he and his wife received bicycles as presents from their relatives, 
and they at once concluded that these should be made to serve the truth 
also. They have extended the range of their ministry and when last 
heard from were 300 miles from home encouraging the Lord's people 
and being encouraged by them. Thus the bicycle has been yoked in 
as a servant to the "good tidings of great joy." 

Several brethren with Letters of Introduction are doing good service, 
some giving spare time from their business as commercial travelers, 
some from stores, etc., and Bro. McPhail giving his entire time. Letters 
received show that the Lord's flock is being refreshed by these agencies. 
We here remark that brethren and sisters desirous of symbolizing their 
consecration, the immersion of their wills into the will of Christ, by 
water immersion, can be served by any of these Brethren when they 
come your way. 

Let the love and sympathy and prayers of God's people everywhere 
embrace and support these dear co-laborers; and forget not those of less 
favorable opportunities who are not ashamed of the Lord and his Word, 
but daily confess the truth, as they can,— by their means, their words, 
their example and by tracts, letters, etc. 



PROGRESS OF THE WORK ABROAD. 

Brother Joseph Winter has for some time been at work colporteuring 
MILLENNIAL DAWN amongst people of his own nation— Denmark. 
He is meeting with fair success and is now much encouraged by one of 
his converts joining him in colporteuring. May the Lord continue to 
bless and use them. 

Brother and Sister Westall have just started for England to engage 
in the "harvest" work there— colporteuring MILLENNIAL DAWN. A 
great work should be possible in Great Britain, and for some time we 
have been watching to see whom the Lord would esteem worthy, putting 
them into the work. (1 Tim. 1:12.) The Tract Society sends 
these two forth with hope-prayers that they may make full proof of their 
ministry to the praise of his glory who hath called us out of darkness 
into his marvelous light. May they be faithful and be greatly blessed. 

Brother Oleszynski, a Polander who received the truth into a good 
and honest heart some three years ago, has gone to his native land to 
search out consecrated ones to preach to them the grand gospel of ransom, 
restitution and the high calling. He has much of the spirit of the 
truth, and in the day of rejoicing will bring his "sheaves" with him. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. and III., English and German, 
VOL. I. in Swedish and Dano-Norwegian, at uniform prices, 25 cents per 
volume in paper covers, $1.00 per volume in embossed cloth binding. 



R1824:page 139 



VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RELIGIOUS conventions have been numerous during 
the past month. The American Baptist 
Union met in Saratoga. The Presbyterian General 
Assembly and The United Presbyterian General Assembly 
met in Pittsburg, and The Unitarian Association in Boston. 
The latter alone seems to be suffering a serious decline. The 
time was when Unitarians had a monopoly of "liberalism" 
and general disbelief in the Bible, its miracles, etc., but it 
has lost this distinctiveness; not by reason of any reform 
on its part, but because ministers in so-called "Orthodox" 
churches have out-run them in disbelief of the Bible, its 
inspiration, its miracles and its doctrines. 

As for the Baptists, they are in great danger of losing 
their liberty and coming into bondage to their Ministerial 
Associations which, anxious for power, are drawing the 
cords tighter and tighter about their confiding lambs and 
sheep. Increase of wealth among Baptists in the large 
cities of the North is an important factor in the binding 
process. The poorer Baptist churches and their ministers 
are finding union more and more desirable. Baptists have 
been among the most firm defenders of the Bible: indeed, 
denying, as they do, all church authority, they have nothing 
else than the Bible as a foundation to their existence, 
and the denial of it would mean the destruction of every 
excuse for their existence as churches, and leave them merely 
moral and social clubs or societies. Nevertheless, among 
Baptists, as well as among the organized denominations, disbelief 
in the inspiration of the Bible and in the very 
foundation of Christian doctrine— that the death of Christ 
at Calvary was man's ransom-price— is spreading rapidly, 
especially among the ministers. 

The U.P. Assembly received very warmly a committee 
from the Presbyterian Assembly, and heard and applauded 
their addresses, which were to the effect that they hold 
much of doctrine, history and practice in common, and 
little at variance, and that the two denominations should 
become one, etc. They took steps looking to the control 
of U.P. Theological Seminaries, fearing a difficulty similar 
to that between the Presbyterian body and Union Seminary 
of Briggs fame. Evidently their hearts are failing 
them for fear as they see other quarters of the ecclesiastical 
heavens being shaken. 

The Presbyterian Assembly decided that the graduates 
of Union Theological Seminary shall not be ordained as 
Presbyterian ministers. This seemed to many a bold, courageous 
course in defense of the Bible; but when all the facts 
are recognized, it appears very much less. It has taken cognizance 
of Prof. Briggs' teachings, has examined him, has 
recognized his teaching as Infidelity of the most pernicious 
sort, has refused to longer recognize him as a teacher and 
suspended him as a minister until he shall have time to recant. 
He repudiates all ideas of recanting, and still holds 



and teaches his unbelief in the Bible, with increased energy. 
The other professors at Union Seminary have approved 
Dr. Briggs' course and teachings, and are still recognized 
as good enough to represent Presbyterianism. The Directors 
of the Seminary have disregarded the orders of the 
General Assembly, have endorsed Dr. Briggs and retained 
him; and yet some of those very Union Seminary Directors 
were specially honored by being reelected to places of 
special influence by this very Assembly. Why?— Because 
of the love of money. Mr. Briggs' friends are wealthy and 
influential, and the past year has shown that Missionary 
and other Societies of the denomination have fallen behind 
financially; and Presbyterianism as a whole, as well as many 
of its ministers individually, keeps close watch as to which 
side of every question brings the golden butter to its bread. 
In no other way can its action be accounted for in selecting 

R1824 : page 140 

to its Board of Home Missions three out-and-out Briggs 
sympathizers. (Infidels so far as the Bible is concerned- 
believers so far as morality is concerned.) One of these, Mr. 
J. Crosby Brown (a very rich man and eminent banker who 
is President of the Board of Directors of Union Seminary, 
and who has a son a Professor in that institution), has been 
made President of the Board of Home Missions. Another 
made a director is Dr. Hastings, the noted leader and 
President of Union Seminary, whose teachings are recognized 
as so bad that a man instructed there is so likely to 
be an out-and-out infidel, that no matter what he may confess 
or profess to believe he cannot be recognized as a 
Presbyterian minister. The Assembly is learning not to 
put much faith in the professions of men taught in Union. 
And, indeed, do they not know from their own consciences 
that not one minister in ten believes what he professes at 
the time of his ordination? Evidently it will not be long 
before the time-and-money-serving spirit will sweep all denominations 
into practical infidelity, as the Scriptures have 
pointed out to us. 



On Sunday, June 2, "Whitsunday," by a very general 
arrangement, sermons were preached in churches of various 
denominations favoring a union of all Protestant sects. 
The Pope, in an encyclical, offered Roman Catholics a 
premium to have them pray for the conversion of Protestants 
to the church of Rome. The premium offered was 
release from Purgatorial pains— so many days release for 
each prayer offered during the nine days preceding Whitsunday 
and for the eight days following it. 

But neither the motives for union nor the desired object 
are good, reckoned from the Bible standpoint. They 
are on a par with the Pope's claim to control the future as 
well as the present life. 

The same bigotry that during the "dark ages" established 



Inquisitions with their dungeons, and torture chambers 
furnished with every device that wicked hearts and 
brains and hands could prepare, would now fain grasp again 
the power lost in the Great Reformation. It would, no 

R1825 : page 140 

doubt, at first conduct itself more moderately than in the 
past; but minds trained to believe that God has prepared 
"hell" as a great bake-oven and that he is not only sweeping 
his creatures into it by the million, but that he has 
pleasure in so doing,— that he made that "hell" for those 
creatures and those creatures (foreknowingly) for that hell, 
are wholly unfit to be trusted with power over their fellows. 
They are sure to be influenced by their perverted ideas of 
God's methods to perhaps send heretics a little sooner to 
the burning. The evil is only intensified by adding to 
these errors the superstition that the pope carries the keys 
of hell and purgatory (and delegates that power to priests), 
and controls the future destiny of fellow creatures, many of 
whom, thank God, are much better every way than himself. 

Here is the premium for prayers referred to above, the 
words of the man who claims to be infallible, unerring, the 
italics and explanatory words in brackets being ours:— 

"To all who, for nine consecutive days before Pentecost, 
either publicly or privately, recite some special prayers 
to the Holy Spirit, we grant on each of those an indulgence 
of seven years and seven quadrgenes [40 days]; and a 
plenary [full, complete] indulgence [from any and all sins 
that he may commit] on any one of these days, or on the 
feast of Pentecost itself, or on any day of the following 
octave, provided, having confessed their sins and received 
absolution and holy communion, they pray God, according 
to the intention which we have above expressed. 

"We further grant that those who desire to repeat for 
the eight days following Pentecost upon the same conditions 
may gain both of the above indulgences. These indulgences 
may be applied to the souls [of the dead, already] 
in purgatory." 



The Rev. Thos. Dixon (Baptist), on May 26, preaching 
in New York City, declared that Christianity is a failure 
in that city and had been repudiated by the spirit of Christ. 
He is reported by the N.Y. World to have said:— 

"The Baptist denomination in this city owns $4,000,000 
worth of property, and, although within the last twenty 
years 15,000 children have been born into that faith, they 
have in that time lost 2,000 members. The combined 
wealth of the Baptist, Presbyterian and Methodist churches 
here is $16,000,000. There are in those churches the 
brainiest men of the age, and yet they are not holding their 
own. They are a curse, because they are only maintaining 
the traditions of a dead past." 



R1825 :page 140 

WHOSE GLORY IS IN THEIR SHAME. 



"Out of thine own mouth will I condemn thee." 

HOW gradually people may drift away from their own 
landmarks is nowhere better illustrated than in 
that very prosperous denomination known as Episcopal 
Methodists. Its founder, John Wesley, an Episcopal clergyman, 
realized that the common people were being neglected 
religiously, and, prompted (we believe) by the best of motives, 
started the movement which is now world-wide in its influence, 
and which in these United States numerically and 
otherwise is the strongest of all Protestant denominations. 

But prosperity has made Methodists proud, and has 
largely killed the spirit which gave birth to the organization. 
It is so changed to-day that its founder would not recognize 
it, and if Mr. Wesley or the Lord Jesus were to appear 
again and teach the same things in the same manner as of 
old, neither would be acceptable— neither would be allowed 
to preach a second sermon in any popular M.E. Church of 
any large city. We have evidence from Methodist sources 
on this subject which we will present below. 

We learned recently that a new M.E. Church in Allegheny, 
which is completing a fine church-building about six 
blocks from our office, to be known as the "Calvary M.E. 
Church," had decided that in order not to encourage the 

R1825 : page 141 

poor it would rent no sittings to servants. At first we 

could scarcely credit the testimony, but were finally convinced 

that it must be the truth; for even a worse expression 

of the same spirit manifested itself in the North 

Avenue M.E. church, two blocks from our office, on the 

same street. In the latter church a spirit of rivalry with 

the former had sprung up; and, as a result, a meeting was 

called to decide whether or not they would best dismiss 

their present pastor, Mr. Story. At that meeting the astounding 

charge against the pastor, plainly stated, was that he 

was bringing into the church too many of the poorer classes, 

R1826 :page 141 

and that the wealthier people were consequently leaving for 
other churches. 

After considerable discussion, covering so far as we can 
learn about two weeks, it was decided to have Mr. Story remain. 
But Mr. Story, having learned that his stay is not the 
unanimous wish of the people, has very properly resigned. 

Following closely our knowledge of the above facts 



came the article which we reproduce below, by an M.E. 
minister, published in a leading Methodist journal— The 
Northwestern Christian Advocate— without one word of 
comment or criticism, and hence endorsed by it as the new 
standard of Methodism which it advocates. This abundantly 
proves that the spirit of Methodism in Allegheny is 
the claimed new spirit of Methodism everywhere. The 
writer so thoroughly draws the contrasts between present 
and past Methodism that comment from us is needless, except 
to say that in our view of matters they are boasting 
and glorying in their shame. 

Brother Compton, who sent us the clipping (formerly 
a Methodist), in the letter accompanying it says: "Nothing 
that I have ever read in the TOWER has so forcibly shown 
the decadence of the modern church as this complacent 
article by a 'Minister of the Gospel.'" Yes, the same 
principle, we fear, applies also to all other denominations 
to a greater or less extent. 

We give the article entire (the italics are Brother 
Compton's). 

"SOME FEATURES OF AMERICAN METHODISM. 



"The revival of religion in the eighteenth century under 
the leadership of the Wesleys and Whitefield purified 
the moral tone of the Anglo-Saxon race and put in operation 
new forces for the elevation of the unevangelized. 
Secular historians, both English and American, have united 
in crediting the movement originated by these remarkable 
men with much in modern church machinery and statement 
of doctrine which tends to spread and plant our civilization. 
The doctrine of 'free will' preached by them and 
their successors has, with the evolution of modern experiments 
in secular government, been one of the most popular 
dogmas engaging the thoughts of men. Among our American 
fore-fathers this doctrine was peculiarly contagious. 
Throwing off the yoke of kings, and disgusted with a nationalized 
and priest-ridden church, what could be more enchanting 
and more in harmony with their political aspirations 
than the doctrine that every man is free to make or 
mar his own destiny here and hereafter? 

"The doctrine of the 'new birth' upon which the 
Methodists insisted, and the preaching of which by Whitefield 
in New England was like the telling of a fresh and 
unheard story, likewise produced effects upon which the 
secular and even the unreligious looked with approbation. 
For this doctrine not only demanded a 'change of heart,' but 
also such a change in the daily life as to make the Methodist 
easily distinguished from the man of the world by his behavior. 
The great purpose for which the church existed was to 
'spread scriptural holiness over these lands.' This was the 
legend on her banner— with this war-cry she conquered. 

"Another reason for the phenomenal success of Methodism 
in this country is to be found in the fact that to its 



simple, popular service the common people were gladly 
welcomed. Only those who have been untrained in ritual 
can appreciate this apparently insignificant but really very 
important fact. To know that you may enter a church 
where you can take part in the service without the risk of 
displaying your ignorance of form and ceremonies is of 
greatest concern if you have no desire to make yourself 
conspicuous. Thus the plain, unstudied service of the early 
American Methodist church was exactly suited to the 
people who had but lately abandoned the pomp of Old 
World religions. Lawn sleeves, holy hats, diadems, crowns 
and robes were repugnant to their rough and simple tastes. 
The religion that taught them that they could make their 
appeals to the Almighty without an intermediator of any 
kind emphasized the dignity and greatness of their manhood 
and appealed to their love of independence. 

"The marked triumphs of this church may also be attributed 
in part to the fact that she had not then laid down 
the Master's whip of small cords. There was in those 
early days, from time to time, a cleansing of the church from 
pretenders and the unworthy which had a most wholesome 
effect, not only on the church itself, but also upon the surrounding 
community. For after the storms which often 
accompanied the 'turning out' of the faithless, the moral 
atmosphere of the whole neighborhood would be purified, 
and even the scoffer would see that church-membership 
meant something. 

"A factor also assisting in the success of which I write 
was the pure itinerancy of the ministry which then obtained. 
Without doubt there were heroes and moral giants in those 
days. The influence of a strong, manly man, possessed by 
the idea that here he had 'no continuing city,' making 
no provision for his old age, requiring no contract to secure 
his support or salary, denying himself the very things 
the people were most greedy to obtain, and flaming with a 
zeal that must soon consume him, must have been abiding 
and beneficent wherever it was felt. 

page 141 

"No mean part in achieving her commanding position 
in this country was played by the singing of the old-time 
Methodists. Serious, sensible words, full of doctrine, joined 
to tunes that still live and rule, there was in such singing 
not only a musical attraction, but a theological training 
whereby the people, uncouth though they might have been, 
were indoctrinated in the cardinal tenets of the church. 
The singing of a truth into the soul of child or man puts 
it there with a much more abiding power than can be found 
in any kindergarten or Quincy method of instruction. 
Thus, without debate, doctrines were fixed in the minds of 
children or of converts so that no subsequent controversy 
could shake them. 

"It remains now to show that 

R1826 :page 141 



THESE ELEMENTS OF SUCCESS HAVE BECOME ANTIQUATED, 
AND THAT A NEW STANDARD OF SUCCESS HAS BEEN SET 
UP IN THE METHODIST EPISCOPAL CHURCH. 

"Let me not assume the role of boaster, but rather be 
the annalist of open facts, a reciter of recent history. So far 
as the standard of doctrines is concerned, there is no change 

R1826 : page 142 

in the position held by the church, but the tone and spirit 
which obtain in almost all her affairs show at once the 
presence of modern progress and light-giving innovations. 
The temper and complexion of this mighty church have so 
far changed that all who are interested in the religious welfare 
of America must study that change with no common concern. 

"The doctrine of the new birth— 'Ye must be born 
again'— remains intact, but modern progress has moved 
the church away from the old-time strictness that prevented 
many good people from entering her fold, because they 
could not subscribe to that doctrine, and because they never 
had what once was called 'experimental religion.' Now 
Universalists and Unitarians are often found in full fellowship 
bravely doing their duty. 

"The ministry of the present day, polished and cultured 
as it is in the leading churches, is too well bred to insist on 
'holiness,' as the fathers saw that grace, but preach that 
broader holiness that thinketh no evil even in a man not 
wholly sanctified. To espouse this doctrine as it was in 
the old narrow way would make one not altogether agreeable 
in the Chautauqua circles and Epworth leagues of the present. 

page 142 

"The old-time, simple service still lingers among the 
rural populations, but in those cultured circles, where correct 
tastes in music, art and literature obtain— among the 
city churches— in many instances an elaborate and elegant 
ritual takes the place of the voluntary and impetuous praying 
and shouting which once characterized the fathers. To 
challenge the desirability of this change is to question the 
superiority of culture to the uncouth and ill-bred. 

R1826 : page 142 

"When the church was in an experimental stage, it 
possibly might have been wise to be as strict as her leaders 
then were. There was little to be lost then. But now wise, 
discreet and prudent men refuse to hazard the welfare of a 
wealthy and influential church by a bigoted administration 
of the law, such as will offend the rich and intellectual. If 
the people are not flexible, the gospel surely is. The church 
was made to save men, not to turn them out and discourage 
them. So our broader and modern ideas have crowded out 
and overgrown the contracted and egotistical notion that 



we are better than other people, who should be excluded 
from our fellowship. 

page 142 

"The love-feast, with its dogmatic prejudices, and the 
class-meeting, which was to many minds almost as bad as 
the confessional, have been largely abandoned for Epworth 
leagues and Endeavor societies. 

R1826 : page 142 

"The present cultured ministry, more than ever in the 
history of the church, conforms to the Master's injunction 
to be 'wise as serpents and harmless as doves.' Who among 
them would have the folly of the old-time preachers to tell his 
richest official member who is rolling in luxury to sell all for 
God and humanity and take up his cross and follow Christ? 
He might go away sorrowing— the minister, I mean. 

"While evolution is the law, and progress the watchword, 
rashness and radicalism are ever to be deplored, and 
the modern Methodist minister is seldom guilty of either. 
The rude, rough preacher who used to accuse the God of 
love of being wrathful has stepped down and out to give 
place to his successor, who is careful in style, elegant in 
diction, and whose thoughts, emotions and sentiments are 
poetical and inoffensive. 

'"The time limit,' whereby a minister may remain in 
one charge five years, will be abandoned at the next General 
Conference in 1896. In the beginning he could serve 
one charge but six months; the time was afterward extended 
to one year, then to two years, then to three, and lately 
to five. But the ruling, cultured circles of the church see 
that if her social success and standing are to compare favorably 
with other churches, her pastorate must be fixed so that 
her strong preachers may become the centers of social and 
literary circles. For it must be remembered that the 
preacher's business is not now as it often was— to hold protracted 
meetings and be an evangelist. No one sees this 
more clearly than the preachers themselves. Great revivalists 
used to be the desirable preachers sought after by the 
churches, and at the annual conferences the preachers were 
wont to report the number of conversions during the year. 
Now, however, a less enthusiastic and eccentric idea rules 
people and priest alike. The greater churches desire those 
ministers that can feed the aesthetic nature, that can parry 
the blows of modern skepticism and attract the intellectual 
and polished, while at the annual conference the emphasized 
thing in the report of the preacher is his missionary collection. 
The modern Methodist preacher is an excellent collector 
of money, thereby entering the very heart of his people 
as he could not by any old-fashioned exhortation or appeal. 

"How great the lesson that has been so well learned by 
these leaders of Christian thought, viz., that the gospel 
should never offend the cultured and polite taste. To a 
church that can so flexibly conform to the times the gates of 



the future open wide with a cheery greeting. What more 
fitting motto can be found for her than the herald angels 
sang: 'Peace on earth, good will to men.'" 
—Rev. Chas. A. Crane. 
Danville, 111. 



R1827 :page 142 

ST. PAUL'S EARNEST DESIRE. 



"For me to live is [to live] for Christ, and to die, gain. But if to live 
in the flesh, this is to me a fruit of labor; and what I should choose I 
do not exactly know. I am indeed hard pressed by the two things 
(I have an earnest desire for the returning and being with 
Christ, since it is very much to be preferred); but to 
remain in the flesh is more requisite on your account. 
-Phil. 1:21-24, Diaglott translation. 

IT will be observed that the chief difference between the 
above and the common English version of this passage 
is the substitution of the word "return" for the word 
"depart." In justification of the use of the word "return" 
the translator in a footnote says:— 

"To analusai, the loosing again or the returning, being 
what Paul earnestly desired, could not be death or dissolution, 
as implied by the word depart in the common version, 
because it seemed a matter of indifference to him, which 
of the two— life or death— he should choose; but he longed 
for the analusai, which was a third thing, and very much 
to be preferred to either of the other two things alluded to. 
The word analusai occurs in Luke 12:36, and is there 
rendered return;— 'Be you like men waiting for their 
master, when he will return,' etc. Jesus had taught his 
disciples that he would come again, or return, John 14:3,18; 
thus, also, the angels said to them at his ascension, 
Acts 1:11. Paul believed this doctrine and taught it to 
others, and was looking for and waiting for the Savior from 
heaven, Phil. 3:20; 1 Thess. 1:10; 4:16,17, when... 
he would 'ever be with the Lord.'" 

An examination of the Greek word analusai shows 
that it is used in Greek literature by Plato in both ways— 

R1827 : page 143 

as signifying sometimes depart and sometimes return; but 
the word occurs only twice in the New Testament, here 
and in Luke 12:36. In the latter instance, as stated above, 
it is rendered "return," and manifestly could not be otherwise 
rendered and preserve the sense. In the case we are 
discussing (Phil. 1:23), we hold that it should be rendered 
return, for the very simple reason that, even when used to 
signify depart, it must carry with it the thought of depart 



again, to depart to a place where one had previously been. 
The Greek prefix ana in ana-lusai signifies again as our 
prefix re in return signifies again. Hence, if rendered depart, 
we would be obliged to add the thought re-depart or 
depart again. And this would spoil the matter as related 
to St. Paul; for he had never been with Christ in glory, 
and hence could not "depart again" to be with Christ there. 
But when we translate analusai "re-turning," and apply 
it to our Lord, every difficulty seems to be removed. 

Let us note the circumstances which gave rise to the expression. 
The Apostle had been for some time a prisoner 
at Rome, and while at times well treated by some of the 
Emperors, he was constantly liable to be put to death 
on some caprice. He wrote this Epistle in acknowledgment 
of a substantial gift from the Church at Philippi, and 
took the opportunity to tell them fully of his own condition, 
the progress of the Lord's work, etc., and to encourage 
them to steadfastness to the end. 

Since they would like to know his prospects for release, 
he tells them that enemies (seeing his liberty for two years, 
Acts 28:30) were explaining Christianity, hoping thereby 
to add affliction and perhaps death to his bonds. (Phil. 1:16-19.) 
But he realized the prayers of the Church on his 
behalf and expected that his trial before Nero would result 
in his deliverance,— his acquittal, or his sentence to death. 
Then he tells them that as to his own preferences it would 
be difficult for him to choose between life (with its sufferings) 
and death (with its rest from toil); but while he had 
no choice as between these two things possible, he had a 
longing, an intense desire for a thing he well knew was impossible, 
a thing which he knew, and had taught the Church, 
was a long way off (2 Thes. 2:1-8)— the returning of Christ 
and being with him. Then, leaving the impossible and returning 
to the possibilities, he assures them that he has a 
conviction that God has a work for him yet to do for the 
Church, and that he would be released. And although the 
Scriptures give no account of it, tradition declares that he 
was acquitted by Nero and had some five years of liberty 
and service before being rearrested and executed. 

It is worthy of note here that several other words are 
repeatedly used in the writings of both Paul and Luke when 
depart is manifestly meant. And it should be remembered 
that Luke was the Apostle's amanuensis, who traveled much 
with him and was accustomed to use words in the same sense. 

But if any yet contend for the word "depart," rather 
than "return," we submit the following. 

No doubt Paul would have desired, especially in view 
of his knowledge that the Lord's second coming could not 
occur soon, that he might depart to heaven or anywhere 
else in order to be with the Lord at once. But he knew 
that such a desire could not be granted in harmony with 
the divine plan, and hence, although it would have been 
his earnest desire, it did not enter into consideration as 
one of the possible things: he was still left in a strait of indecision 
as to his own preference of the two possible things 
—to live and serve the Church in suffering, or to die and 



rest from his labors— waiting "for that blessed hope, the 
glorious appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned 
like unto his glorious body." 



R1827 : page 143 

SECRET AND BENEFICIAL SOCIETIES. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I would like to have your opinion 
on the subject of life insurance. They are organizing 
lodges all around here— United Workmen, Knights 
of Pythias, Red Men, Masons, Odd Fellows, etc. They are 
working it just about like sectarianism in the churches. 
Would like to see an article in the TOWER on the subject. 
Yours in the love of the truth, W. E. KILLAM. 

OUR REPLY TO THE QUERY. 



In our judgment the majority of "secret societies" are 
merely beneficiary and have no secret schemes antagonistic 
to the general public welfare, the secret rites and ceremonies 
being merely "boys' play," occupying the time and attention 
of persons who have no greater aims than those which 
pertain to the present life. We note, however, that several 
Roman Catholic Societies seem to have schemes connected 
with the use of fire-arms, and are therefore to be classed as 
malevolent rather than benevolent. 

We note also that the Order of Free Masons, if judged 
by its past history, has some secret object or scheme, more 
than fraternity and financial aid in time of sickness or 
death. And, so far as we can judge, there is a certain 
amount of profane worship or mummery connected with 
the rites of this order and some others, which the members 
do not comprehend, but which, in many cases, serves to 
satisfy the cravings of the natural mind for worship, and 
thus hinders it from seeking the worship of God in spirit 
and in truth— through Christ, the only appointed Mediator 
and Grand Master. 

In proportion as such societies consume valuable time 
in foolish, senseless rites and ceremonies, and in substituting 
the worship of their officers, and the use of words and 
symbols which have no meaning to them, for the worship 
of God, in his appointed way— through Christ, and according 
to knowledge and the spirit of a sound mind— in that 
proportion these societies are grievous evils, regardless of the 

R1827 :page 144 

financial gains or losses connected with membership in them. 



But respecting those orders which are merely Mutual 
Insurance Societies, in which the members pay a certain 
weekly sum of money to their sick, and at death a larger 
sum to their families, we must concede that they represent 
a good principle. It is certainly in harmony with the 
golden rule to help our neighbor when he is in need. The 
only objection we see to this is, that it puts the matter on 
a business or selfish basis and thus destroys its benevolent 
features; for each one joins, not for the good he can do, 
but for the help he hopes to obtain for himself or his family. 

If, therefore, the matter be considered merely as a 
business arrangement, we can see no more wrong in joining 
such Mutual Benefit Societies than in taking out a policy 
in a regular Life or Accident Insurance Co., or insuring 
property in a Fire Insurance Co.— provided always that 
there be no confession of error or binding obligation required, 
contrary to the liberty wherewith Christ makes free. 
Wherever oaths of secrecy are demanded it is safe for God's 
people to touch not, taste not, handle not,— except as 
oaths are prescribed by public law, as before courts or in 
reference to documents for public record. In every other 
case the children of God will be blessed in obeying strictly 
the admonition,— Let your Yea be yea, and your Nay, 
nay; for "whatsoever is more than these cometh of evil." 
It is in connection with his description of the "last days" 
of this Gospel age that St. James cautions against all binding 
oaths, such as many Secret Societies demand.— Matt. 5:37; 
Jas. 5:12. 

We suggest, however, that, even as business concerns, 
many will be disappointed greatly by these Mutual Benefit 

R1828 : page 144 

Societies, in the near future. When the time of trouble 
shall have fully culminated, these Societies, as well as the 
great Life Insurance Companies and business in general, 
will all be paralyzed; and those leaning upon them will be 
sorely disappointed. The only ones who will be secure 
then will be those who have laid up treasures in heaven, 
where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt and where thieves 
do not break through and steal. All others, even the rich, 
will "weep and howl for the miseries" which shall come 
upon them." 

The present agitation for Societies and Unions, which 
is taking the world by storm, seems to be foretold in the 
Scriptures, and includes, we believe, not only Church 
organizations, but all the various organizations which tie 
men up together in bundles, to-day as never before. (See 
Isa. 8:12; Matt. 13:30.) These "bundles" or Societies 
may seem simple and harmless just now, but when the symbolic 
fire reaches them, when the great time of trouble shall 
have kindled the passions of the world in general, then it 
will be almost impossible to escape from these bundles. 
Pride will hold them together;— none will wish to show the 
"white feather" of cowardice;— none will wish to appear 
disloyal in the hour of trouble;— Societies will act en 



masse, and individuals will thus be led into positions which 
they never would take alone. Money also will be a factor. 
After having paid in considerable "dues," they will not feel 
disposed to lose that money;— especially when they see the 
cloud of trouble getting darker and nearer. Thus bound 
together they will suffer from the "burning," the distress, 
of the time of trouble, which God declares will be such as 
was not since there was a nation. 

Better far will those be who lean not upon Egypt 
(Ezek. 29:6,7— the world), for help, but who lean upon the 
Lord. The Lord will be their fortress in the day of trouble. 

Such societies, on selfish business principles, are 
foreign to the spirit of God's Church. In it, those who 
have this world's goods should be ready to assist the needy 
of the Lord's family, hoping for nothing again. And all 
who are members of the true Church whose names are 
written in heaven, all who have the spirit of the Head, will 
be willing and anxious to do good unto all men as they 
have opportunity, especially to the household of faith, 
who are not leaning upon earthly Societies, but who, instead 
of spending "dues" in that way, are using their 
means to serve the Lord, his truth and his people. 

Since we do not condemn Life Insurance Societies 
conducted upon business principles, even though we fear 
that they will be very insecure dependencies when the time 
of trouble shall have fully commenced, some one may ask, 
How are we to understand our Lord's words,— 

"TAKE NO THOUGHT FOR TO-MORROW." 



We are to understand these words in perfect harmony 
with the Apostle's words, "Provide things honest in the 
sight of all men," and "He that provideth not for his own 
[as he may be able] hath denied the faith and is worse 
than an infidel." Our Lord's words signify, Do not be 
weighed down with anxious care for to-morrow; but while 
seeking to know and to do God's will, trust in his providential 
care, which he has promised will cause all things to 
work together for good to them that love him supremely. 
It is as right for the husband to consider the future welfare 
of his wife, as for the Heavenly Bridegroom to provide for 
the Church (Eph. 5:25.) It is as proper for the earthly 
father to make provision for his children— especially in 
good training and fair education, as for the Heavenly 
Father to plan for and educate and prepare a future home 
for his children. (1 Cor. 2:9.) It is when parents attempt 
to become rich and to leave their children rich that 
they specially err. (1 Tim. 6:9,17,18; Mark 10:23,24.) 
They in attempting to contravene the law of God (that 
sinners learn to labor and to eat bread in sweat of face) 
work an injury to their children. But their error does not 
justify other parents in neglecting to give their children the 
best patrimony, an education, at least rudimentary, including 
religious and moral training. 



Those who leave their children such a legacy and the 
example of a noble, upright life of fellowship with God 
leave a bequest which the breaking of banks and insurance 
companies and all the terrible troubles of "the great day" 
will only make the more pricelessly valuable. 

So then our advice to God's consecrated people is,— 
"Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily thou shalt be 
fed." Use time and money in the Lord's service, and rely 
upon him to cause all things to work for your highest good. 



R1828 :page 145 

OUR LORD'S ASCENSION. 



-JUNE 23, LUKE 24:44-53.- 

Golden Text— "And they worshipped him, 
and returned to Jerusalem with great joy." 

WHILE all who are still true to the sure foundation 
of the Christian faith and have not been moved 
away from the hope of the gospel recognize the necessity 
of Christ's death as the payment of our ransom, and see 
in his resurrection the pledge of salvation to all them that 
believe, few seem to consider what was accomplished for us 
and also for himself by his ascension. Yet this was a feature 
of the divine plan as necessary to our salvation as were 
the sacrifice and the resurrection. 

This feature of the plan is clearly shown in the service 
of the typical tabernacle. It corresponds to the act of the 
high priest, Aaron, in entering the Most Holy with the 
blood of the atonement sacrifice and presenting it before 
the Mercy Seat together with the sweet incense which represented 
the human perfection of Christ.* As God said to 
Moses, referring to the Tabernacle, "See that thou make 
all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the 
mount," and required that the whole service of the Tabernacle 
should be performed with exactness according to the 
prescribed directions, so in the antitype every feature of 
the divine plan must be carried out in line with the type so 
carefully given. 

Our Lord's ascension was therefore, according to the 
type, an essential part of the divine plan. Nor was it arbitrarily 
indicated in the type: there was a necessity for it, 
else it would not have been expressed there. In referring 
to it before his death, Jesus said to his disciples, "I go to 
prepare a place for you, and if I go and prepare a place for 
you, I will come again and receive you unto myself, that 
where I am, there ye may be also."— John 14:2,3. 

If we inquire whither he went, we have his answer, 
"I go unto my Father." (John 14:12.) But why was it 
necessary that he should go away? Had he not finished 



the work of sacrifice? and could he not now have remained 

on earth for the personal direction and supervision of the 

work of the Gospel age? Granted that that work was the 

selection and the teaching, training and discipline of a 

people for his name, had he remained as the visible head of 

the Church would it not have been greatly to her advantage? 

Then all matters of faith and conduct could have had authoritative 

settlement; and the dissensions of "Christendom" 

would have been a thing unknown; and "that Man of Sin, 

whose coming was after the working of Satan, with all 

power and signs and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness 

of unrighteousness," could never have arisen: no 

blasphemous popes or others could then have lorded it 

over God's heritage. Oh, how blessed would it have been, 

seemingly, according to human judgment, had the Lord remained 

with his people after his resurrection! Why might 

it not have been so? Why was it necessary that he should 

go away and leave them apparently at the mercy of every 

wind of doctrine and of all the machinations of the powers 

of darkness to overcome them— by arts, temptations, allurements, 

deceptions and by persecutions in every conceivable 

form? 

Well, however it may appear or may have appeared to 
human judgment, the Lord himself said, "It is expedient 
for you that I go away." "But consider, "Lord, the disciples 
might have urged, "that the Church, as it increases in numbers, 
and as false teachers will surely arise among us, will 
greatly need a visible head to direct her course and to save 
her from endless divisions and discords. How can the 
Church remain one, as thou hast prayed (John 17:11), in 
the midst of the conflicting voices and influences that will 
arise?" But no, the early disciples asked no such questions: 
they were not so self-confident as the multitudes of 
professed Christians of later date, who seem to have concluded 
that, since the Lord had so unwisely ignored the 
subsequent conditions and necessities of the Church, they 
would select from their midst one upon whom they would 
confer the title, "the vicar of Jesus Christ," and consider 
him and his successors in office the visible heads of the 
Church, who should be considered by all as infallible authority 
in all matters of faith and conduct. 

Both the Church and the world are aware of the evil 
results of this heady philosophy, and of the monstrous 
usurpations of authority and power that have made both 



*See Lev. 16; also TABERNACLE SHADOWS, p.48,50. 

R1829 : page 145 

the church and the world to groan under the iron heel of 
oppression. And yet, strange as it may seem, though the 
folly of this measure has been so glaringly manifest, and the 
hated power of the false head of the Church has been cast 
off, again there is a great cry for his restoration to power 



and authority. The religious leaders of to-day are saying, 
We need and must have a visible head to reorganize and 
unify the divided hosts of "Christendom"— Christ's (?) 
kingdom;— and many are looking anxiously to the Papacy 
for that head. 

Nevertheless, we are of those who still believe that it 
was expedient for Christ to go away; and that, too, without 
leaving any visible head to represent him in office. It 
was expedient for various reasons; and those in view of all 
the seemingly adverse conditions that could, and that the 
Lord knew were sure to, arise; for he foretold the very 
things that were to come to pass— the coming of the Man 
of Sin, the false teachers, and plausible false doctrines and 
how they would prosper, and the persecutions of the saints 
through long and weary centuries, and the treading down 
of the truth and the prevalence and prosperity of error. 

His going away was expedient for the following 
reasons:— 

(1) As already intimated, in order that, in accordance 
with the pattern given us in the typical high priest, Aaron, 
in the service of the typical tabernacle, he, as our great 
High Priest, should enter into heaven, into the presence of 
God— the antitypical holy of holies— for us. To this the 
Apostle Paul refers, saying, "For Christ is not entered into 
the holy places made with hands [into the typical tabernacle, 
as did Aaron the typical high priest], which are 
figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear 
in the presence of God for us."— Heb. 9:24. 

If we would know what Christ our High Priest did for 
us after his ascension to the "most holy," to heaven itself, 
the presence of God, we have but to look back to the type 
which was made to illustrate it. There we see the high 
priest, after he had sacrificed the bullock which represented 
the humanity of Christ (while he himself then represented the 
new creature of the divine nature), entering the Most Holy 
with the blood of the bullock, and there presenting it before 
the mercy seat in the presence of the Shekinah glory; 

R1829 : page 146 

thus formally presenting to God the evidence of the typical 

sacrifice for the sins of the people, and so typically completing 

the work of atonement toward God. (See Lev. 16:6,14,17; 

Heb. 9:7.) And the Apostle in Heb. 9:7-14, 

shows that this work, thus typically accomplished by the 

typical high priest, was actually accomplished by Christ 

after his ascension to the Father, and that this formal presentation 

of the fact of his sacrifice for our redemption, 

was therefore a necessary part of the work of atonement, 

without which, according to the type (Lev. 16:2,3), 

his sacrifice would have availed nothing. It was only after 

the sacrifice had been made in exact conformity to the prescribed 

method, and after the evidence thereof (the blood) 

had been duly presented in the Most Holy, that the blessing 

of God could be granted to those for whom the atonement 

was made. Every part of the prescribed work was, in 



the antitype, as in the type, a necessary part, without which 
the whole would have been a failure. The typical sacrifices, 
of course, availed nothing, except to illustrate to our minds 
the actual processes of the work of atonement and the reasonable 
necessity of all its various features.* 

(2) His going away was expedient also for himself, 
and again for us indirectly. This our Lord illustrated in 
his parable of the young nobleman going into a far country 
to receive for himself a kingdom and to return. (Luke 19:12.) 
Paul tells us that our Lord's great exaltation, which 
included, not only his change to the divine nature, but also 
his official elevation to the right hand of God, was 
granted to him as a reward for his atoning sacrifice— "And 
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and 
became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore, God also hath highly exalted him and given 
him a name which is above every name." This full exaltation, 
it is manifest, could not have been experienced until the 
sacrifice had been, not only made, but presented as well, as 
the fulfilment of this part of the divine plan. This full exaltation 
was that "glory" to which the Lord referred 
when he said, "Ought not Christ [according to the Scriptures] 
to have suffered these things, and to enter into his 
glory?" (Luke 24:26.) His going away was necessary, 
therefore, to this exaltation to the right hand of God— an 
exaltation which also is greatly to our present as well as to 
our future benefit. 

But let us consider further what is said of this glorious 
exaltation for which purpose it was necessary that our Lord 
should go away. The Apostle Paul says (Eph. 1:17,20,21), 
"The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
glory,... raised Christ from the dead and set him at his 
own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality 
and power, and might and dominion, and every 
name that is named, not only in this world [age], but also 
in that which is to come." And in his Revelation to John 
on Patmos, Jesus said, "I am set down with my Father in 
his throne." The inference is plain, therefore, that our 
Lord was exalted as Jehovah's Prime Minister in the throne 
of universal dominion, for which exalted office he was also 
duly qualified, being made a partaker of the divine (immortal) 
nature, a dignity never before conferred upon any 
created being. Such has been the honor and glory of our 
blessed Lord ever since he ascended up on high, there to 
appear in the presence of God for us. 

But what does it signify to us that our Lord was thus 
exalted so far beyond even our comprehension of the glory? 
Oh, it signifies much! it signifies that "when he ascended 
up on high, he led captivity [death] captive;" for he that 
ascended thus into the heavens is he, the very same Jesus, 
"that descended first into the lower parts of the earth [the 
grave]; [and] he that descended is the same also that 
ascended up, far above all heavens, that he might fill all 
things." (Eph. 4:8-10.) It signifies that we have now "a 
great High Priest, that hath passed into the heavens [one 
who is now on the most intimate terms and in the closest possible 



favor with the Sovereign of the whole universe],... 
and not a High Priest which cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities; but [one who] was in all points 
tempted like as we are, yet without sin;". .."a merciful 
and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, 
to make reconciliation for the sins of the people;" and "in 
that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to 
succor them that are tempted." It signifies that, "if any 
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ 
the righteous;" and therefore, we may "come boldly unto 
the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find 
grace to help in time of need." (Heb. 4:14-16; 2:17,18; 
1 John 2:1.) His very presence there in the glory of his 
enduring priesthood is the only appeal that is necessary on 
our behalf; for Jehovah himself loveth us— the dear purchase 
of the precious blood of his Anointed One (John 16:27); 
in fact, the whole plan of this reconciliation was of 
God, and is wrought out in Christ. Yes, praise the Lord! 
"Before the throne my surety stands; 
My name is written on his hands."— Heb. 7:22; Isa. 49:16. 

Yet the ascension of our blessed Lord to the right hand 
of power signifies more even than this: it signifies his 
ability now to "give gifts unto men." At the appointed 
time— the times of restitution of all things— he comes forth 
from that holy of holies, heaven itself, whither he hath 
entered for us, and he will lift up his hands and bless the people 
(Lev. 9:23), and there will be a thousand years of his 
glorious reign. But this is not all; for as soon as he had ascended 
up on high and presented his sacrifice on our behalf, 
he sent the Comforter, the holy spirit of adoption, into the 
hearts of his disciples (on the day of Pentecost), whereby 
they were enabled to cry, Abba, Father. It was with reference 
to this gift that Peter said on that day, "Therefore, 
being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received 
of the Father the promise of the holy Spirit, he hath 
shed forth this which ye now see and hear." (Acts 2:33.) 
And this gift has continued with the Church ever since. 
It was sent according to his promise— "It is expedient for 
you that I go away; for if I go not away the Comforter 
will not come unto you: but if I depart I will send him 
unto you." This gift, the Apostle John shows, could not 
be given to the disciples until after the Lord's ascension. 
"For the holy spirit was not yet given, because that Jesus 
was not yet glorified."— John 7:39. 

With some idea at least of the necessity of the Lord's 
departure in their interest, and assured of his coming again 
in glory and power, we can understand the rejoicing of the 
disciples as they returned to Jerusalem after his ascension. 
They were comforted and blessed, not only by the hope of 
his return, but also by the promise of the Comforter, as a 
token of his love and of the Father's favor, not many days 
after. 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF BETTER SACRIFICES. 



R1829 : page 146 

A REVIEW OF OUR LORD'S MINISTRY, ETC. 

-JUNE 30.- 

Golden Text— "Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our 
faith."-Heb. 12:2. 

In view of all the precious lessons of this quarter 
gathered from the life and death and resurrection of our 
Lord, we have only to repeat to those who are endeavoring 
to follow in his footsteps, the exhortation of the Apostle: 
"Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin which doth so 

R1830 : page 147 

easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that is 
set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of 
our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right 
hand of the throne of God." 

He who by his example and teaching has inspired our 
faith will, if we continue to follow his leading, finish, perfect 
it. He will establish, strengthen, settle us so that we 
cannot be moved; and finally present us to himself "a 
glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing." He will also perfect us by present experiences for 
our office as the "royal priesthood" as he was "made perfect 
through suffering" for his office as Chief Priest. 

R1830 :page 147 

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. 

-JULY 7, EXOD. 20:1-17.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy 
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy 
mind; and thy neighbor as thyself."— Luke 10:27. 

For a full presentation of the subject of this lesson, the 
reader is referred to the following articles in previous issues 
of this journal; viz., 

(1) The Divine Law, Universal and Eternal.— Nov. 
1-15, '94. 

(2) The Law of God. -Nov. 1, '92. 

(3) Taking God's Name in Vain.— May 15, '93. 

(4) The Bond of Perfectness.-Oct. '91. 



R1830 :page 147 

"OUT OF DARKNESS INTO HIS MARVELOUS LIGHT.' 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Although we 
are strangers to you, you are not strangers to us; and as a 
slight evidence of our appreciation of the blessings your 
books have brought us, we venture to trespass upon your 
precious time long enough to tell you something which may 
prove of interest. 

We are a young husband and wife who have been 
members of the nominal church for about ten years; but 
are now, we trust, stepping from its darkness into the light 
of the new day now dawning for the consecrated children 
of the Most High. 

About the first of December, '94, Miss Erlenmyer, one 
of your colporteurs and one of the Lord's dear saints, 
called at our home, and finding us deeply interested in the 
subject of our Savior's return, had little difficulty in persuading 
us to take the first volume of DAWN, promising to 
call again as soon as we had had time to read it. 

We began to read and in two or three weeks were interested 
to such an extent that although nearly everything 
else was mixed up and we scarcely knew what we believed, 
we did see clearly that there certainly is some special prize, 
some exceptional opportunity, for which the humble, sacrificing 
members of Christ's flock are invited to strive. We 
felt that there was only about one plank in the old platform 
left for the Christian worker to stand upon, and that was 
the one in which we have always been most interested, 
"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every 
creature." We have always been expecting to fall into 
some trap unless we clung close to our Savior, and at the 
time of which we speak were by no means sure that your 
interpretations of the Scriptures, despite their apparent 
harmony with them, were not the well-meant views of another 
class of those unfortunates who unwittingly go about 
"deceiving and being deceived." 

This hesitancy to accept the message led us into a most 
serious predicament from which, however, the Lord has extricated 
us, and that, too, in a manner which seems to us 
unmistakable personal evidence that your views of the Word 
are correct. A few words of explanation are necessary to 
understand the way we got into what has proven the greatest 
testing season of our lives. 

Long before we ever met each other it was our earnest 
wish that we might serve the Lord, if it chanced to be his 
will, as missionaries in the foreign field. One of us has, 
however, been for years physically unable to go; the other 
had no opportunity to go before our engagement took place, 
and as he received only the next day after that event a 
notice of acceptance of an application made nearly two 
years before, from which nothing had been heard in the 
meantime, but which, had it been received even one day 
sooner would have been considered a "call" and prevented 
our engagement altogether, it seemed to both of us that we 
had been plainly shown the Lord did not wish to use us in 



that direction. 

In this city there is a young lady who from her infancy 
has wished and expected to some time go to the foreign 
field, and she has had the advantages of the education usually 
given at Mr. Moody's Northfield School and the Chicago 
Training Institute to fit her for such work. She is now the 
city missionary of the church with which we are at present 
connected, and is, we believe, earnestly trying to do her 
Master's will. 

To come to the point: One evening early in January, 
after a long discussion of the sore needs of what seemed to 
us the Master's work, and of the ways and means at our 
disposal, we decided to send the above mentioned young 
lady to the foreign field and sustain her in the work as God 
saw fit to favor the plan, provided she was willing to accept 
the call. We concluded that if the DAWNS were right we 
had not many years in which to work and that whether 
they were right or wrong we would be doing the Lord's 
will by giving up for him every earthly prospect. 

We invited the young lady in question to call as soon 
as possible, which she did the next evening, and we found 
her not only ready but anxious to take up the work. The 
next day she sent in her application to the Mission Board, 
asked to be appointed to the field to which she has from 
her childhood wanted to go, and even mentioned the date 
she would like to start. 

About a week later Miss Erlenmyer called, as she had 
promised, renewed our interest in the DAWN, left VOLS. II. 
and III., and such a sea of trouble as our first examination 
of the Chronology plunged us into, we earnestly hope we 
may never be called upon to go through again. We saw 
the old landmarks of orthodoxy topple and fall on every 
side, and although God's Spirit enabled us to look with a 
sense of joy upon the ruins of the creeds and catechisms, 
it did not extricate us from our contract to engage in work 
which we see is no longer necessary, and we did not have 
the confidence, as yet, in these, to us, new interpretations 
of the Word, to enable us to withdraw our offer. 

In our extremity we asked our Father in Heaven to 
show us the truth or falsity of your teachings by sending 
our friend as we had planned, or preventing her from going. 

Since that time we have gone on reading and studying 
the books and growing in the doctrine of grace and in the 

R1830 : page 148 

knowledge of the love of God until, from a comparison of 
their teachings with the infallible Word, confidence in the 
DAWN has become heart-certainty that they are right. But 
although we have been for several weeks fully convinced, 
and have been growing stronger and stronger week by week, 
we have done nothing to interfere with the plans mentioned, 
fearing to take out of the Lord's hands what we had placed 
in them, and knowing from many rich experiences in the 
past that in his own good time he would answer us in a way 
that would satisfy. 



Our confidence in the Lord has not been in vain, for 
as fast as we have come into the light we have received our 
answer, although in a manner that has given us much pain. 
Our dear friend whom we had expected to send began about 
six weeks ago to have trouble with her eyes. A month ago 
the affliction had become so serious as to require regular 
treatment twice a week. Now she is unable to read or 
write and cannot even bear the light for any length of time. 

A week ago she told us that it would be years before 
she could go, and day before yesterday informed us she 
had written to the Mission Board and requested them to 
let the matter drop. Of course we know that the Lord has 
not sent this affliction upon her for the purpose of answering 
our prayer, but we know, too, that the young lady in 
question has heretofore enjoyed good health and we believe 
this trouble, which it now appears has been coming upon 
her unobserved for years, has been providentially postponed 
until now, or otherwise so ordered as to give us an opportunity 
to "Prove whether these things be so." 

Now we have proved the Lord, and he has answered 
us, and we mean to obey the call. With fear and trembling, 
but with confidence in our mighty King, we enter at the 

R1831 :page 148 

eleventh hour to run the race for crowns which others have 

flung aside. The thought that others have had them and 

lost them almost unnerves us. Oh! may he grant to 

strengthen our weak hands and confirm our feeble knees, 

that we be not castaways after having once entered the 

Holy Place and feasted on the wonderful truths so providentially 

placed in our way, is the heartfelt prayer of 

Your loving brother and sister in Christ, 

EMMA AND CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

[Since writing the above the Brother and Sister have 
withdrawn from the earthly organization of which they were 
members; but they are more than ever united to the one 
Church "whose names are written in heaven."— ED.] 



page 148 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-Enclosed find order for 
One Dollar for which please send to the undersigned for 
one year ZION'S WATCH TOWER. I feel that I must have 
it, for as far as I have read in the DAWN I am more than 
ever convinced that it is leading me into that truth which 
will make me free. For nine years I have been groping in 
the M.E. church for what I have found in your book in as 
many hours. With the teachings of that church I have always 
felt, as they often sing, that "there was a void that 
never was filled." I have been a local preacher in that 
church, but have now renounced all connections with it, 
and as fast as the truth is gained by me, with the help of 
God I will teach it. 



I have already given three lectures which have created 
quite a stir here, and many are looking up the Word to 
find me mistaken; but the truth still stands, thank God! 
Coming in at the eleventh hour, I am reminded that "the 
time is short." Am now sixty years of age; but when 
speaking in the light my "strength is renewed like the 
eagles." There are two or three already who are showing 
a desire to be led into the light. May God bless and help 
you still to unfold to me and other seekers the blessings that 
will follow from a true knowledge of him who gave himself 
a ransom for all. I take the liberty to subscribe myself, 

Your brother in Christ, JAMES BUNTING. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Last October a gentleman called at 
my house and drew my attention to a book he was selling. 
I was upon the point of refusing when the title, "MILLENNIAL 
DAWN," interested me. I consented to examine 
it, saw at once it was something I wanted, and ordered all 
three volumes. After going through them two or three 
times, to say I was astonished is a very mild expression. 
Although I had been brought up in the fear of the Lord 
and in the faith as taught by the Methodist church, still I 
had strayed far from all religion, believing that a God who 
would torment one forever could not be the God of love I 
had been taught. I was not far from atheism, but those 
DAWNS, thank the Lord, altered all that. I am now trying 
to serve God, and thank him sincerely that the colporteur 
called at my house. I will pray for him, and may his 
efforts be blessed in spreading the truth. 

The DAWNS having proved such a blessing to me, I 
am anxious that others should have the benefit of the truth 
which they contain. I enclose Money Order and several 
addresses. May God spare you long for his work. 

Yours in the faith, E. E. MITCHELL. 



DEAR SIR:— Excuse a perfect stranger for troubling 
you, but will you please tell me if the fourth volume of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN is yet published, and where I can get 
it? I got the first three volumes from one of your agents 
last year, and have read them through five or six times 
with both pleasure and profit. I consider them books not 
to be read merely but to be studied. Every time I have 
read them I have gathered something new. In my opinion 
this is the true religion, the only one that combines reason 
with faith, and that is not contradictory to the sciences. 

Your respectfully, E. S. . 



TOWER PUBLISHING CO.:-I am carefully studying Vol. 
I. of MILLENNIAL DAWN. It is the clearest production I 
have yet found, and I desire to read VOLS. II. and III. Enclosed 



find order. If you have a catalogue of other works 
please send it, and oblige, 

J. W. S , Pastor M.E. church. 



R1831 :page 148 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-God be praised that at last I 
have willingly yielded to the Spirit's call through the Word, 
and have left Babylon, never to return, and am now happy 
in Christ my Redeemer. How blessed is the light that 
hath shined into our hearts! And now we realize fully the 
words of the Apostle— "And we, brethren, are not in darkness, 
that that day should overtake us unawares." 

I have been reading DAWNS for about a year and a 
half. I heard the Spirit's call through the Word, but was 
so weak and so strongly bound to Babylon, that it was hard 
to throw off the shackles of bondage and enter into the 
liberty there is in Christ; but he will not break the bruised 
reed, or quench the smoking flax; and in his wisdom he 
sent among us Brother V. C. Haviland to do colporteur 
work. Bro. H. sought me out, and strengthened me, even 
as Ananias did Paul; and now I am in the light, bless his 
holy name, O my soul, and all that is within me! 

Yours in hope of eternal life. FRANK H. RUSS. 



page 149 

VOL. XVI. JULY 1, 1895. No. 13. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: The Pastor Denies It 150 

That Modern Methodism Article 150 

Missionary Envelopes; Dawns 150 

Views from the Tower 151 

"The Peace of God" 153 

Poem: If We Had but a Day 157 

Bible Study: The Golden Calf 157 

Bible Study: The Offering of Strange 

Fire 158 

The Memorial Anniversary 160 

page 150 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1832:page 150 

THE PASTOR DENIES IT. 

The Pastor of the Calvary M.E. Church, Allegheny, called at our 
office and assured us that the rumor (See page 140 of our last issue), 
that servants were not wanted at that church, is wholly without foundation. 
He presumes that their fine new edifice may have led some one 
to mention it as a "rich-man's church;" but that so far from the Board 
of Trustees taking any such action, they reduced the charges for many 
sittings, so as to bring them within the means of people in very moderate 
circumstances. We are glad of such assurance, and glad to make 
it known. 

The rumor, it seems, got its start in the fact that originally only two 
pews had been provided whose sittings would be as cheap as six dollars 
each per year; and, furthermore, that a Committee on pew-renting had 



been granted more than usual powers which it was feared, perhaps uncharitably, 
would be used against the poor. 



THAT MODERN METHODISM ARTICLE. 

Several readers inquire concerning the article in our last issue, on 
Modern Methodism: Did we publish the article entire? In which issue 
of the Northwestern Christian Advocate did it appear?— Right-minded 
people find it difficult to believe that others could so lose the spirit of the 
gospel as to glory thus in their own shame. 

We reply, that we published the article entire, word for word, as 
it appeared in the Northwestern Christian Advocate of March 28, '94, 
over the signature of its writer, Rev. Chas. A. Crane, who has since removed 
to Colorado Springs, Colorado. 

A portion of the paper containing this article was found by Brother 
Compton and sent to us, but the date of it was missing. We at once 
wrote the Advocate, and also to Rev. C. A. Crane, and from the latter 
received the date of the journal; but too late for mention in our last issue. 

The date, the fact that such an article was published over a year 
ago, read by thousands of Methodists, and by scores of editors of Methodist 
and other journals, and not commented upon by any of them, and 
that it only raises a "breeze" when it reaches the awakened readers 
of the WATCH TOWER, gives all the stronger evidence that the sentiments 
of the article were well received and approved, by Methodists in 
general, as the truth, and that a larger number than we had supposed 
are glorying in their shame. 

Later.— We have received a whole copy of the Advocate mentioned, 
and after a very careful search we find that we erred in saying that it 
was published without one word of comment; for four pages away the 
Editor gave exactly eleven words of comment as follows: "Mr. Crane's 
friendly satire on existing Methodist conditions will awaken thought." 
The article itself bears no evidence of insincerity: we fear, as does the 
Editor, that it is too true a picture of "existing Methodist conditions." 



page 150 

MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

We are placing an order for another lot of our usual Missionary 
Envelopes, and make the proposition that any who can use 5000, can 
have them at less than half the usual cost,— with their card printed at 
the corner. This is to induce a very general circulation of this tract 
envelope. Order at once. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOLS. I., II. AND III., English and German, 
VOL. I. in Swedish and Dano-Norwegian, at uniform prices, 25 cents per 
volume in paper covers, $1.00 per volume in embossed cloth binding. 



R1831 :page 151 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE term "Infidel" will probably soon die out: it is 
being replaced rapidly by the terms, "Higher Critic," 
"Reverend," "Professor," "Doctor of Divinity," 
etc. The President of Rochester Theological Seminary 
(Baptist) takes his stand with the Evolutionists and Higher 
Critics. Some Baptists remonstrate but are powerless. The 
Trustees, representing the money influence, support the 
President. 

The Northwestern University of Chicago, at its recent 
commencement exercises, had Dr. Lyman Abbott deliver the 
principal address, on Evolution, in which he derided the 
Bible account of Adam's creation, saying, "I would as soon 
have an ape for an ancestor as a mud man; and that is the 
choice." He scouted the idea of a fall from purity into 
sin, denied redemption and declared Evolution to be the 
real redemption. At a ministers' meeting a few wished to 
rebuke the president of the University for having the speaker 
and his subject on such an occasion, but their objections 
were suppressed by the majority. 

The same unbelief or infidelity is spreading in Germany, 
beginning, as here, with the learned college professors, who, 
professing to be wise, are becoming foolish and having their 
foolish hearts darkened. (Rom. 1:21,22.) Recently the 
Professors of Bonn University addressed an audience of 
ministers who were at Bonn, on a vacation. They pursued 
the same methods as our American higher critics, holding 
up the earlier portions of the Bible as myths and generally 
discrediting the entire Book, implying a general stupidity 
on the part of our Lord, the apostles and all who, following 
their example, accept the Old Testament writings as the 
Word of God. 



While the religious teachers of Christendom are thus 
blindly leading their flocks away from the Lord, we need 
not be surprised that, bewildered and without any divine 
anchorage, many are falling into various pit-falls of error- 
Christian Science, Theosophy, Spiritism, etc., and in substance 
concluding that God is a principle not a being, a 
principle of good;— that man is the highest embodiment of 
this "good" and intelligent principle which pervades all 
space and all times; hence that man is not only the highest 
form of animal, but the highest expression of God. Thus, 
while God is dethroned, man is enthroned, man is his own 
god. Ah! how Satan must be rejoicing in the success of his 
latest move. He can afford to do a few cures for Spiritualists, 
Clairvoyant Mediums, Christian Scientists and Mormons. 

The readiness of people to fall into these traps is before 
the reading public daily. For instance, the Philadelphia 



Press tells how Rev. J. H. Davis, pastor of the 

Methodist Episcopal church at Sodus Point, N.Y., recently 

drove ten miles to consult a mediumistic fortune-teller respecting 

the whereabouts of his son who mysteriously disappeared 

recently and was supposed to have been murdered. 

As people leave God and his Word, they are ready for anything. 

-See Rom. 1:25,28. 



But, however many may be ensnared by Satan, or fall 
before the pestilence of Infidelity now issuing from the 
"high places" of learning, we may rest assured that in due 
time "the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh 
shall see it together" (Isa. 40:5), and that that due time is 
not far distant; for although there will first be a dark and 
stormy time, it is nearly due time for the Sun of Righteousness 
to arise with healing in his beams. And, further, 
we may rest assured that the Lord knoweth them that are his, 
not only his in profession, but his in deed and in truth, and 
that none can pluck them out of the Lord's hand. It will 
not be possible to deceive "the very elect;" hence those 

R1831 :page 152 

deceived are not the very elect, whatever may be their station 
in the future. 

While seeing error flourish often in high as well as in 
low places, we are reminded of the grand truth expressed 
upon the old seal of the Huguenots. It represented an 
anvil with broken hammers scattered all around it, and bore 
this legend: 

"Hammer away ye hostile bands! 

Your hammers break, 
God's anvil stands." 



While the professed advocates of God and his Son and 
Book are turning traitors and firing their heaviest shot 
against the Book they enlisted to serve, it is refreshing to 
find Mr. Charles A. Dana, the editor of one of the leading 
New York journals, addressing the Wisconsin Editorial Association 
as follows, respecting the book which has done 
more for the world than all other books combined, and 
which has been attacked by professed friends and professed 
foes as no other book has ever been attacked. Mr. Dana 
said:— 

"What books ought you to read? There are some 
books that are indispensable— a few books. Almost all 
books have their use, even the silly ones, and an omnivorous 
reader, if he reads intelligently, need never feel that 
his time is wasted even when he bestows it on the flimsiest 
trash that is printed; but there are some books that are absolutely 
indispensable to the kind of education that we are 
contemplating, and to the profession that we are considering; 



and of all these the most indispensable, the most 

useful, the one whose knowledge is most effective, is the 

Bible. There is no book from which more valuable lessons 

can be learned. I am considering it now, not as a religious 

book, but as a manual of utility, of professional preparation, 

and professional use for a journalist. There is perhaps 

no book whose style is more suggestive and more instructive, 

from which you learn more directly that sublime 

simplicity which never exaggerates, which recounts the 

greatest events with solemnity, of course, but without sentimentality 

or affectation: none which you open with such 

confidence and lay down with such reverence. There is 

no book like the Bible. When you get into a controversy 

and want exactly the right answer, when you are looking 

for an expression, what is there that closes a dispute like a 

verse from the Bible? What is it that sets up the principle 

for you, which pleads for a policy, for a cause, so much as 

the right passage of Holy Scripture?" 



An English journal, commenting upon the observance 
of Whitsunday (which memorializes Pentecost), says:— 

"Reunion Sunday" is the new title by which we are 
to recognize Whitsun Day. The Pope has set apart the 
whole of Whitsuntide for special effort and prayer towards 
the reunion of Christendom. From Lambeth Palace, also, 
the desire had been expressed that the prayer for unity in 
the Accession Service should be recited among the collects 
of yesterday." 

Thus it appears that in Europe, as well as in the 
United States, the day and the week were devoted to Union. 
We may look for results within a few years— results 
favorable to Churchianity, but unfavorable to individual 
Christian development and liberty. However, by that time 
the "elect" will probably be nearly all out of Babylon and 

R1832:page 152 

waiting for a little further polishing before sharing the great 
work of blessing the world. See Matt. 13:43; Rom. 8:19; 
Gal. 3:16,29. 



We clip from The Independent, of New York City, the 
following, in illustration of Papal love for Protestants. 

"The Catholic Times, of Philadelphia, which puts whiskey 
advertisements in the same column with its appeal for 
St. Joseph's House for Homeless Boys, gives room to the 
following illuminating paragraph in its Paris letter: 

'"The first batch of soldiers left Paris this week for 
Madagascar.... The Protestant sects have had their 
own way there far too long. The time is approaching when 
our missions will receive a substantial support from that 
European power which, whatever the faults at home, has 



never failed to protect Catholic interests abroad. It is the 
fashion to speak of French policy in Madagascar as a check 
to England. It is nearer to the truth to regard it as a 
check given to British Protestantism.'" 

"The French invasion of this native African State, already 
largely Christianized, with a Christian queen and a 
Christian government, is supported by Catholics, it seems, 
as a war upon Protestantism. This is a shameful confession. 
See how these Catholic Christians love the Christians of 
Madagascar! The gospel was carried by Protestant missionaries 
to the Malagassy while they were yet savages." 



The United Presbyterian commenting on the Pope's 
latest Encyclical on Christian Union inquires, "Why is it 
not possible for Evangelical Scholars, representing all denominations, 
to get together and come to an absolute agreement 
upon all Christian doctrines?" 

It may be that it is not our answer to this question that 
is desired, but we give it gratis, for all that, and say: It is 
not possible simply, (1) Because the so-called "scholars" 
have generally lost faith in the only standard of doctrine 
that exists, and are "at sea." (2) Because neither they nor 
the people they would represent are really anxious for the 
truth. God has provided the truth only for those who 
hunger and thirst after it; and consequently they alone will 
be filled with it. (3) Because people reverence the errors 
upon which their various Denominations are built and are 
too indifferent and too engrossed with money-getting and 
pleasure-seeking to dig for the truth "as men search for 
silver." (Prov. 2:1-15.) (4) They are afraid to investigate 
what they now hold as faith, lest even it slip away and they 
find themselves with none. 

Hence, no such plan will be considered feasible; and 
the easier method of federation or "union," in which each 
denomination will respect the others' errors or foibles, will 
be preferred. 

But the "union" will last only a short time. The great 
time of trouble will swallow it up, root and branches. And 
then, when consternation fills the hearts of all the world 
and the "foolish virgins," they will hear the command, 
"Be still, and know that I am God! I will be exalted among 
the nations! I will be exalted in the earth!" (Psa. 46:8-10.) 
Then tremblingly and in fear the "foolish virgins" 
with the Jews "shall look upon Him whom they have 

R1832:page 153 

pierced," and rejected in rejecting his Word! Then they 
shall be surprised to hear the Master speak peace to the nations 
and to them in the terms of his New Covenant sealed 
with his precious blood. 

But the Bride, the "little flock," the "royal priesthood." 
What of this class? "God shall help her, and that 
right early" in the morning of that Millennial day.— 



Psa. 46:5. 

R1832:page 153 

"THE PEACE OF GOD" 

"And the peace of God, which passeth all understanding, 
shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus." 
-Phil. 4:7.- 

PEACE is defined to be a state of quiet or tranquility, 
freedom from disturbance or agitation, calmness, 
repose. Such a state of mind is here affirmed of God. 
His is a mind tranquil, calm, undisturbed and never agitated 
nor even wearied nor perplexed by any of the cares of 
his vast dominion. Yet this perfect peace of God, the 
Scriptures show, is not due either to the fact that there are 
no disorders in his vast dominion, nor yet to any stoical 
indifference to pain or pleasure, but rather to that perfect 
poise of his glorious attributes which makes him Master of 
his situation as Sovereign of the whole universe. Have we 
admired the coolness and calm self-possession of a great 
general such as Grant or Napoleon in the midst of the 
confusion and smoke of battle? or of a great statesman such 
as Gladstone or Bismarck in the midst of national perplexities 
and perils? or of able and skilled physicians or others 
in critical times and places?— these are only faint illustrations 
of the peace of self-possession and self-confidence which 
rules in the mind of God. He is never confused, bewildered, 
perplexed, anxious or careworn, nor in the least fearful that 
his plans will miscarry or his purposes fail; because all 
power and wisdom inhere in him. The scope of his mighty 
intellect reaches to the utmost bounds of possibility, comprehends 
all causes and discerns with precision all effects; 
consequently he knows the end from the beginning, and 
that, not only upon philosophical principles, but also by intuition. 
As the Creator of all things and the originator of 
all law, he is thoroughly acquainted with all the intricate 
subtleties of physical, moral and intellectual law, so that no 
problem could arise the results of which are not manifest to 
his mind. "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all." 
-1 John 1:5. 
God, the Creator of all things, is also the competent 

R1833 :page 153 

Sustainer of all things. In silent grandeur, from age to age, 
the whole physical universe fulfills his will, without a suspicion 
of disorder or mishap; and the same power is pledged 
for its sustenance throughout the eternal future. 

Thus, from his own vast inherent resources of power 
and wisdom, springs the peace of God. But not from this 
source alone is the divine peace; for peace is the certain 
concomitant of inherent goodness. God is the impersonation 



of every virtue and every grace; consequently he has 

the blessed satisfaction and peace of conscious moral perfection 

as well as inherent wisdom and power. 

Yet we find this peace of God coexisting with much 
of disorder and trouble. As a Father he shows us that he 
bears a father's love to all his intelligent creatures— "the 
whole family of God in heaven and in earth"— and that 
for his "pleasure they are and were created." (Eph. 3:15; 
Rev. 4: 1 1.) He created them in his own likeness— with 
the same mental and moral attributes, so that he might have 
communion and fellowship with them as sons, and they with 
him as a Father, that thus, in mutual fellowship and communion, 
the Creator and the creature might find pleasure, 
happiness and delight. This likeness of God includes in 
all not only the same mental faculties, but also the free exercise 
of the same in the formation of character. A creature 
incapable of thus forming character would not be in God's 
likeness. And for the purpose of developing character the 
alternative of good and evil must be placed before him. 
The right and wrong principles of action must be discerned 
and the individual left free to his own choice in the matter, 
that the pleasure of God may be realized in the virtuous character 
resultant from the free choice of righteousness. 

Since the love of God for his newly created and innocent 
creatures is akin to, though much stronger than, the 
love of an earthly parent for an innocent infant; and since 
that loving interest and solicitude does not grow cold as he 
advances in years, but earnestly watches for the development 
of the principles and fruits of righteousness, it is manifest 
that, like an earthly parent, God experiences the sense of 
either pleasure or pain, according as his free intelligent 
creatures choose the right course or the wrong. Of this we 
are fully assured, not only by this reasoning from the fact 
of his fatherhood, but also by all of those scriptures which 
speak of some things as abominable, displeasing, hateful and 
despicable to him and as giving him no pleasure; which say 
that his anger burns against them, and that his indignation 
and wrath wax hot, even to their destruction; and, further, 
by those scriptures which speak of his pleasure, love, joy 
and delight in other things— in the principles of righteousness 
and those who obey them. The appreciation of pleasurable 
emotions necessarily implies ability to appreciate 
emotions of an opposite character; for pain and pleasure 
may properly be considered the ebb and flow of the same 
emotion. 

These exhibitions of the mind of God indicate clearly 
an emotional nature in the divine being, of which fact we 
might also judge from the realization of our own emotional 
nature, since man was created in God's image. No, dear 
friends, God is not a God of stoical indifference, insensible 
to the emotions of pleasure and pain; but the perfect poise 
of his attributes preserves the equilibrium of peace under all 
circumstances, whether of pain or pleasure. 

R1833 : page 154 



With this thought, then, let us consider the circumstances 
under which the marvelous "peace of God" has 
been perpetually maintained. The deep-laid plan of God 
in all his creative works required long time for its accomplishment. 
Across the vista of ages he saw in his purpose 
the glory of an intelligent creation in his own likeness, 
established in righteousness and worthy of his gift of eternal 
life. He therein foresaw the mutual pleasure of the Creator 
and the creature, and with a peaceful patience he resolved 
to wait for the glorious consummation. As the plan developed 
and time rolled on, the free moral agency of his creatures, 
misused by some, was enabling them to develop evil 
characters, and by this means discord was introduced into 
his family ("the family of God in heaven and in earth"— 
all his creatures, angels and men), and the family was divided, 
some holding to righteousness and some choosing to 
do evil. But such a contingency was one of the foreseen 
necessities of the far-reaching plan, the glorious outcome of 
which, was, in the divine judgment, worth all the cost of 
both trouble and loss which he foresaw. 

What a dreadful thing is family discord! How a prodigal 
son or a wayward daughter often brings the gray hairs 
of the human parent down with sorrow to the grave! Ah, 
the heavenly Father knows something of such sorrow; for 
he saw Satan, one of his sons (Isa. 14:12), an angel of 
light, as lightning, fall from heaven (Luke 10:18); and for 
six thousand years at least, that son has been in open and 
defiant rebellion against God and most actively and viciously 
engaged in inciting further rebellion and wickedness. He 
saw many of the angels leave their first estate and become 
the allies of Satan, and then he saw also the whole human 
race fall into sin. Did ever any human parent find 
such a conspiracy— so virulent and hateful— spring up in his 
family? Surely not. Then God has found it necessary to 
perform the unpleasant duties of discipline. In his justice 
he must disown the disloyal sons and deal with them as 
enemies; and though all the while his fatherly love was preparing 
to bless the deceived and fallen ones when the purposes 
of redemption should restore the repentant to his 
favor, love must be vailed while only stern, relentless 
justice could be manifested. This has been no happifying 
duty, nor has the attitude of the sinner been pleasing to him. 

Consider the love against which these recreants sinned: 
that though from God cometh every good and perfect gift, 
his favors have been despised, his love spurned, his righteous 
authority conspired against and defied, his character 
maligned, misrepresented, made to appear odious and hateful, 
unrighteous and even despicable. Yet, through it all 
"the peace of God" continues, though for six thousand 
years he has endured this contradiction of sinners against 
himself. And still, O wondrous grace! his love abounds; 
and it is written that he so loved the world, even while 
they were yet sinners, that he gave his only begotten Son 
to die for them; and that through him judgment (trial) is 
also to be extended to those angels that fell, with the exception 
of Satan, the leader and instigator of the whole 



conspiracy— the father of lies.— John 3:16; Rom. 5:8; 
1 Cor. 6:3; Jude 6; Heb. 2: 14; Rev. 20:10,14. 

This gift of divine love was another indication of the 
cost to our heavenly Father of his great and marvelous 
plan. Not only did he behold the fall into sin of a large 
proportion of his family, but their recovery cost the sacrifice 
of the dearest treasure of his heart, and the subjection 
of this beloved one to the most abject humiliation, ignominy, 
suffering and death. Again the illustration of a 
parent's love assists us in comprehending the cost of this 
manifestation of Jehovah's love. With what tender and 
yearning emotions of love must he have made this sacrifice 
of his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased. In addition 
to all the graces of his character manifested since the 
very dawn of his being was now added the further grace of 
full submission to the divine will, even when the pathway 
pointed out was one of pain and humiliation. 

Ah, did the Father let him go on that errand of mercy 
without the slightest sensation of sorrowful emotion? had 
he no appreciation of the pangs of a father's love when the 
arrows of death pierced the heart of his beloved Son? 
When our dear Lord said, "My soul is exceeding sorrowful, 
even unto death," and again, "Father, if it be possible, 
let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as 
thou wilt," did it touch no sympathetic chord in the heart 
of the Eternal? Yea, verily: the unfeigned love of the 
Father sympathetically shared the Lord's sorrow. The 
principle taught in the divine Word, that true love weeps 
with those that weep and rejoices with those that rejoice, is 
one which is also exemplified in the divine character. The 
immortal Jehovah could not himself die for us, his divine 
nature being proof against death. And, even if he could 
have died, there would have been no higher power to raise 
him out of death, and all creation would have been left 
forever without a governor, and only disaster and ruin 
could have ensued. But God could and did sacrifice at 
great cost to his loving, fatherly nature, the dearest treasure 
of his heart, and thus he manifested (1 John 4:9) the great 
love wherewith he loved his deceived and fallen creatures. 
If this sacrifice cost him nothing; if it were impossible for 
his mind to realize any painful emotion, even under such a 
circumstance; then the gift of his Son would be no manifestation 
of love; for that which costs nothing manifests 
nothing. 

Our Lord Jesus also manifested his great sympathy for 
the Father in the misrepresentation of his character which 
he has so patiently endured for ages. It was the one effort 
of his life to glorify the Father and to rectify among men 
the false impressions of his glorious character— to show to 
men his goodness, benevolence, love and grace, and to lead 
them to love the merciful God who so loved them, even 
while they were yet sinners, as to seek them out and to 
plan for their eternal salvation. 

Yes, there has been great commotion in the disrupted 
family of God— commotion in which the Lord declares he 
has had no pleasure (Psa. 5:4); but, nevertheless, "the 



R1834:page 155 

peace of God" has never been disturbed. In the full consciousness 

of his own moral perfection, his unerring wisdom, 

his mighty power, and with the fullest appreciation of justice 

and the keenest and most ardent love of the beauty of 

holiness, patiently and peacefully, and even joyfully in the 

midst of tribulation, he has endured the contradiction of 

sinners against himself for six thousand years. But during 

the seventh millennium, according to the divine purpose, 

it will be the joyful privilege of our Lord Jesus to fully 

manifest to all creatures in heaven and in earth the Father's 

glorious character. Then will the Father rejoice in the 

grandeur of his finished work and in the everlasting peace 

and happiness of his family in heaven and in earth, "reunited 

under one head." (Eph. 1:10— Diaglott.) This 

blessed consummation will not be realized, however, until the 

incorrigible fallen sons of God, disowned and disinherited 

because they loved unrighteousness and would not be reclaimed, 

shall have been cut off. This will be the last unpleasant 

duty of the Creator and Father of all, who positively 

declares that it is a sad duty, yet nevertheless a duty 

which he will have the fortitude to perform in the interests 

of universal righteousness and peace. Hear him:— "As I 

live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of 

the wicked; but that the wicked turn from his way and live: 

turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye die?" 

-Ezek. 33:11. 

Thus we see that "the peace of God" is compatible 
with great commotion and with sorrow and pain of any 
kind; for it is not dependent upon outward circumstances, 
but upon the proper balancing of the mind and the conditions 
of a perfect heart. Such peace— the peace of God- 
was enjoyed also by our Lord Jesus in the midst of all the 
turmoil and confusion of his eventful earthly life. And 
this brings us to the consideration of our Lord Jesus' last 
legacy to his disciples, when he was about to leave the world, 
as expressed in the following; his own words:— 

OUR LORD'S LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT. 



"Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you: 
not as the world giveth [in stinted measure or in perishable 
quality], give I unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, 
neither let it be afraid."— John 14:27. 

Thus, with abounding compassion and tenderness, did 
our Lord, on the last night of his earthly life, bestow upon 
his beloved disciples his parting blessing, his legacy of peace. 
It was the richest legacy he had to bequeath, and was one 
of priceless value. It was the promise of that tranquillity 
of soul, that rest and ease of mind, which he himself possessed 
—the peace of God. It was the same peace which 
the Father himself has always enjoyed, even in the midst of 



all the commotion which the permission of evil has brought 
about; but it was not derived from the same source. In 
Jehovah this peace was self-centered, because he realized in 
himself the omnipotence of power and wisdom; while the 
peace of Christ was centered, not in himself, but in God, 
by faith in his wisdom, power and grace. So also if we 
would have "the peace of God," the peace of Christ— 
"my peace"— it must, like his, be centered in God by faith. 

Yes, the peace of Christ was a priceless legacy; yet how 
quickly the storm-cloud of trouble, which was even then 
growing very dark, burst in its fury upon the heads of those 
very disciples to whom the words were directly addressed. 
It followed almost immediately the gracious bequest, and 
struck consternation, bewilderment, confusion, to their 
hearts and shook their faith from center to circumference. 
Then, where was the peace? While the Lord was speaking 
the words the foul betrayer, Judas, was out on his murderous 
errand, then followed the agony in Gethsemane and 
the terror and consternation among the disciples as they 
began to realize the fate of their beloved Lord. Soon their 
almost breathless suspense deepened into more fearful forebodings 
as he stood alone before his merciless accusers and 
persecutors in the hall of Pilate and the court of Herod, 
while they were powerless to shield him; and then came 
the tragic end, the horrors of the crucifixion. 

Where was the promised peace under such circumstances 
—when, overcome with fear and dread, they all forsook 
him and fled; and when Peter, although anxious to 
defend him, was so filled with fear that three times he denied 
his Lord and with cursing declared that he never knew 
him? Well, the peace had not yet come; for, as the Apostle 
Paul tells us, "Where a testament is, there must also of 
necessity be the death of the testator. For a testament [a 
bequest] is of force after men are dead; otherwise it is of 
no strength at all while the testator liveth." (Heb. 9:16,17.) 
But as soon as the tragic scene was over and the cry, 
"It is finished," fell upon their ears, strange as it may 
seem, there is evidence that peace began to steal into their 
hearts. The darkened heavens, the quaking earth, the rending 
rocks, the torn vail of the temple, all spoke to them a 
message of comfort which the world could not receive. 

To the world (Jews and Gentiles, both participating 
in the crime) the language of those events was that of divine 
wrath and indignation against them. And as fear fell 
upon the people and the clamor and excitement of that 
awful day died away, they smote upon their breasts and returned 
to their homes; the guilty conspirators, having 
accomplished their work, slunk away to hide, if possible, 
from the wrath of God; Judas, filled with remorse, went 
out and hanged himself; and the Roman centurion and they 
that were with him, fearing greatly, said, "Truly this was 
the Son of God." But to the disciples of the Lord these 
events spoke a very different language. The cause of their 
blessed Master was their cause and it was God's cause; and 
these supernatural demonstrations were evidences to them 
that God was not regarding this matter with indifference; 



and though through the vail of darkness they could not 
read his bright designs, in these events there was to them a 
whisper of hope. 

Three days later hope was revived by the news of his 
resurrection, confirmed to them by his appearance in their 
midst, and again forty days later by his ascension after his 

R1834 : page 156 

parting counsel and blessing and promised return and the 
instruction to tarry in Jerusalem for the promised Comforter, 
the holy spirit of adoption, not many days thence (at Pentecost). 
Then the peace of Christ, the Lord's rich legacy, 
began to be realized, and the tarrying days of prayer and 
expectancy were days of abiding peace— peace which flowed 
as a river. But when, on the day of Pentecost, the promised 
Comforter came the river of their peace found a deeper 
bed, and their joy knew no bounds. 

But not alone to the early Church was this legacy of 
peace bequeathed: it is the blessed inheritance of the entire 
Church, even to the end of the age. The Lord showed 
his thought for us all on that very day, when in his prayer 
he said, "Neither pray I for these alone, but for all them 
also that shall believe on me through their word." 

The peace promised, observe, was not the short-lived 
peace of the world, which is sometimes enjoyed for a little 
season— while fortune smiles and friends abound and health 
endures, but which quickly vanishes when poverty comes 
in, and friends go out and health fails and death steals 
away the treasures of the heart; but "my peace," the peace 
of God, which Christ himself by faith enjoyed, who, though 
he was rich, for our sakes became poor, who lost friend 
after friend and in his last hour was forsaken by all of the few 
that remained— the peace that endured through loss, persecution, 
scorn and contempt and even amidst the agonies of 
the cross. This peace is something which none of the vicissitudes 
of the present life can destroy, and which no 
enemy can wrest from us. 

What richer legacy could the Lord have left his beloved 
people? Suppose he had bent his energies during his 
earthly life to the accumulation of money, and that in so 
doing he had amassed an immense fortune to leave in the 
hands of his disciples wherewith to push forward the great 
work of the age when he should be taken from them— 
money to pay the traveling expenses of the Apostles and to 
defray the numerous expenses incidental to the starting of 
the work in various places, such as the renting of lecture 
rooms, the payment of salaries to traveling brethren, etc., 
etc.— how soon would it all have vanished, and how poor 
would be our inheritance to-day! Why, "the Man of Sin," 
would surely have gotten hold of it in some way and not a 
vestige of the legacy would have reached this end of the 
age. But, blessed be God, his rich legacy of peace still 
abounds to his people. 

The peace promised is not such as the world can always 
recognize and appreciate, for the possessor of it, like 



the Lord himself, and like the heavenly Father as well, may 
have a stormy pathway. Indeed, that it must be so to all 
the faithful until the purposes of God in the permission of 
evil are accomplished, we are distinctly forewarned, but 
with the assurance that through all the storms this peace 
shall abide— "In the world ye shall have tribulation, but 
in me ye shall have peace." 

If we would know the foundation and security of this 
abiding peace which is able to survive the heaviest storms 
of life, we have only to look to the teaching and example 
of the Lord and the Apostles. What was it that held them 
so firmly and gave them such rest of mind while they suffered? 
It was their faith— their faith in the love, power and 
wisdom of God. They believed that what God had promised 
he was able also to perform, that his righteous and 
benevolent plan could know no failure; for by the mouth 
of his prophets he had declared, "My counsel shall stand, 
and I will do all my pleasure. ...Yea, I have spoken it, 

R1835 : page 156 

I will also bring it to pass; I have purposed it, I will also 
do it." "The Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall 
disannul it?" (Isa. 46:9-11; 14:27.) On the assurances 
of God they rested. In him their faith was anchored, and 
it mattered not how fiercely the storms raged or how they 
were tossed by the tempests of life while their anchor still 
held fast to the throne of God. 

The language of our Lord's faith was, "O righteous 
Father, the world hath not known thee: but I have known 
thee." He had been with the Father from the beginning, 
had realized his love and his goodness, had seen his power 
and had marked his righteousness and his loving kindness 
and fatherly providence over all his works. And so it is 
written, "By his knowledge shall my righteous servant 
justify many; for he shall bear their iniquities." (Isa. 53:11.) 
The knowledge which he had of the Father gave to 
him a firm footing for faith in all his purposes concerning 
the future. Hence he could and did walk by faith. And 
that faith enabled him to overcome all obstacles and secure 
the victory even over death. 

So also it is written for our instruction— "This is the 
victory that overcometh the world, even our faith"— that 
faith in God built, in our case, upon our Lord's testimony 
of the Father; and again it is written that, "Without faith 
it is impossible to please God." It is only through steady, 
unwavering faith that the peace of God— the peace of Christ 
—will abide with his people. While the Lord was with his 
disciples, and they saw in him the manifestation of the 
Father, their faith was firm and they had peace in him, as 
he said, "While I was in the world I kept them;" but not 
until after he had left them was their faith anchored in God. 
After Pentecost they experienced the same peace that Christ 
had enjoyed— the blessed peace that came from a knowledge 
of the fact that God acknowledged them as sons and heirs, 
and joint-heirs with Christ, if they would continue faithfully 



to follow in his steps. 

Herein is also the basis of our peace. No matter how 
heavily the storms of life may assail us, we must never let go 
our anchor and allow ourselves to drift, but always remember 
that "the foundation of God standeth sure;" that 
"his truth is our shield and buckler;" that "what he has 
promised he is able also to perform," notwithstanding our 
human imperfections and frailties; that covering these we 
have the imputed righteousness of Christ, our surety and 
advocate; and that "the Father himself loveth us," and 
"he considereth our frame and remembereth that we are 
dust," and so has compassion for the sons of his love and 

R1835 : page 157 

is very pitiful and of tender mercy. Indeed, "what more 
could he say than to us he hath said," to assure our faith 
and to steady and strengthen our hearts to patient endurance 
in the midst of the trials and conflicts of the narrow way of 
sacrifice? 

There is nothing that puts the Christian at greater disadvantage 
in the presence of his foes than for him to let go, 
even temporarily, his grip upon the anchor of faith. Let 
him do so for a moment, and of necessity darkness begins 
to gather round him: he cannot see the brightness of his 
Father's face, for "without faith it is impossible to please 
God;" and while he grapples again for the anchor, the 
powers of darkness fiercely assail him with doubts and fears, 
based generally upon his human imperfections, which he 
should ever bear in mind are covered by the robe of Christ's 
righteousness. 

If we would have the peace of God reign in our hearts, 
we must never let go our anchor, "nor suffer Satan's deadliest 
strife to beat our courage down." The language of 
our hearts should always be, "Though he slay me, yet will 
I trust him." With this faith the peace of God, the peace 
which the Master bequeathed to us, ever abides. Thus the 
peace of God which passeth all understanding will keep 
our hearts and minds through Christ Jesus; for it is written 
again, "Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind 
is stayed on thee." 

In the midst of the Christian warfare let our hearts be 
cheered and our minds stayed, not only with such assurances 
that all the divine purposes shall be accomplished, but also 
with such promises of personal favor as these,— 

"Like as a father pitieth his children, so the Lord 
pitieth them that fear him; for he knoweth our frame; he 
remembereth that we are dust." "Can a woman forget 
her sucking child?. ..Yea, they may forget; yet will I 
not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the palms 
of my hands." "The Father himself loveth you," and 
"It is the Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." 
"Such as are upright in their way are his delight." "Delight 
thyself also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the 
desires of thine heart"— the peace of God which passeth 
all understanding, even in the midst of storm and 



tempest. 

R1837 :page 157 

IF WE HAD BUT A DAY. 



WE should fill the hours with the sweetest things, 

If we had but a day; 
We should drink alone at the purest springs 

On our upward way; 
We should love with a life-time's love in an hour, 

If the hours were few; 
We should sleep, not for dreams, but fresher power, 

To be and to do. 

We should hold our wearied or wayward wills 

To the clearest light; 
We should keep our eyes on the heavenly hills 

If they lay in sight; 
We should hush our murmurs of discontent 

At a life's defeat; 
We should take whatever a good God sent 

With a trust complete. 

We should waste no moment in weak regret, 

If the days were but one, 
If what we remember and what we forget 

Went out with the sun; 
We should be from our clamorous selves set free 

To work and to pray; 
To be what the Father would have us be, 

If we had but a day. —Selected. 



R1835 :page 157 

THE GOLDEN CALF. 

-JULY 14.-EXOD. 32:1-8,30-35.- 

Golden Text— "Little children, keep 
yourselves from idols."— 1 John 5:21. 

AS soon as Israel had been delivered from the bondage 
in Egypt, God began to educate and deal with 
them as a nation, and his dealing was such as to distinguish 
them from all the other nations on the earth. The first 
step to this end was the giving of the law from Mt. Sinai, 
through Moses, their divinely appointed leader. The import 
and character of that law we considered in our previous 
lesson. 



This lesson calls to mind the peculiar circumstances of 
the giving of the law, and the covenant based upon that 
law, instituted through their mediator, Moses, and solemnly 
assented to by all the people, who, with united voice, 
responded to the Lord's proposal, saying, "All that the 
Lord hath spoken we will do." For the Lord had said, 
"Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I 
bare you on eagles' wings, and brought you unto myself. 
Now, therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed and keep 
my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me 
above all people; for all the earth is mine. And ye shall 
be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation." 
(Exod. 19:4-8.) And it was in pursuance of the conditions 
of this covenant that God at once called Moses up 
into Mount Sinai and delivered to him the law. 

But how quickly Israel violated their part of the covenant 
this lesson shows. While yet Moses was in the 
Mount with God the whole nation lapsed into the most degrading 
idolatry, utterly ignoring their covenant and forsaking 
the Lord who, with a mighty hand and a stretched-out 
arm, had so recently recovered them out of Egyptian 
bondage, led them triumphantly through the Red sea, destroyed 
their enemies, fed them with manna in the wilderness 
and refreshed them with water from the barren rock. 
In this sudden and disgraceful apostasy, there is not the 
record of a single dissenting voice. Even Aaron, who had 

R1835 :page 158 

been so intimately associated with Moses, and had been left 
in charge during Moses' absence, weakly hearkened to the 
demands of the people and became their leader in their 
idolatry. Thus the whole nation, within the brief space of 
forty days, forsook the Lord, despised their covenant, and 
plunged into sin. "Up, make us gods," they said, "which 
shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that 
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what 
is become of him." So, at Aaron's call, they brought 
their earrings to Aaron and he made them a golden calf; 
and they praised the work of their own hands and said, 
"These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out 
of the land of Egypt." 

This tendency to idolatry on the part of any people, 
and especially of Israel, manifested on various occasions, 
may seem strange to many, but the evil had its root, both 
with Israel and with other nations, in the depravity of the 
fallen nature which gravitates toward sin and yet seeks to 
silence the protests of conscience with the sanction of religion. 
Man is naturally inclined to worship. In his fallen 
condition, however, it is not love or gratitude or reverence 
for superiority of wisdom, power or goodness, but superstitious 
fear, that prompts it. He desires to do evil: conscience 
protests, and fear and superstition suggest the joining 
of the desired evil practices with a form of worship; 
and the form of worship seeks some central figure, real or 
imaginary, to receive it; and that central figure is the god. 



And this god is supposed to have just such characteristics 
as the evil mind of his inventor and worshiper desires. 
Idolatry, therefore, is not the blind reverential adoration 
of superior dignity or power or moral worth; but it is wilful 
and sinful devotion to degrading self-gratification. 

It is clear, therefore, that idolatry is the synonym of 
evil; and it precludes the recognition of the one true God, 
whose purity and holiness are directly adverse to the spirit 
of idolatry. The Apostle Paul gives an apt description of it 
in Rom. 1:21-32,— a description which not only fitted the 
ancient heathen nations, but which also characterizes very 
prominently the heathen nations of to-day. It reads thus: 
—"When they knew God, they glorified him not as God, 
neither were thankful; but became vain in their imaginations 
and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing 
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the 
glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to 
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and 
creeping things. Wherefore, God also gave them up to 
uncleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor 

R1836 :page 158 

their own bodies between themselves: who changed 
the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped and served the 
creature more than the Creator, who is blessed forever. 
For this cause God gave them up unto vile affections." 

The sin of idolatry is most prominently set forth in the 
Jewish law, the very first commandment being,— "Thou 
shalt have no other gods before me;. ..for I, the Lord 
thy God, am a jealous god." The worship of the one true 
and righteous God, whom we are commanded to worship in 
the beauty of holiness (Psa. 29:2; 96:9), is elevating and 
ennobling, and calculated to develop in us the glorious 
moral likeness of God; and only those do truly worship 
him in the spirit of the truth— in the beauty of holiness— 
whose fruit is always unto praise and honor and glory. 

In considering the gross idolatry of Israel, acquainted 
as they were with God by such marvelous experiences of 
his goodness and grace, we may smile at the puerility which 
would erect a golden calf and call it a god, as well as despise 
the faithless degeneracy of a people so favored; but 
before we judge Israel harshly let us see to it that no semblance 
of the same sin lies at our own door. Not forgetting 
that Israel after the flesh was a typical people, let us beware 
of being identified with her antitype in sin. 

The Apostle Paul in Col. 3:5 and Eph. 5:5 says that 
all covetousness is idolatry; and the Lord, in reference to 
the same disposition, says, "Ye cannot serve God and 
Mammon." (Matt. 6:24.) The sin of covetousness, the worship 
of Mammon, the idolatry of money, is the great sin 
of "Christendom," the antitype of fleshly Israel. Nor is 
she less blameworthy in this idolatry than was fleshly Israel 
in the worship of the golden calf; for if fleshly Israel had 
witnessed many manifestations of the divine favor, "Christendom" 
has surely seen many more. It is a lamentable 



fact, too, that while all "Christendom" is plunging into 
this idolatry of money, so that even the heathen nations 
about us say that money is the Christian's god, the religious 
leaders of the people make no resistance, but, like Aaron, 
weakly assent and throw their influence also into the common 
current. 

We have already called attention to the fact that Moses, 
the mediator of the law covenant, was a type of Christ, the 
mediator of the New Covenant. His return to the people 
from Mount Sinai corresponded to the second coming 
of Christ, which marks the idolatrous worship of the golden 
calf as corresponding in time also to the present worship 
of mammon on the part of Christendom. 

The action of Moses in the destruction of the calf, 
burning it in the fire and reducing it to powder, then 
sprinkling it on the waters of which the people must drink, 
aptly symbolizes the foretold destruction of hoarded wealth 
in the great time of trouble due in the end of this age, and 
the bitter experiences of the rich while their wealth is burned 
in the fire of trouble and becomes to them bitterness. 

But while Mammon is the popular god that commands 
the worship of Christendom in general, let us not forget 
that there are also many other forms of covetousness less 
general, and beware of being overcome by them. Only God 
is worthy to be enthroned in our hearts; only those principles 
of righteousness and truth so gloriously exemplified 
in his character are worthy to control our lives; and only 
those incentives which his wisdom and goodness present 
are worthy of our ambition and effort. And every thing 
that is short of this partakes of the spirit of idolatry. 
Therefore the beloved Apostle said, "Little children, keep 
yourselves from idols." 



R1836 :page 158 

THE OFFERING OF STRANGE FIRE. 

-JULY 21. --LEV. 10:1-11.— 

Golden Text— "Do not drink wine nor strong 
drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee."— Verse 9. 

THE text of this lesson introduces to us the typical 
religious service of the Tabernacle in the wilderness, 
instituted by God in connection with the giving of the law 
to Israel.* 

The tabernacle, with all its appointments and service, 
is of special interest to Christians, not merely as a matter 
of Jewish history, but because, both in its construction and 
in its service, it was typical of spiritual things in store for the 
Gospel Church. The plan and materials of its construction, 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

R1836 : page 159 

every board and curtain, every article of its furniture, and 
the colors and designs of its ornamentation, as well as its 
priesthood, its sacrifices and all its forms and ceremonies, 
were full of significance as "shadows of heavenly things," 
of the divine plan of redemption and reconciliation through 
Christ, which began to be wrought out in Christ at his first 
advent, has been gradually working out all through the 
Gospel age and will be completed in the Millennial age. 

There are three points to which special attention is 
called in this lesson; viz, (1) The sanctification or setting 
apart of Aaron and his four sons to the priesthood; (2) The 
abuse of the office on the part of two of the sons, and 
(3) The penalty which followed. While these things would 
have but small interest to us as mere matters of history, 
they are seen to be of immense importance to all Christians, 
when their typical significance is considered. 

The High Priest, Aaron, and the under or subordinate 
priests, his sons, in their typical official capacity, represented 
Christ Jesus and his Church during the Gospel age, 
whose chief duty during this age is to offer the acceptable 
sacrifices of this antitypical day of atonement, as represented 
in the type. (Heb. 9:22,23.) It should be observed 
that the number of priests, five, in comparison with the 
hosts of Israel, who represented the whole world, was very 
small. So, in the antitype, it is but a "little flock" (Luke 12:32); 
and they are chosen for their office for the purpose, 
not of condemning, but of serving and blessing the 
world, as shown in the type and indicated by the term 
priesthood. 

It is a great honor now, as it was then in the type, to 
be called to this high office of service with Christ our Lord 
and Head, to be, with him, a royal priesthood, a holy nation 
a peculiar people; but as such let us not forget that 
we are to be a people zealous of good works— a people 
cleansed from sin, as symbolized by the washing and 
the clean white linen robes of the typical priesthood. We 
must by faith appropriate the robe of Christ's righteousness; 
and then, as the typical priesthood was anointed with 
the holy anointing oil, so must we be anointed with the 
holy spirit, and thereafter fully submit ourselves to the leading 
of the holy spirit of God, which speaks to us in no 
uncertain tones through his precious Word. 

While it is a great privilege and honor to be called to 
the priesthood, and to be robed and anointed for its service, 
the typical incident of this lesson conveys to us a solemn 
warning of responsibility. Nadab and Abihu, the two 
eldest sons of Aaron, without authority presumed to offer 
incense before the Lord. This duty was appointed to Aaron 
only. It was to be performed in a particular way, and only 
on the day of atonement, and with fire taken from the 
altar of sacrifice. (Lev. 16:2,1 1-13.) In offering the incense 
these two members of the priesthood took upon themselves 



to do what they were not commanded to do, and 

also in a time and manner unauthorized, taking the fire 

also from some other source than the altar of sacrifice. 

Their burning incense was therefore called "strange fire" 

—unauthorized. Their sin was a presumptuous sin, and 

the penalty was death. As immediately following the record 

(verses 9-1 1), there is the prohibition of wine or strong 

drink to the priests in the service of the tabernacle, the intimation 

seems to be that the two offenders were to some 

extent under such influence when they offered the "strange 

fire"— strange or unacceptable incense. 

What is the lesson here shadowed forth for the antitypical 
priesthood, the truly consecrated and anointed 
Church of Christ? The special lesson to all such is, Beware 
of presumptuous sins! The offering of incense by 
Aaron, the typical High Priest, and made by fire from the 
altar of sacrifice, represented the sweet odor unto God of 
the perfect obedience of Christ, our great High Priest, even 
when tried in the fires of the altar of sacrifice. As thus on 
the day of atonement, after the offering of the sin-offering, 
Aaron burned the incense in the holy place before the 
Lord, so Christ, after offering his great sacrifice for us, entered 
into heaven itself with the sweet incense of his perfect 
obedience, and his sacrifice was therefore acceptable to 
God on our behalf. (Heb. 9:24; Rev. 8:3.) And as the 
offering of the sacrifice with the incense was on behalf of 
the under-priests and of all Israel as well, so the offering of 
Christ is for the priesthood, the Church, as well as for the 
whole world. (1 John 2:2.) True, we are to be laid with 
him on the altar of sacrifice; but our sacrifice would avail 
nothing were it not for his sacrifice and the sweet odor of 
his personal merit ascending God with our prayers for a 
share in his meritorious covering.— Rev. 8:3. 

We, the Church, the antitypical under-priests, must 
therefore beware of the presumptuous sin of offering strange 
fire, strange incense, before the Lord, of presuming to approach 
God in our own righteousness. Only in acknowledgement 
of the sweet savor of Christ's righteousness, applied 
to us by faith in his blood, are we acceptable with 
God. Another lesson is that we should pay our vows unto 
the Most High with scrupulous exactness, and, to this end, 
keep the head clear and the heart right by obediently abstaining 

R1837 :page 159 

from the intoxicating spirit of the world; but "Be 
ye filled with the spirit"— the spirit of obedience and of a 
sound mind. (Psa. 19:13; Eph. 5:17,18; 2 Tim. 1:7.) 
In so doing we shall not be tempted to offer strange fire 
before the Lord, but will humbly trust in the acceptable incense 
of Christ our Redeemer, and ever observe a well defined 
line between the holy and the unholy, the clean and 
the unclean.— Lev. 10:9-11. 

The displeasure of the Lord against those who presume 
to approach him with "strange fire"— knowing that they 
are not coming in his appointed way— is indicated, and the 



penalty illustrated, in the fate of the two sons of Aaron. 
(Verse 2.) "And there went out a fire from the Lord [probably 
a lightning stroke] and devoured them, and they died 
before the Lord. Then Moses said unto Aaron [in explanation 
of the summary judgment], This is what the Lord 
hath spoken, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come 
nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And 
Aaron held his peace."— Verse 3. 

The destruction of the two presumptuous priests who 
thus attempted to present themselves before the Lord in 
other than his appointed way illustrates the teaching of the 
Lord and the apostles that the second death will be that 
"sorer punishment" which those of the antitypical priesthood 
will incur who attempt to appear before the Lord and 
to offer strange fire— strange incense which he did not authorize 
and cannot approve. The righteousness of Christ 
is the only acceptable incense; and we dare not come in 
our own. That we have been called to the priesthood and 
anointed with the holy anointing oil (the holy spirit) is 
no guarantee that we shall retain that office if we do despite 
unto the spirit of favor, despise God's appointed way, and 
so forfeit his approval. (Heb. 10:29,30.) Nor is the penalty 
indicated merely the forfeiture of the official honor; 
but it is death, the second death, from which there shall be 
no awakening. Let us not lose sight of the fact that the 
Lord has declared that he will be sanctified, that his name 
shall be honored before the people in those whom he owns 
as his consecrated priests. And those taking upon themselves 
the vows of the priesthood and receiving the divine 
anointing, who afterward at heart despise the Lord's appointments 
and ignore their covenant relationship with him, 

R1837 :page 160 

have no other hope than that indicated in the death of the 
two typical priests who offered strange fire. 

"And Aaron held his peace." In the office of high 
priest, Aaron was a type of Christ, the High Priest of our 
profession, who will make no intercession for the recovery 
of those who sin unto death. His silence approves the 
judgment of God. 

And Moses called the relatives of the two dead priests 
and said unto them, "Come near, carry your brethren from 
before the sanctuary out of the camp. So they went near 
and carried them in their coats out of the camp, as Moses 
had said. And Moses said unto Aaron and unto Eleazer 
and unto Ithamar, his sons, Uncover not your heads; 
neither rend your clothes, lest ye die, and lest wrath come 
upon all the people; but let your brethren, the whole house 
of Israel, bewail the burning which the Lord hath kindled 
[bewail the fact that these had so incurred the wrath of 
God]. And ye shall not go out from the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation [—ye shall not leave the 
holy place to follow after and lament the dead ones], lest ye 
[also] die; for the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you 
[—i.e., you are consecrated to full submission and obedience 



to the will of God]. And they did according to the 
word of Moses"— the representative of God.— Verses 4-7. 
So all who remain loyal to God will approve his righteous 
judgments. Nor will they leave the holy place of fellowship 
and communion with God to follow those spiritually dead 
into the outer darkness. And all who have the spirit 
of God will show by their conduct that, while they approve 
God's righteous sentence, they feel as he does about it, 
when he says, "As I live, I have no pleasure in the death 
of him that dieth."— Ezek. 33:11. 

It is a fact worthy of notice that one-half of those called 
and consecrated to the typical priesthood (as under-priests, 
representing the consecrated of this age) forfeited their lives 
by offering the strange fire. If this proportion is typical 
of a similar loss amongst the called and consecrated of this 
age, it bids us be all the more upon our guard to make our 
calling and election sure. 

While the death penalty was promptly visited upon the 
erring typical priests we must not forget that theirs was not 
the "sorer punishment"— the second death— due to a violation 
of the New Covenant obligations by the antitypical 
priesthood. They forfeited only the present life, or rather 
the few more years they might otherwise have lived. In 
the resurrection-day they also will come forth to trial for 
everlasting life under the favorable circumstances of Christ's 
glorious reign. 



R1837 :page 160 

THE MEMORIAL ANNIVERSARY. 



BROTHER Mott's letter, below, may be of general 
interest as supporting the views already presented 
in this journal on the subject. See our issues of 
March '91, April 1, '94 and March 15, '95. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-In the course of a study 
as to the origin and history of Easter Sunday, I discovered 
some facts which appear to confirm the view that the Lord's 
Supper should be observed as an annual memorial. 

The Americanized Encyclopaedia Britannica, [We can 
supply this work at $5.00 per set of 20 volumes, paper covers, 
postpaid.], under the title "Ecclesiastical Calendar," contains 
the following: 

"So early as the second century of our era, great disputes 
had arisen among the early Christians, respecting the 
proper time of celebrating Easter, which governs all the 
other movable feasts. The Jews celebrated their Passover 
on the 14th day of the first month, that is to say, the lunar 
month of which the 1st either falls on, or next follows, 
the day of the vernal equinox. Most Christian sects agreed 
the Easter should be celebrated on a Sunday. Others followed 
the example of the Jews, and adhered to the 14th of 



the moon; but these, as they usually happened to be the minority, 
were accounted heretics, and received the appellation 
of Quartodecimnians. In order to terminate dissensions, 
which produced both scandal and schism in the church, 
the Council of Nice, which was held in the year 325, 
ordained that the celebration of Easter should thenceforth 
always take place on the Sunday which immediately follows 
the full moon that happens upon, or next after, the day of 
the vernal equinox. Should the 14th of the moon, which 
is regarded as the day of full moon, happen on a Sunday, the 
celebration of Easter was deferred to the Sunday following, 
in order to avoid concurrence with the Jews and the above 
mentioned heretics." 

It is conceded that there exists a great diversity of opinion 
as to the proper time for the observance of the Lord's 
Supper, indicating that early in the history of the Church 
this most important ordinance had been tampered with by 
the great apostasy, the mystery of iniquity, which began to 
work in apostolic times, but is now fully developed and recognized 
as the Man of Sin. 

The difference of opinion which gave rise to the "great 
disputes" mentioned in the article quoted could not have 
been with reference to Easter, which, as every one knows, 
is intended to be in memory of the Resurrection— which 
could not by any process of calculation be made to fall 
upon the same day as the Passover of the Jews. It was 
clearly the Lord's death which was in question, and those 
poor "heretics" were contending earnestly for the faith 
once delivered to the saints, protesting, by their adherence 
to the true traditions of the Church, against the innovations 
of a corrupt and ambitious priesthood, who were willing 
to make any concessions to the pagan world in exchange 
for temporal power. 

Pasch (Greek, pascha, for Passover) is defined by Webster 
as "The Feast of Easter." 

The month of April was also called "Mensis Paschalis" 
(Passover Month), and "Easter Monath" in honor of the 
Anglo-Saxon goddess, Eastra; which further supports our 
position that Easter is nothing but a heathen substitute for 
the Christian Passover, wholly unauthorized by the Lord or 
his apostles, and another of the vile counterfeits of Babylon 
the Great, the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the 
Earth. 

Yours for the One faith, E. C. MOTT. 



page 161 

VOL. XVI. JULY 15, 1895. No. 14. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Missionary Envelopes, 

Tracts, etc 162 

Views from the Tower 163 

Consolation 165 

Walk by this Rule 167 

Bible Study: Journeying to Canaan 168 

Bible Study: The Report of the Spies 169 

Encouraging Letters 170 

page 162 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



MISSIONARY ENVELOPES. 

Our supply of envelopes is exhausted, until our new lot shall come 
to hand; which will not probably be before Aug. 15. Orders received 
meantime will be filled in rotation. Prices, postpaid by us, are as follows: 
100 for 25 cents, 1000 for $2.00. We recommend the use of these 
as a good service of the truth. They should be going constantly in 
every direction. They are seen and read by postal employees, carriers, 
and often by the households as well as by the friends to whom they are 
addressed. 



REMEMBER YOUR TRACT PRIVILEGES. 

We now have a supply of almost all the back numbers of the Old 
Theology Tracts except No. 3, and it will be reprinted soon. All TOWER 
subscribers are privileged to order these freely, without charge, for gratuitous 
circulation. In ordering state how many you can use judiciously. 
Give only one or at most two tracts to one person at one time. More 
are less likely to have attention. 



DAY BY DAY. 

"Make a fence of trust around to-day, 



Fill the space with loving work and therein stay. 
Look not through the shelt'ring bars upon to-morrow; 
God will help thee bear what comes of joy or sorrow. 



R1839 :page 162 

A WISE WORLDLY CONCLUSION. 

The Arkansas Baptist relates the following: "Three or four traveling 
men were stopping for a day and night in an Arkansas village, and 
having heard that a revival was going on, intended going to it at 
night; but after playing checkers for three hours in the afternoon with 
the preacher who was conducting the meeting, they concluded his ministry 
would do them no good. This is no idle tale, but a record of the 
facts." 



R1838 :page 163 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



ONE of the notable events of our day was the recent 

peace-demonstration on the occasion of the opening 

of the Baltic canal. The canal was projected by the grandfather 

of the present German Emperor and begun by his 

father; and, as intended, it will doubtless be of great benefit 

to Germany's commerce as well as to her navy. The German 

Emperor determined to make the occasion of its opening 

a forcible reminder of the blessings of peace on earth 

and good will toward men, and invited all the great governments 

of "Christendom," and Turkey as well, to send 

to it their representative battle-ships or peace-makers. 

They came: over a hundred of the most awful engines 
of war; and they made, as they steamed through the canal, the 
most remarkable exhibition of the kind ever witnessed on 
earth. The cost of the vessels and their armament represented 
hundreds of millions of dollars; and one salute fired 
simultaneously by 3,500 guns consumed in an instant thousands 
of dollars' worth of powder, and produced, as it were, 
a voice of mighty thunder such as never before was heard. 
Of course, while telling them that this was a peace-demonstration, 
the Emperor feasted his guests royally. He could 
well afford to do so, for the people would foot the bill, 
which in this case is stated to have been in round figures 
$2,000,000. 

As the eye of the mind beholds the pageant we inquire 
—Who are these Christian nations? And for what purpose 
have they built these floating fortresses? Are they to defend 
civilization and Christianity from barbarous foes seeking 
their destruction? No; the barbarian savages never 
dreamed of such death-dealing devices. It was not the fear 



of these that led to the construction of these vessels. Perhaps 
there once were such savages, and mayhap these are 
the vessels by which they were conquered long ago, and 
therefore they are symbols of peace and good will toward 
civilized man? No; not one vessel in the entire 
number had ever been in battle: they were all new vessels 
of the most modern type. Vessels launched ten years ago 
would be too antiquated for such a naval parade; indeed 
would be almost useless in warfare against one of these modern 
vessels. Why then were hundreds of millions spent 
in building these vessels? and why are other millions spent 
annually in keeping them manned, armed and provisioned 
for war? 

Ah! the only answer is that the name Christian, as 
applied to nations, is a mistake. Although Christianity has 
done much for the nations of Europe and America— bringing 
them civilization and a measure of liberty and some 
ideas of justice and decency— it has not converted them as 
a whole, nor more than a small minority. To many it has 
merely brought enlarged ambitions of selfishness which are 
scarcely restrained by public weal and sentiment. The nations 
have not been converted from principles of selfishness 
to principles of love: and none know this better than the 
rulers. They know that they dare not trust each other— 
that if one got much more power than the other, so that she 
dared to do it with impunity, she would not hesitate to 
steal away their liberties for her own gain; "might would 
make right." Hence it is a race for power, for self-defence 
against each other. Such a peace evidently rests upon a 
poor foundation. 

How much the world needs a general government, a 
good government, a righteous government, a paternal government, 
that would really "speak peace to the nations" 
and bid them spend time and treasure and blood in a nobler 
cause than destroying one another financially and literally. 
Six thousand years of experience proves that such a government 
cannot be organized amongst the fallen sons of Adam. 
For even though a few might be found able and willing to 

R1838 : page 164 

do their best, their efforts would be handicapped by others 
seeking to do their worst while deceiving the people and 
posing before them as patriots. And even the best intentioned 
would be in great danger of being corrupted by 
power. 

But as God's people read the great, divine plan of the 
ages they see that God has for centuries been selecting and 
preparing, under Christ their head, a peculiar people, "a royal 
priesthood," who, with Christ their Chief Priest, shall shortly 
rule and bless and help up, out of sin, degradation and 
death, all the families of earth. They pray for that promised 
Kingdom of God— "Thy kingdom come, thy will be 
done in earth as it is in heaven." They realize that when 
God's Kingdom is in control, the present implements of 
human destruction will be of no further value, and human 



energies will be otherwise invested. But first the great battle 
of the Great Day of God Almighty must be fought. The 
nations realize faintly, even while they cry, "Peace, peace," 
that a conflict impends: and hence in the language of 
Scripture the weak are saying, "I am strong." (Joel 3:10.) 
This is the real meaning of the naval display at Kiel. The 
nations desire to impress each other with their strength, 
hoping thus to put off the evil day of war. 

But the world in general is not deceived by the cries 
of Peace! Peace! Even though they do not see the glorious 
outcome as we see it, they see the "battle," the "irrepressible 
conflict," and know the real meaning of the recent 
peace-demonstration. We quote from the London Spectator 
as follows:— 

"And yet the irony of the situation is very keen. It 
was a grand festival of peace and constructive industry, but 
its highest glory was the presence of the fleets prepared at 
vast sacrifices of treasure and of energy solely for war and 
for destruction. An ironclad has no meaning, unless it is a 
mighty engine for slaughter. There is but one phrase which 
describes fully the grandeur of that 'peaceful' fleet, and this 
is that it could in a day destroy any port on earth, or sink 
the commercial navies of the world, if gathered before it, 
to the bottom of the sea. And what depths of human hatred 
were concealed under all that fair show of human amity. 
One squadron was French, and its officers were panting to 
avenge on that exultant Emperor the dismemberment of their 
country. Another was Russian, and its Admirals must have 
been conscious that their great foe and rival was the Power 
they were so ostentatiously honoring, and had only the day 
before broken naval rules to compliment the Emperor's 
most persistent and dangerous foe. A third was Austrian, 
whose master has been driven out of the dominion which 
has made the Canal, and jockeyed out of his half -right in 
the province through which the Canal in its entire length 
winds its way. And there were ships from Denmark, from 
which Holstein had been torn by its present owners, and 
from Holland, where every man fears that some day or 
other Germany will, by another conquest, acquire at a blow, 
colonies, commerce, and a transmarine career. The Emperor 
talked of peace, the Admirals hoped for peace, the 
newspapers of the world in chorus declare that it is peace, 
but everything in that show speaks of war just past, or, on 
some day not distant, to arrive. Never was there a ceremonial 
so grand in this world, or one so penetrated through 
and through with the taint of insincerity." 



We noticed not long since that in France some of the 
theaters were presenting scenes from the New Testament. 
Now a "Sacred Opera," Christ, composed by the celebrated 
pianist, Anton Rubinstein, now deceased, is being presented 
at the City Theater of Bremen, Germany. 

The tone is reverent, the building is hung with dark 
drapery, and no applause is permitted. The prologue opens 



with a shepherd scene in which the wondrous star appears 
over the manger. Soon the heavens open and the Annunciation 
angel appears surrounded by a heavenly host and 
declares the Redeemer's birth, when follows the joyful song, 
"Glory to God in the highest, Peace on earth, good will 
toward men." The music changes, a Moorish king and 
retinue appears, then one from the North, and finally a 
third from India. Each sings of his own greatness, but also 
of that longing which the whole world feels for something 
better. The door of the manger opens and the infant 
Jesus with his mother and Joseph are seen in a flood 
of light. 

Then follow scenes in our Savior's life:— his baptism 
at Jordan, by John, who preaches the Kingdom of Heaven 
at hand, and who salutes Jesus as the Lamb of God which 
taketh away the sin of the world; the temptation in the 
wilderness, in which our Lord is represented in white garments, 
while Satan is represented behind him in black garb, 
etc. Scene 3 represents the sermon on the mount. (Matt. 5.) 
As each beatitude falls from the lips of the great 
Teacher, the disciples repeat quietly the word, "Blessed." 
But presently when the hungry clamor for bread, the miracle 
of the loaves and fishes is represented, followed by the 
awakening of the son of the widow of Nain. 

Another scene represents our Lord driving the tradesmen 
and money-changers out of the temple, saying, "My 
house shall be called a house of prayer, but ye have made 
it a den of thieves." The scene shows the buyers, sellers, 
children, etc., in oriental dress, scurrying across the stage 
before the scourge of small cords. Then Caiaphas and the 
Pharisees appear, demanding his authority and taunting 
him. Our Lord's answers are given in dignified form, tone 
and music. 

Then follows the scene of the Last Supper; Gethsemane's 
agony; the trial before Caiaphas, Herod and Pilate; 
the latter represented with great dramatic effect, followed 

R1839 : page 164 

by the dragging away of the Master to execution. The 
crucifixion scene is omitted because the stage is insufficient 
in size. A scene representing Judas' remorse is brought in 
and the whole concludes with a representation of St. Paul 
preaching in bold strains the gospel of the cross of Christ. 

It is truly remarkable that worldly men, we presume 
as a financial speculation, are finding that the common 
people are hungering for the gospel of the Son of God, 
while the preachers of various denominations declare that 
they cannot attract them with grand organs, and singers, 
and free seats, and essays upon science, art, politics, etc., 
which contain but little food for the soul— little of the 

R1839 :page 165 

bread of everlasting life. Thus while the colleges and 
churches are explaining away our Lord's miraculous birth 



and all of his miracles, God finds defenders and mouthpieces 
for his truth, even amongst non-professors. 



The latest development of Protestant union is called 
"The League of Catholic Unity," which, acting along the 
lines laid down in 1888 at the Lambeth (England) Conference, 
sets forth the following four rules as the basis of union: 

"1. The Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, 
as 'containing all things necessary to salvation,' 
and as being the rule and ultimate standard of faith. 

"2. The Apostles' Creed, as the baptismal symbol, 
and the Nicene Creed, as the sufficient statement of the 
Christian faith. 

"3. The two sacraments ordained by Christ himself: 
baptism and the supper of the Lord, ministered with unfailing 
use of Christ's words of institution, and of the elements 
ordained by him. 

"4. The historic episcopate, locally adapted in the 
methods of its administration to the varying needs of the 
nations and peoples called of God into the unity of his 
Church." 

This league has been joined by quite a number of 
ministers. 



The Coptic Catholic Church of Abysinnia seems disposed 
to unite with the Roman Catholic Church; and the 
pope is supplying money for the establishment of Roman 
Catholic schools among them. 



A splendid specimen of Roman Catholic love for Protestantism, 
the Bible, the American flag and the Public 
School, was given in the great city of Boston, on July 4. 
Boston (like New York and several other large cities in the 
United States) has a large foreign population, and hence 
the Roman Catholics, under the name of the Democratic 
party have had control of the city government for years. 

It is usual for Patriotic orders to celebrate by parade, 
etc., the Nation's birth, and this was done by the Patriotic 
Sons of America and the "American Protective Association," 
unsectarian organizations whose special object is the preservation 
of American liberties, and especially the protection 
of the Public School from the hostile attacks of Romanists. 
The R.C. Board of Aldermen refused permission to 
take along a "float" representing a New England school 
house, and two of their number, knowing the loving and 
liberal spirit of their supporters, prophesied trouble and it 
is believed encouraged it by their utterances, so that their 
expectations were realized. But the A. P. A. people thought 
that they should cling to a shred of liberty on the day of 
its celebration and obtained the Governor's consent and 



that of the Police Commission, which is of his appointment, 
and did parade as intended. 

The parade was to emphasize the value of the public 
schools as nurseries of freedom; and a miniature "Red School 
House," of the pattern general throughout New England, 
led the procession guarded by 300 policemen. It was 
mounted on wheels and drawn by horses covered with American 
colors. At its door stood a man dressed with striped 
pants and starry coat, representing "Uncle Sam," the promoter 
and protector of the public school system. At one 
of its windows stood the Rev. H. F. H. Miller, a Baptist 
minister, with an open Bible before him resting upon an 
American flag; and near him stood Prof. H. H. Lincoln, 
the first and for forty years a school teacher in East Boston. 

The procession got along fairly well until Saratoga 
street was reached, when the mob, which lined the sidewalks 
hooting and using vile and insulting language, grew aggressive. 
The minister and the Bible were the mark for tobacco 
quids and gobs of mud. As the school house was known 
to be the chief objection, the police were massed near it; 
but when the school house and police were past the mob of 
Romanists closed in upon the rear of the procession with 
most foul and insulting language, and women joined in 
spitting upon and striking the marchers. The mob cut off 
the rear of the procession, assaulting it with stones, etc. 
The result was two killed and many wounded severely. Of 
course the decent people of Boston are all hurt by the 
wound given to the fame of their city. 

The lesson is that however much the pope and his cardinals 
and bishops and Protestant ministers may desire unity between 
their system and Protestantism, the fact remains that there is a 
wide gulf of bitter feeling between their people and all the 
institutions of liberty. Poor creatures, they are so blinded 
by priestcraft and superstition that they are scarcely accountable. 
Thank God! the time is not far distant when they shall 
all "come to a knowledge of the truth" under the instruction 
of the "royal priesthood." Then the blind eyes shall 
be opened, and no doubt many will be saved by the Redeemer 
from their present malicious, antichristian, murderous 
spirit, which surely is unfit for any place in or under 
the Kingdom of God's dear Son.— 1 John 3:15. 

While God's consecrated saints should see all this 
clearly, they are to take no part in such parades and battles. 
We have a greater battle and labor: a battle with spiritual 
wickedness and an overcoming of our own carnal tendencies. 
The world will fight its own battles, some on each side, but 
we must wait for the salvation that shall be brought unto us 
at the revelation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 



R1839 :page 165 
CONSOLATION. 



"Trust in the Lord and do good: so shalt thou dwell in the land, and 
verily thou shalt be fed. Delight thyself also in the Lord; and he shall 
give thee the desires of thy heart. Commit thy way unto the 
Lord; trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass; and he 
shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and 
thy judgment as the noonday. Rest in the Lord and 
wait patiently for him."— Psa. 37:3-7. 

WHILE the Word of God abounds in precepts and 
admonitions, in warnings and instructions, and 
while it lifts high the standard of moral excellence— so high 
that in our weak and fallen condition we cannot attain unto 
it, and in our efforts to do so in the midst of a crooked 
and perverse generation we must of necessity encounter the 

R1839 : page 166 

wrath of all the powers of darkness strongly entrenched in 
the hearts of fallen fellow-men, this same blessed Word 
comes to the faithful children of God in the very midst of 
this battle of life with sweet and refreshing consolation. 

Consolation! What is it? Oh, you who have never enlisted 
under the banner of the cross, you who have never 
made an honest endeavor to withstand the powers of darkness, 
to fight the good fight of faith, to stem the current of 
your own fallen nature's tendencies, or to contend earnestly 
for truth and righteousness in the midst of a crooked and 
perverse generation, what can you know of the sweets of 
divine consolation? It is the balm for wounded spirits on 
the battle fields of time; the cooling draught for fainting 
souls hard pressed by the relentless foe; the soothing caress 
of a loving hand upon the fevered brow of a noble contender 
for truth and righteousness; the gentle whisper of 
hope and courage when the heart and flesh begin to fail- 
that is consolation, divine consolation, the only consolation 
that has any virtue of healing and refreshing in it. But it 
is reserved only for those noble souls who are faithfully 
bearing the burden and heat of the day; while those who 
listlessly drift with the current of the world's favor, and of 
the downward tendencies of the carnal nature, can never 
have an intimation of its sweetness. 

It is to the faithful soldiers of the Lord that the above 
words of the Psalmist are addressed— to the persecuted, 
tempted and tried. Hear them, tempest-tossed and fainting 
souls: they were long ago penned by the Lord's prophet 

R1840 : page 166 

for your edification— "Fret not thyself," but "trust in 
the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land, and 
verily thou shalt be fed." How strong is the Lord, how 
wise and good! His promises have never failed to those 
that put their trust in him. We may feel that our efforts 
to be good and to do good are very unproductive, and that 
the opposition from within and without is very strong; but 



it is when we are weak— when we thus realize our own incompetency 

—that we may be "strong in the Lord and in 

the power of his might." Let us endeavor to make straight 

paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of 

the way, and then lay hold of the Lord's strength to help 

us pursue our course in the narrow way of difficulty and 

trial. The fact that we are weak and lame does not separate 

us from the love and power of God; for "he knoweth 

our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." He knows 

that we have the treasure of the new nature in earthen vessels, 

and therefore it is that, while we strive to overcome, 

we have his proffered sympathy and aid and the imputed 

righteousness of Christ for our all-sufficient covering. "Trust 

in the Lord and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land; 

and verily thou shalt be fed." Our food and shelter will 

be sure: he will never leave nor forsake his own, but will 

make all things work together for good to them. 

"Delight thyself also in the Lord, and he shall give 
thee the desires of thine heart." This delight in the Lord 
is a still more advanced step in the Christian life. It is a 
blessed thing to learn to trust in the Lord; but it is when 
continued trust and responsive providences have ripened 
into personal acquaintance and fellowship with God that 
we learn to delight in him. Yes, it is when heart answers 
to heart, when pleading prayer brings recognized answers 
of peace, when the divine care and love are specially seen in 
the guidance of our way: in a word, when we come to feel 
that the Father and the Son have so clearly manifested 
themselves to us that we can recognize their abiding presence 
with us. Ah! then it is that we begin to delight ourselves 
in the Lord. Then, however dark may be the way, 
or however heavy may be the storm that rages about us, the 
balm of divine consolation is always there, so that the child 
of God, though often troubled on every side, is not distressed; 
though perplexed, he is never in despair; though 
cast down, he is not destroyed; and though persecuted, he 
is never forsaken. 

To delight thus in the Lord is to have the affections 
centered in him; it is to have the heart in such sympathy 
with righteousness and truth as to see in God the fountain 
of all goodness and truth, the one altogether lovely. The 
Psalmist expresses such an attitude of heart when, personifying 
our Lord Jesus, he said, "I delight to do thy will, 
O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart." And again, 
"O how love I thy law! It is my meditation all the day." 
And again, when he says, "O God, thou art my God; 
early will I seek thee: my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh 
longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land where no water 
is. ...Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my 
lips shall praise thee.... My soul shall be satisfied as with 
marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with 
joyful lips when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate 
on thee in the night watches. Because thou hast been 
my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I rejoice. 
My soul followeth hard after thee: thy right hand upholdeth 
me."— Psa. 63. 



Such an experience springs only from the felt consolations 
of divine grace in times of sore and pressing need, 
and however great the afflictions or the trials of faith, patience 
and endurance that lead to such an acquaintance with 
God, there is great cause for rejoicing in them; for 
"E'en sorrow, touched by heaven, grows bright 

With more than rapture's ray, 
As darkness shows us worlds of light 
We never saw by day." 
When the heart has been thus centered in God, it is 
its most natural impulse to commit its way to him. As one 
has beautifully expressed it— 

"We'd rather walk in the dark with God 

Than go alone in the light; 
We'd rather walk by faith with him 
Than go alone by sight." 
And how precious is the promise to those who thus 
learn to trust in the Lord and go on doing good, no matter 
how obstinate or fierce may be the persecution it may excite, 
and who delight in the Lord and confidently commit 
their way to his loving wisdom. Surely they shall have the 

R1840 : page 167 

desires of their heart, and no good thing will he withhold 
from them. Their fervent prayers avail much, and in his 
own good time their righteousness, however misrepresented 
and evil spoken of now, shall be brought forth as the light 
—clear, cloudless and widely manifest; and their judgment, 
the justice and righteousness of their hearts, as the noonday. 
And even while we remain here as aliens and foreigners 
in the enemy's land, verily we shall be fed, both 
with the temporal bread and with the bread of heaven for 
our spiritual sustenance. "Rejoice in the Lord, O ye 
righteous, and give thanks at the remembrance of his 
holiness." 

But the Psalmist adds one more important word of 
counsel to the Lord's beloved children. It is this— "Rest 
in the Lord, and wait patiently for him." Do not make 
the mistake of expecting him to give you the desires of 
your heart at the very instant of your request; to make 
your path peaceful, easy and pleasant as soon as you commit 
your way to him; and at once to bring forth your 
righteousness as the light and your judgment as the noonday. 
He has not promised to do that. Time is necessary 
for the working out of his kind providences in our individual 
affairs; for God works on philosophical principles and 
for lasting and blessed results. So— 

"If not to-day, be thou content, poor heart! 

God's plans, like lilies pure and white, unfold; 
We must not tear the close-shut leaves apart; 
Time will reveal the calyxes of gold." 

This waiting, under severe trial or affliction, will indeed 
be a blessing in disguise, if the soul be rightly exercised 
unto patience, endurance, faith, hope, meekness, long-suffering 
kindness and true Christian fortitude. And it 



will be in the darkness of these waiting seasons that the 
blessed stars of hope will shine the brightest, and the bright 
Morning Star, the harbinger of day, will shed his beams 
into the deepest recesses of our hearts. "They that wait 
upon the Lord," says the Prophet (Isa. 40:31), "shall renew 
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as 
eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they shall 
walk and not faint." 

Blessed promises! and, to the praise of his abounding 
grace, his saints of the past and present all bear ample testimony 
of their fulfilment. 

"Who need faint while such a river 

Ever flows our thirst to assuage? 
Grace, which, like the Lord, the giver, 

Never fails from age to age." 



R1840 : page 167 
WALK BY THIS RULE. 



"And as many as walk according to this rule, 
peace be on them and mercy."— Gal. 6:16. 

PEACE, rest of mind, tranquility of soul, is the 

happiness that all men crave, yet seek for in vain, 

because they seek it where it cannot be found. God created 

man for his own pleasure (Rev. 4:11; Isa. 43:7) and in his 

own image, so that man's true pleasure, happiness and 

peace should be found only in harmony, fellowship and 

sympathy with his Creator, that thus the fellowship 

of the Creator and the creature might be responsive. He 

wanted that love should respond to love, admiration to admiration, 

virtue to virtue, and grace to grace, in the Creator 

and the creature, as face answers to face in a glass. In 

this natural attitude of the Creator and the creature generous 

benevolence and filial gratitude combine in mutual 

happiness. God is happy in the realization and in the exercise 

of all the noble traits of his glorious character, which 

happiness is enhanced by appreciation of the same on the 

part of his creatures, and by manifestation in them of the 

same qualities and dispositions of mind and heart. And 

likewise man must both realize and exercise the noble endowments 

of his nature and form a character modeled after 

that of his heavenly Father and meeting his approval, if he 

would find that true happiness which consists in the approval 

of his own conscience and of his Creator and Judge, 

in whose favor is life, and "at whose right hand there are 

pleasures forevermore."— Psa. 16:11. 

True, all men have lost much of the original likeness 
of God, but this does not alter the fact that they still crave 
the happiness and peace which can never be found except 
under the natural, original relations to his Creator. No 



matter how deep a man may sink in sin, how far he may 
stray from the path of rectitude, how low and vile he may 
become, he still remembers that he is a man, a member of 
that noble though fallen race which God created in his own 
likeness, and he knows and feels his degradation. He 
knows that he was made for higher and nobler ends than 
those toward which he is ever tending, although he has 

R1841 :page 167 

neither inclination nor desire to strive toward those nobler 
ends, not having the fortitude to resist the inherited and 
long-cultivated bias of his fallen nature. 

In this painful realization of the absence of true happiness 
and peace of mind and heart, men have sought for happiness 
and peace in ways in harmony with the more or less 
depraved tendencies of the fallen nature— in the poor substitutes 
which pride, ambition, strife, rivalry, wealth, fame, 
power, etc., have to offer; but the happiness they find in 
these is only delusive, and at most very short-lived. The 
bubble of success may burst in an instant, and the peace and 
happiness built upon it be utterly wrecked. 

There is no peace, therefore, to any man except in the 
reestablished relationship between himself and his God. 
And since this relationship of sons can only be reestablished 
through Christ, there is no peace to any man out of 
Christ. "There is no peace, saith the Lord, to the wicked." 
(Isa. 48:22.) And "if any man be in Christ, he is a new 
creature; old things have passed away, and behold all 
things have become new" (2 Cor. 5:17): he has "passed 

R1841 :page 168 

from death unto life," and has found the peace which the 
world can neither give nor take away. He realizes himself 
a son and heir of God. And to these justified sons and heirs 
of this age God has not only granted his recognition, but 
also his special favor, in offering to them exceeding great 
and precious promises— to become sons of God on a higher 
plane, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ, his only begotten 
Son, the conditions of which relationship are that we follow 
in his footsteps of sacrifice, even unto death. 

Those who thus covenant with God are begotten of the 
spirit of God, and as many such as are thenceforth led of 
the spirit of God, they are the recognized sons of God 
(Rom. 8:14), while those who fail to recognize, appreciate 
and accept the great favor offered, lose the benefit of their 
reckoned justification in this age. 

It is to these new creatures, begotten and led of the 
spirit of God, that the words of our text are addressed— As 
many such as walk by this rule, peace be on them and 
mercy. The rule referred to is the rule of the new creature 
mentioned in the preceding verse— "For in Christ Jesus 
neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, 
but a new creature." Forms and ceremonies are not 
the rule, but the new life itself, the new creature filled with 



the holy spirit of God and led of the spirit. "Walk in 
the spirit," says the Apostle, "and ye shall not fulfil the 
lust of the flesh; for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and 
the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one 
to the other."-Gal. 5:16,17. 

To as many as walk by this rule are promised peace and 
mercy— mercy, because our best efforts to walk after the 
leading of the holy spirit will be imperfect; but God who 
judges our heart's desires and efforts is merciful and will 
not exact from us more than we are able to perform. And 
therefore, notwithstanding our lameness and halting steps 
in following the lead of the spirit, he gives his blessed peace 
to all them that walk by this rule— the rule of the holy 
spirit, the rule of the new creature. 

Now if any man be in Christ, a new creature, he has 
put away the old man— the carnal nature, which is enmity 
against God and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed 
can be— with all his evil deeds, which the Apostle thus 
enumerates (Gal. 5:19-21), "Now the works of the flesh 
[the carnal nature] are manifest, which are these: Adultery, 
fornication, uncleanness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, 
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, 
murders, drunkenness, revellings and such like, of the which 
I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that 
they which do such things shall not inherit the kingdom 
of God." 

While we might wonder that the Apostle, in addressing 
the saints, should make mention of the grosser forms of sin 
which could only be predicated of those who have fallen 
from grace, when we consider, we see that it would not 
have done to leave these out, because they belong to the 
category of evils which are opposed to the spirit of God, 
and can have no place in his Kingdom. Then, again, they 
are the abominable ends to which the lesser evils inevitably 
tend, as the nature of sin is always progressive. The Apostle 
gives fair warning that those who do such things, no 
matter how loud may be their professions, have no inheritance 
in the Kingdom of God; and therefore they have no 
right to the fellowship of the saints upon whom, and the 
cause of Christ in general, they bring only disgrace. 

But the effect of the rule of the spirit, in all those who 
are truly new creatures, begotten of God and led of his 
spirit, is very differently described by the Apostle. He says, 
"But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, 
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against 
such there is no law. And they that are Christ's have 
crucified the flesh with the affections and desires." If we 
are living according to the rule of the new nature, following 
the leading of the spirit of God, then we must have these 
fruits in some measure, even from the very start of our Christian 
experience; and if we are following on to know the 
Lord and to walk in the spirit, these fruits are surely growing 
and becoming more and more manifest to all with whom 
we are associated. 

If those who are in Christ would observe this principle, 
and deal with each other as new creatures, much discord 



would be avoided; for the motives and endeavors of the 
"new creature" would be considered, and not the frailties 
or mistakes of the "earthen vessel." "Let us follow the 
things that make for peace."— Rom. 14:19; 1 Thes. 5:13. 



R1841 :page 168 
JOURNEYING TO CANAAN. 
-JULY 28, NUM. 10:29-36.- 



Golden Text— "Come thou with us and we will do thee 
good; for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel." 

THERE are two phases of Israel's typical character; 

one in connection with the tabernacle service, in 

which the whole camp of Israel represents the world, and 

in which the priesthood, Aaron and his sons, and the tabernacle 

service of sacrifices, etc., represent Christ and the 

Church and the great work of atonement for the sins of the 

world. The other phase of its typical character is that in 

which the whole nation, regarded as the chosen people of 

God, represent God's chosen people of the Gospel age and 

their journey, under the divine direction and leading, from 

the bondage of sin into the blessed Canaan rest of justification 

by faith in Christ, which is also a foretaste of that still 

more glorious rest that remains for the people of God beyond 

the Jordan of death, in the heavenly Canaan, whence 

all the hosts of sin will have been forever expelled. 

To this latter phase of the type the Apostle Paul refers 
in his letter to the Hebrews (3:8-19; 4:1,2). Here the 
Church is warned against failure to enter into the heavenly 
Canaan, by the example of fleshly Israel in its wayward 
course from Egypt to Canaan; and the fact is pointed out 
that a whole generation of them forfeited that privilege and 
died in the wilderness, because of unbelief and departing 
from the ways of God. In unbelief, they murmured against 
the divine leading, and their carcasses fell in the wilderness. 

R1841 :page 169 

Then he adds, "Take heed, brethren, lest there be 

in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from 

the living God."-Heb. 3:12. 

While he speaks (Heb. 4:9) of the rest that remaineth 
for the people of God, referring to the final rest, the 
heavenly Canaan, the glorious spiritual condition beyond 
the vail of the flesh, he also speaks of a present rest— the 
blessed foretaste of the rest that remaineth in the heavenly 
Canaan, the rest of faith, saying,— "For we which have 
believed do enter into rest."— Heb. 4:3. 

In this view of the type, let us examine it, that we may 
see the more clearly our own blessed privileges and our responsibilities 
on the higher plane of the spiritual Israel of 



God; for though we who have believed do enter into the 

Canaan rest of faith now (4:3), our course with reference 

to the rest that remaineth for the people of God (4:1) 

—the heavenly Canaan— is still aptly represented, as the 

Apostle Paul shows, by the wilderness journey and its wonderful 

divine leading. Think of it! There was a numerous 

host of men, women and children suddenly emancipated 

from four hundred years of bondage, with only a few days' 

preparation and but a scanty outfit, traveling through a 

barren, trackless wilderness toward an unknown land promised 

to their fathers. There were hostile nations about them, 

and many privations and dangers to be expected by the 

way. But what had they to fear? Had not the God of 

heaven promised to go before them and to lead them all 

the way? 

Just so it is with the Church. The true Church is the 
Church in the wilderness (Rev. 12:6,14; Luke 15:4; Hos. 2:14; 
Isa. 51:3; Cant. 8:5)— separate from the world, 
and under the divine protection and guidance. It is 
a company of widely varied degrees of growth and development 
in the spiritual life. There are babes in Christ and 
a host of those more or less slowly approaching maturity. 
And God is leading us all through the trackless wilderness 
of this present evil world. He is our shield and our guide, 
our glory and our defence; and it is our part to faithfully, 

R1842 : page 169 

follow where he points the way. Our bread and our water 
are sure, and our joy is to realize that his presence is in 
our midst, and that he is able to bring us to the promised 
inheritance. Let us follow his leading, and not be wayward, 
as was the faithless generation which fell in the 
wilderness. 

Referring again to the type, and comparing our own 
experiences, we see that the Lord pursues much the same 
methods with his people now as then. The leading of the 
Lord is by the way of that experience and discipline 
which tend to develop character. And to such discipline 
every "Israelite indeed" will faithfully submit, while those 
who will not do so are thereby proved unworthy of the 
promised inheritance. Let us not be of that unworthy 
class, but humbly and patiently seek to profit by the experiences, 
rough though they be, and by all the discipline and 
teaching so necessary to fit us for the glorious inheritance 
of the saints in light.— Col. 1:12. 



R1842:page 169 

THE REPORT OF THE SPIES. 

-AUG. 4, NUM. 13:17-20,23-33.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord is with us; fear them not."— Num. 14:9. 



STILL bearing in mind the typical character of Israel's 

experiences; that the consecrated Gospel 

Church is her antitype; and St. Paul's statement (1 Cor. 10:11) 

that these things are written for our admonition, let 

us consider the important lessons of the scrap of history 

before us. In reading the full account, included in Num. 13:14; 

Deut. 1:1,2,19-36, several thoughts are brought 

forcibly to our attention; viz., (1) That "without faith it 

is impossible to please God." (2) That the faith which 

God expects to find in us is a reasonable faith, having for 

its basis a good, solid foundation justifying its exercise. 

(3) That treason against God will not go unpunished. 

(4) That God hears and answers intercessory prayer on 
behalf of his people, except in the one case of treason. 

(5) That fidelity to the truth will in due time be gloriously 
rewarded, though for a long time the faithful may suffer to 
some extent on account of the unfaithful. 

Let us consider the illustration of these principles. 
God gave to Israel abundant evidence of his love and 
power and of his special favor toward them above all the 
families of the earth. With a mighty hand and an outstretched 
arm he brought them out of Egypt, across the 
Red sea, fed them with manna in the wilderness, caused 
the barren rock to bring forth refreshing waters, gave them 
his law amidst the inspiring scenes at Sinai and led them 
through the desert with the pillar of cloud and of fire, the 
emblems of his presence. 

When they came to the borders of the promised land 
their faith was put to the test by the reports of the spies and 
their conflicting counsel as to the ability of Israel to go up 
as the Lord commanded and possess the land. Ten of the 
twelve discouraged the undertaking and counselled disobedience 
to the divine command, while the other two, with 
Moses, reminding the people of the fact that the Lord in 
whom they had abundant reason to trust would go with 
them, counselled that they go up immediately and possess 
the land, and that, with the Lord on their side, they were 
abundantly able. The latter was the language of faith and 
obedience; the former of cowardice and rebellion. 

To the evil counsel the people hearkened and became 
mutinous against Moses and the faithful spies, declared 
their purpose to return to Egypt, and were about to stone 
these faithful ones to death and choose from among themselves 
a leader to guide them back to the land from which 
God had delivered them. --Num. 14:1-4,10. 

Just here God interfered on behalf of his servants, and 
declared his purpose against the disloyal hosts of Israel, 
saying to Moses, "I will smite them with the pestilence 
and disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater nation 
and mightier than they." (14:12.) What a suggestion of 
personal honor and preferment was this to Moses— that his 
own posterity should inherit the blessing, instead of this rebellious 
host. And then it would relieve him at once 
of all the labor and care and weariness of leading, instructing 
and judging this people, and permit him to spend the 



remainder of his days in the tranquility of domestic life. 
Such a course, too, on the Lord's part would have been 
entirely consistent with his plan and perfectly just; yet for 
the time it would have been misunderstood by the world at 
large; for the attention of all the nations had been attracted 
to the wonderful power of Israel's God, and in 
such a case they would be ready to take up a reproach against 
him and say that his power had failed and that he was unable 
to fully accomplish the deliverance of his people. 

But Moses was more mindful of the Lord's honor 
than of his own. "And Moses said unto the Lord, Then 

R1842 : page 170 

the Egyptians will hear it,. ..and they will tell it 

to the inhabitants of this land; for they have heard that thou 

Lord art among this people.... Now if thou shalt 

kill this people as one man, then the nations which have 

heard the fame of thee will speak, saying, Because the Lord 

was not able to bring this people into the land which he 

sware unto them, therefore he hath slain them in the wilderness. 

How beautiful this self-forgetfulness in its zeal for 

God, this humility and patient endurance and the loving 

spirit that could so tenderly pray for the wayward and even 

mutinous hosts that conspired against his life! What a lesson 

is here for every one filling a responsible position in the 

body of Christ! 

But mark how the faithful man of God frames his petition 
in harmony with God's law. He does not ask that 
the Lord might clear the guilty, persistently wilful sinners, 
contrary to his law, but that only so far as might be consistent 
with his just and holy law he would pardon the iniquity 
of his people as he had done in the past, and not utterly 
consume them in his just wrath. Hear him: "And now I 
beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great, according 
as thou hast spoken, saying, The Lord is long-suffering, and 
of great mercy, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and by no 
means clearing the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the fathers 
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation. 
Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people according 
unto the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou hast forgiven 
this people from Egypt even until now."— Num. 14:17-20. 

Now mark the answer— "And the Lord said, I have 
pardoned according to thy word"— according to the word 
of his own holy law, whose promise of mercy to the erring 
(though not to wilful, determined sinners) Moses had pleaded 
on behalf of Israel. This mercy could be extended to 
the young, but not to the adults who were inexcusable; and 
this was now the tenth time they had rebelled against the 
Lord, showing their hearts strongly set to do evil. In this 
they were a type of a class of wilful sinners in this still 
more favored Gospel age who, having been once enlightened, 
etc., nevertheless, afterward prove disloyal to God 
and come under condemnation to the second death. 

The Lord told Moses and Aaron to say to them, "As 
truly as I live, saith the Lord, as ye have spoken in mine 



ears, so will I do to you. Your carcases shall fall in this 
wilderness;. ..but your little ones, which ye said should 
be a prey, them will I bring in, and they shall know the 
land which ye have despised."— Num. 14:28-33;l-4. 

Here was a type of the value of intercessory prayer on 
behalf of those who sin not unto death. (1 John 5:16.) 
Let us bear in mind this privilege and duty of intercessory 
prayer for all such, and for our encouragement let us remember 
God's dealings with his faithful ones of old. And 
let us beware of any thing approaching to disloyalty to 
God— of any disposition to rebel against him and return to 
Egypt, the world; and also of that lack of faith which indicates 
a serious lack of appreciation of all of God's favors 
and leading in the past and which therefore fails to trust 
him for the future. 

Beloved, the Lord has led us in the past by a way we 
knew not. It has not always been an easy way, but it has 
always been a safe way, a profitable way though often a 
rough and thorny one. True, it has been a way of privation, 
a lonely, wilderness way, but it has been good for that 
discipline and training so necessary to fit us for the greater 
blessings of the Canaan beyond. And has not the glory 
of the divine presence and favor been sufficient to compensate 
for all the barrenness of the wilderness way? Ah, yes! 
we hear you say; and our hearts respond, Amen! 

"Oh, what are all earth's gilded toys 

Compared with heaven's eternal joys? 

Or even to the feast now spread 

For pilgrims through the desert led? 

Oh, sweeter far the wilderness, 

With all its bleak, wild barrenness, 

Than all the city's pomp and pride 

Without our heavenly Friend and Guide. 

Its manna is a foretaste sweet 

Of heavenly bounty all complete; 

Its cloudy pillar, guiding light, 

Are earnests of the future bright." 
Let us keep the wilderness way and rejoice as we go. 
See Poems and Hymns of Dawn, p. 57. 



R1843 : page 170 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER:— I enclose report and order for more 
books. The small-pox scare is about over, and I am again 
taking orders— nearly as many orders for sets as for single 
copies. 

To-day I have been confined to the house, and a Seventh 
Day Adventist has been with me nearly all day, talking 
on the plan of the ages and reading the DAWNS. He 
can find nothing in the DAWN to object to, and he is now 



reading the TOWER, of Nov. 1-15, '94, which I think will 
clear him on the subject of the Law. I have met 
him often, and we have had many talks and prayers 
together. 

I placed several DAWNS in the East End when I first 
came here, and a group of six now meets once a week at a 
private house for prayer and the reading of the DAWNS. 
Pray for us, that we may all remain faithful and do all the 
Lord would have us do. 

Yours in the Lord's service, WM. T. McCLAIN. 

[This city in Mississippi was threatened with small-pox 
and cut off from communication with other cities. The colporteur 
was unable to get away and the people were too excited 
to be canvassed for DAWN; so he sought out some who had 
already purchased and read, started a meeting and introduced 
the WATCH TOWER. God is ready and willing to make all 
things work together for good to his people, if they are but 
willing, obedient and faith full.— Editor.] 



page 170 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-We are unable to colporteur 
to-day owing to the inclement state of the weather, and I 
take this opportunity to write you. 

I heartily thank you for the concern you seem to have 
for me, and also for the help and encouragement that you 
have given me in the past. My brother, you do not know 
how anxious I am to serve the Lord in an acceptable manner. 
I realize that the Lord has been very gracious in 
leading me out of Babylon; and the fact that I was glad 
to withdraw from the Presbyterian church and the Y.M.C.A. 
shows that my love for the truth is pure and that I 
greatly appreciate the call to run for the glorious prize that 
is to be rewarded to the Church of Christ. I believe I 
know now what consecration is, and daily I strive to be 

page 171 

an overcomer— to please the Lord in all things. I remember 
that it is one thing to be called, but quite another thing 
to be chosen. The Lord says— "To him that overcometh 
will I grant to sit with me in my throne." It is the faithful 
overcomer who is chosen. And then I want to be 
more zealous in the Lord's work— in disseminating the 
truth. I realize that now is the time to work, because the 
dark night is fast approaching when no man can work. 
Your Brother in Christ, WM. P. CAUSER. 



R1843 :page 171 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-Many thanks for your kind and 
welcome letter. It is always so refreshing to my soul to 



receive a letter from the office. 

Well, praise the Lord! He has yet his people, filled 
with his spirit of love and peace, left in the world, though 
they are but few. Then it is a comfort to know that one 
is not entirely alone yet; and I am so apt to think so, sometimes, 
when I look around me and find only such a little 
handful who care to walk not after the flesh, but after the 
spirit— so few who want to be fully the Lord's and to follow 
the Lamb whithersoever he goeth, in the narrow way 
to life; so few trusting in the great and glorious promises 
of God, or believing in so great and blessed salvation as 
we do. 

I am glad that the Lord has not left his children in 
darkness concerning his plan, but has made everything so 
plain for us, even informing us of the appointed times and 
seasons for the accomplishment of the different features of his 
wonderful plan. It would indeed be a gloomy thing for us, 
if God had left us entirely in uncertainty and darkness now, 
so we could see nothing of the impending great events, the 
time of trouble, the harvest work, the Lord's presence and 
the soon establishment of his Kingdom, "the restitution of 
all things spoken," the Jewish question, and all these important 
truths now so clearly seen and so much appreciated 
by God's saints. I am glad we are yet in the path that is 
shining more and more for the just and the faithful children 
of God, being led by his spirit to see and understand 
the promised "things to come." 

In answer to your inquiry about the number of Danish 
DAWNS disposed of in Denmark up to date, I am pleased 
to say that five hundred of the books are already among 
the Danes, most of them in good hands, I believe. The 
English lot is nearly all sold; but as yet I have sold only a 
few single copies of the German, and about half a dozen 
of the Swedish translations. 

The Swedish brother here, Bro. Holm, would be very 
happy to engage in the work, but is hindered now; he will 
write you a letter soon. The Danish brother, who I mentioned 
to you was canvassing around in his neighborhood, 
has opened his house for meetings where the truth can be 
freely proclaimed by voice. I was there on Easter Sunday, 
and about twenty intelligent people were present to listen 
to the discourse on the plan of the ages. Many questions 
were asked and answered. 

My new-found brother in the Lord is daily growing 
in love and knowledge of the truth. He has been with me 
two weeks now, canvassing. 

Wishing you all an abundant measure of the favor and 
blessing of God, I am 

Yours in Christ, JOSEPH S. WINTER. 

[This is the Brother mentioned in our last issue, laboring 
as Colporteur in Denmark.] 



DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I went up to Wesson on Sunday, 
and talked on the Scriptures to a little gathering there. 



Had a good delivery of DAWNS on Monday. What a stir 
the books have made there! Some oppose it very bitterly, 
while others defend it fervently. Some are searching it just 
to find something to criticize, and they accuse it falsely of 
many things, but their accusations do not agree. Even 
this I believe results in good, for the few who defend it 
read it with the more care. God is able to make the wrath 
of men to praise him. One brother said that he had heard 
much against it, and read it carefully to find the statements 
attributed to it, but he read it through without finding them. 
He said it cost him a few cents, but he would not take five 
dollars for it. 

In love and haste, H. W. DEMING. 

[Yes ! the truth is a sword in the present harvest, as it 
was in the Jewish harvest. (Matt. 10:34.) As the Apostle 
declares, it is either "A savor of life unto life [tending toward 
life eternal], or of death unto death [tending in some 
toward the second death, as they array themselves, in prejudice, 
in opposition to the truth]." 

We are pleased to see the colporteurs growing more 
earnest and careful, not only to plant the truth, but to water 
it.-EDITOR.] 



DEAR BROTHER:-Brother McPhail's visit has stirred 
up the people of our little village more than anything else 
has done for years. Both believers and infidels say, 
"What new doctrine is this? This restitution is something 
we have never heard of." Although we have been talking 
about this truth and distributing tracts and lending TOWERS 
and DAWNS for years, they do not seem to grasp the idea 
until they receive an object lesson such as the chart is capable 
of giving. One infidel neighbor, who attended one 
of Brother McPhail's meetings, was deeply impressed. At 
the close of the meeting he asked a very reasonable question, 
and our good brother answered it satisfactorily to all present. 
Previous to that he could not be induced to read 
anything but Ingersoll; but now he is investigating the 
truths contained in the first volume of DAWN. May the 
Lord, by his wondrous truth, open the blind eyes! 

The Church here also has been awakened to renewed 
energy and closer fellowship as a result of our dear brother's 
visit and ministry. Much of the misunderstanding has 
been removed, for some existed as a result of early training 
and preconceived notions. A neighbor, who is an unbeliever, 
kindly offered us the use of a vacant room in his 
house in which to meet for worship and study of the Word, 
and we meet once a week. 

Our desire is to keep close to Christ and let him lead 
us in all things, and to grow in grace and knowledge of the 
truth. Of course we are misjudged and evil spoken of by 
some; but we expect that; and we are endeavoring by 
his grace to show the true spirit of Christian love toward 
all. May the good Lord help us to stand in this evil day 
against all the wiles of the enemy! 



I must tell you of a remark that was made before 
Brother McPhail reached us. One of the brethren was 
speaking of his coming to hold some meetings to some 
parties, and they replied that they presumed he was like all 
other preachers— that he would hold a few meetings, take 
up a collection at every meeting, get all the money he 
could, and then leave the village. But to their surprise the 
brother came quietly, without any pomp or show, held four 
good meetings, and went as quietly as he came, without 
even mentioning money, and left an influence which no 
other man has ever left. And they do not know what to 

R1843 : page 172 

make of it. We thank the dear Lord for sending him to us 
to help us; and I take the liberty to tender to you, on 
behalf of the Church here, our thanks for the part you have 
had in this matter of sending the brother here. We hope 
that he may find it convenient to come again. 
I send greeting on behalf of the Church. 
Yours in the one hope, JOHN N. LATHWELL. 



page 172 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Herewith is a letter from 
Brother James A. Church, which nearly explains itself. I 
need only add that Mrs. Church is a daughter of a Presbyterian 
minister to whom (Dec. 27, '87) I sent DAWN, VOL. 
I., and (Apr. 27, '89) VOL. II. Some portions of the letter, 
underlined with my blue pencil, are of general interest, and 
I would suggest that they be printed. 

Mr. W. M. Wright. Dear Sir:-You will probably 
be surprised to receive a line from me a stranger, but the 
matter will explain itself as you read. 

You probably remember that some years ago you gave 
my wife's father the first two volumes of M. DAWNS. How 
long they laid in his library, I do not know, but about five 
years ago my wife, while at home on a visit, saw the books 
and became interested. 

When we took God's Book and drew our theology from 
it instead of man's teachings, we find that now we have discarded 
all the theology that we were brought up on except 
the Ransom; and how different that is as set forth in the 
DAWNS and TOWERS from the limited and emasculated doctrine 
as taught in the theology of the churches. 

I write to let you know the results (or some of them), 
for it is sometimes a pleasure to find after many days the 
result of the bread cast on the waters; and it is an encouragement 
that if one only sows the seed that it will 
spring up somewhere, though perhaps not at the point we 
intended and hoped to reach. I know that we would like 
much to hear from some of the seed we have scattered since 
we made up our minds on this subject. Some fruit (a very 
little) we can see, but with the majority it is all a matter of 



faith as to how it germinates or where. Fortunately we are 
not held responsible for the fruits, all our part is to do the 
present duty and sow the seed, and leave the results with the 
Master. 

Our old associates in the church regard any one that 
has cast off human tradition as of course gone to the bad, 
and their reports as to our views and belief are not much 
to be relied on, for they class all that do not accept tradition 
as astrays and out-casts. We would not for the world 
go back to the views that we were brought up on. I wonder 
that Christian people can be so blinded by their prejudices 
that they will not read or examine the subjects. If 
they did, and took the teachings of the Bible, I cannot see 
how they could escape coming to our conclusion. 

Very truly yours, JAMES A. CHURCH. 

Another brother has written me, among other matters, 
the following commendable sentiments:— 

"My desire is to make the things of the 'Kingdom' 
more and more my care, that I may appreciate more clearly 
the blessings coming to all in it, and to be infused more 
and more with earnestness in making my calling and election 
sure. 

"Thank God, his plan is so consummately arranged 
that in due time it will be fully wrought out without the 
jarring of one imperfection in the agents he commits it to. 
Corruption, incapacity, ignorance, envy, strife and every 
form of sin and imperfection may mar present man-made 
plans, teaching all the exceeding evil of evil; but when the 
fulness of time has come, God's elect, selected because 
they loved righteousness and hated wickedness during the 
time iniquity abounded, will come on the scene and put an 
end to the troubles from which no man could escape, if God, 
even the Most High, did not thus provide a Savior. 

"Thus holding, and, as we can, proclaiming God's 
purposes in Jesus, and using all diligence to add to faith, 
virtue, to virtue, knowledge, to knowledge, temperance, to 
temperance, patience, to patience, godliness, to godliness, 
love, we may know that we will gain an abundant entrance 
into the Kingdom. 

"This course will naturally separate us from those relying 
on, and working to maintain, present governments, 
thinking them to be of God, and our views to be erratic 
and anarchistic; and the more they affiliate with present 
kingdoms, and try to bolster up their waning powers, and, 
added to this, the more they understand the trend of our 
faith, the more surely we must become unpopular." 

Your fellow servant, W. M. WRIGHT. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-It is with 
great pleasure that I am trying in my weak way to do what 
I can to serve my Master, as I deem it my duty to do. I 
have been holding meetings every Sunday for nearly two 
months, though the attendance is somewhat small; but this 
is because the locality is thinly settled. I can say that the 



people seem to take great interest and that these doctrines, 
although new to them, they find when rightly administered 
are old and reliable. I tendered them my services free of 
charge, if they were willing to spare the time to come and 
listen, although it is quite a task for me to walk five miles 
and back as I do every Sunday and I am getting quite old 
and crippled somewhat with rheumatism; yet I thank God 
that I am able to this much. Pray for me, that I may be 
able at all times to do my Master's will, and that though the 
road be rugged and steep I may have the strength and ability 
to climb to the top. 

Enclosed you will find a small order for DAWNS. I 
could not have succeeded in getting any one to subscribe, 
had I not first got them interested. I think before long 
nearly all in the neighborhood will have a set. 

Yours in Christ, PETER HEBERT. 



R1843 : page 172 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Please send as soon as 
possible the Plan of the Ages Wall Chart. Brother Draper 
wishes to give a lecture on the Chart before going home. 
I wish you could have seen him yesterday, as he was looking 
it over with my husband and myself. Tears would fill 
his eyes and his face light up with a deeper appreciation of 
God's love and his plan for the Church. It is truly grand! 

Some of the people here say of us as a little band, the 
reason they live such good, pure lives is, they want to reign 
over some one. Is not that encouraging? I tell you this 
to let you see how we are holding up the banner of Christ. 
Praise God for his spirit! It seems strange that back of all 
their treatment of us they look to us to live a better life 
than other professing Christians; and I am very glad of it, for 
it makes us stronger. We long to hear some voice other 
than our own proclaiming the truth, and would be glad of 
a visit from one of the brethren sent out by the Tract Society. 

Yours in the truth, MRS. S. J. PORTER. 

[Yes; surely we who have a knowledge of God's great 
plan should also be "partakers of his holiness," if we partake 
at all of the spirit of the Truth: and "If any man 
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his." "What 
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy living and 
godliness. "--EDITOR.] 



page 173 

VOL. XVI. AUGUST 1, 1895. No. 15. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Sister Russell's Letter 174 

A Word of Caution 174 

Views from the Tower 175 

The Time of thy Visitation 178 

Tract Society's Introductory Letters 181 

Consecration vs. the World and its 

Affairs 182 

Bible Study: The Brazen Serpent 183 

Bible Study: The New Home in 

Canaan 183 

page 174 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, 
or other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1850 : page 174 

SISTER RUSSELL'S LETTER. 

Sister Russell is generally busy in the TOWER office; but just now 
she is making a little tour among the Lord's people in New Jersey, 
New York, Massachusetts, etc. Sister Russell's meetings are usually 
"parlor talks." Her present mission is to see and cheer the Lord's 
flock and to bring us word of their spiritual welfare. She writes:— 
Springfield, Mass., July 25, '95. 

MY DEAR HUSBAND:— I arrived a few hours ago from Troy, on 
the 1.12 train and am safely and pleasantly sheltered with Sister Clark 
who gives me a cordial greeting, and I am resting a little and trying to 
feel ready in mind and body for the evening meeting. 

We had a good time in Troy, also in Saugerties and Yonkers, as 
well as in New York City and Brooklyn. Indeed, I have most cheering 



news from all with whom I have met thus far, and they all have messages 
of love and encouragement for you. The spirit of God is wonderfully 
manifest among his people. 

I have not had a chance to write you since I left New York, my 
stay in each place being so short that what little time I had with the 
friends was wholly occupied; and it has been midnight and after, almost 
every night before we retired. I am somewhat weary to-day, but tomorrow 
will not be so hurried. 

It was a great pleasure to receive your letter on my arrival here, 
and to know that you are so thoughtful of me and that I have your 
prayers constantly. I feel that I am constantly dependent upon divine 
grace, for I have no strength of my own. In so many ways I have 
realized the Lord's special helpfulness supplying my deficiency out of 
his abundant fulness that many times I am even surprised at it. I am 
trying to fulfill my mission as thoroughly as possible, but I must leave 
particulars until I return. I expect to hear from you next at Boston. 

Kindly remember me to all the family and inquiring friends. I 
think of you always, dear, and am anxiously anticipating the return 
home. Your loving wife, MARIA F. RUSSELL. 



R1851 :page 174 

A WORD OF CAUTION. 

We learn that certain persons are writing to Z.W.T. readers for 
the addresses of all known to be interested in Z.W.T. publications. 
We advise that such requests be ignored;— do not even answer them. 
The "babes" in the truth will get enough confusion and error and 
sifting, without your thus helping to send them more. Satan is very 
active, spreading all kinds of snares; and all who cannot help others 
out of these snares should be doubly careful that they assist none into 
them. You may be sure that if you are requested to send addresses of 
Z.W.T. people, it is because your applicant knows that the Z.W.T. 
office does not know him well enough to send such addresses, or because 
he is well known to be a propagator of false doctrines. The 
"sheep" and "lambs" are far better a little lonely in the "green pastures" 
and beside the "still waters" than in communication with the 
"grievous wolves" of this evil day, against whom we are cautioned by 
the Apostle Peter. Read 2 Pet. 2:1-3; Acts 20:28-32. 

Experience proves to us all that anyone who cannot by the grace 
of God claim for himself (to some degree) the Eight Qualifications of a 
minister (servant) of the truth, mentioned in our issue of Oct. 15, '94, 
and declare his appreciation of those qualifications, and his desire to 
grow in them, is not such an one as would probably be a benefit to the 
sheep and lambs, or be in any manner qualified to "feed" them. 



R1844:page 175 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



RELIGIOUS VIEW. 



YOUNG Peoples' Societies are the order of the day. 
The phenomenally successful "Young People's Society 
of Christian Endeavor" at its recent annual convention 
claims to have had present over fifty thousand delegates, 
representing societies numbering nearly three million 
members. It does not claim to be unsectarian, but allsectarian. 
Its success is due to the fact that it may be said 
of it, "All men speak well of you." It won sectarian favor, 
by making it a fundamental rule that each Society 
should be connected with some church, and that it must 
cooperate with the pastor, and that its members must never 
if possible be absent from the services of its own church. 
An institution so loyal to sectarianism could not fail to be 
successful. 

But "Christian Endeavor" had its rise amongst Congregationalists, 
and bears the stamp of their love of liberty 
in that its officers, etc., are selected by general ballot. 
The astute managers of Methodism soon saw that the Young 
People's movement had come to stay, and that if as young 
people they got the idea of managing their own affairs, selecting 
their own leaders, officers, etc., it would not be 
long before they would get to be old folks and have the 
same ideas respecting conferences, choosing their own 
ministers, etc.; and this would mean the destruction of the 
Methodist Episcopal polity, by which the bishops or clergy 
now manage that denomination's affairs so successfully. 



As a result the Epworth League was organized, to 
handle the young folks of the M.E. Church; and in an 
unobtrusive manner accustom them to the recognition of 
Episcopacy in their affairs. Otherwise they are identical 
with the Y.P.S.C.E. This movement also has scored 
quite a success. It has just held a convention at Chattanooga, 
Tenn., where nearly fifteen thousand delegates were 
in attendance. The M.E. young people are being withdrawn 
from the Y.P.S.C.E. and from the "Boy's Brigade" 
into the "Epworth League" and the "Epworth 
Guards," in which the Church Pastor always has the control. 
As the Episcopal system made the Church of Rome powerful 
and great, so the same system is daily adding power and 
influence to the M.E. Church. 



The influence was contageous, and soon the Methodist 
Protestant denomination organized its Christian Endeavor 
Societies as Methodist Protestant Societies of Christian Endeavor. 
Their convention was held recently in Pittsburg. 



Baptists, too, concluding that their young people might 
lose sight of their distinctive doctrines, organized "The 
Baptist Young People's Union." Their convention, just 
held at Baltimore, Md., reports 6,559 delegates present. 

We cannot feel otherwise than sympathetic with the 
avowed objects of these Societies, and the manifest endeavors 
of some of their leaders. Yet on the other hand we 
cannot overlook the fact that they are strands of another 
rope which is being thrown around the rising generation, 
to bind them more tightly to the theological errors which 
they have inherited, and from which otherwise they would 
have the better chance to get free. Their time already 
overfilled with church "work" is now so filled to the brim 
that they have no time to see the fallacies of their church-creeds 
nor to seek for truth "as men search for silver." 
Besides, filled with the intoxication of numbers and the excitement 
of annual conventions, etc., they have little appetite 
for spiritual things; they do not realize the inconsistency 
of much that they profess to believe, and are therefore 
not hungering and thirsting after something better, 
and are less susceptible to present truth. They remind us 
of some in the Apostle's day who knew only the baptism 
of John, unto repentance. (Acts 18:25-19:4.) Repentance 

R1844 : page 176 

is the first step, and it is important; but those who 
would make their calling and election sure to joint-heirship 
with Christ must be sanctified with the truth,— errors do 
not produce the right sort of sanctification. 

On the whole we would feel glad to see so many young 
people even slightly interested in religious things did we not 
realize (1) that it is likely to attract some away from the 
"deep things of God," the truly spiritual things, and (2) 
that with the activity of our day these associated and well 
organized millions will sooner or later realize their power 
and start crusades (political and otherwise), which will bias 
public opinion, influence legislation, and sooner or later, 
probably, be used of Satan against liberty and the truth. 
It is very safe to follow Apostolic methods and recognize 
and belong to only "the Church of the first-born" whose 
names are written in heaven and who altogether will be but 
a "little flock." 

And yet, one cannot overlook the fact that among the 
earnest laborers in these Societies are some noble men and 
women, upon the altars of whose hearts burns the fire of 
full consecration to our Lord. This encourages us, and reminds 
us that there are numbers yet in Babylon who should 
be sealed with the present truth. Let us each be fully awake 
to the use of our opportunities for serving that class. 

In illustration of what we mean, we quote from an address 
by Miss C. Grant before the Epworth Convention. Her 
subject was "Church Amusements— What to have and what 
not to have." She urged that the Scripture injunction be 
remembered: "Come out from among them, and be ye separate, 



saith the Lord God, and touch not the unclean thing." 
She urged that whatever amusements are recognized be of 
the stamp approved by the Apostle's words: "Whatsoever 
things are true. Whatsoever things are honest. Whatsoever 
things are just. Whatsoever things are pure. Whatsoever 
things are lovely. Whatsoever things are of good 
report." But she said,— 

"Frankly we must acknowledge that our churches of 
today are not keeping entirely to that standard. In an 
endeavor to meet the needs or nature of our younger young 
people and to hold our own, so to speak, with the world's 
fascinating allurements, or in special efforts to make (in 
other words to extort) the money that should be freely 
given, we have undoubtedly gone too far over on the world's 
side and I believe that for good reason our church papers 
are giving the warning cry of 'Danger!' And this danger 
is the greater because so few seem aware of it. What I 
would say to those of you here today who are among the 
workers in this line or who have any voice in the work, and 
what I wish I could say to all our Epworth young people 
everywhere, is, present no entertainment that has not been 
carefully and prayerfully considered in the light of God's 
word, "Come out from among them and be ye separate 
and touch not the unclean thing." Many err from blindness 
to the importance of this matter, but this morning I 
beg you to go home from this conference now ready, if 
never before, to scatter light, to open the eyes of others, to 
say a strong, firm, but courageous No! to whatever has upon 
it the 'image and superscription of Caesar." But do this 
not in a dictatorial way that is certain to antagonize, not 
in an 'I am holier than thou' spirit, that is equally certain 
to arouse opposition, but in a self-forgetting, Christ-like 
spirit that shall win others by its firm and loving loyalty. 

"To specify somewhat as to what not to have, I will 
illustrate by plain mention of some examples. There is a 
so-called 'Brownie Entertainment;' what could be less suggestive 
of harm than that name? Without due investigation, 
it has been entered into by our churches here and there and 
has proved to be theatrical in its real nature; children have 
been kept out very late practicing; dancing, under the 
changed name of marching and 'drills,' has been taught, 
and in one instance by the very person who instructed certain 
ballet dancers; in some places the entertainment has 
been called the church theater. Can such work be consistent 
with our vows, with holy Christian living? Its effect upon 
the spiritual life of the young people engaged in it, I leave 
you to imagine." 

She also rebuked other improper entertainments, "The 
Midway Plaisance," etc. 

The Rev. C. H. Payne, of New York City, spoke of a 
coming revival which he intimated might be in the nature 
of a revolution. We wonder whether or not he may have 
gotten a glimpse of the true Church's power and kingdom 
soon to be manifested (Rom. 8:22,21) and the new earth 
(social order) under that new heavens (ecclesiastical order). 
He said:— 



"It will be a revival of original Christianity. The 
greatest need of the world today is the Christianization of 
Christianity, the making of Christianity what Christ himself 
intended it to be. Christ's own type of Christianity 
must and will be realized. The present age has been marked 
by brilliant discoveries, but the greatest discovery has yet 
to be made, and when made will startle and quicken the 
world. That discovery is the discovery of Christ. He has 
never yet been really and fully known; has never been 
rightly recognized; never had a fitting place in the world 
for which he died. He is coming to the front as the rightful 
and recognized leader of his own forces; the church will 
soon awake to see Him as her true leader, listen to His 
words of command and follow Him to victory.... 
It is my firm belief that the church of Christ is on the eve 
of such a mighty spiritual and moral upheaval; the incoming 

R1845 : page 176 

of a revolutionary power that will make the church 
truly Christian, in fact as well as in name, and sweep the 
world forward toward the Millennial dawn." 

One excellent move, among the Epworth Leaguers, is 
represented in the "Tongue Bridlers Brigade," the members 
of which are required to take the following pledge: 

"In consideration of the feelings of my fellow human 
beings, I hereby agree, in my ordinary conversation, not 
to speak ill of persons, especially in their absence, but to 
speak well of all as opportunity is afforded, and as I can 
conscientiously do so." 

We trust that this movement may do some good, and 
help to stop one of the greatest evils in the world, "gossiping. 
But we remind the prospective or probationary 
members of the "royal priesthood" that the Chief Priest 
of our profession (or order) has put upon all who would be 
recognized by him as members of his glorious Melchesidec 
Priesthood, a pledge whose conditions are much more 
sweeping and comprehensive than the above. We fear 
that many have overlooked it. It is to this effect:— 

"A new commandment I give unto you,— that ye 
love one another." "Love as brethren; be pitiful, be 

R1845 : page 177 

courteous: not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing, 
but contrariwise blessing." "Be kindly affectionate 
one to another with brotherly love; in honor preferring one 
another." "He that loveth not knoweth not God, for 
God is love." "Respect all men, love the brotherhood." 
"Love one another with a pure heart fervently." "Love 
suffereth long and is kind; love envieth not; love vaunteth 
not itself, is not puffed up; love seeketh not her own, is 
not easily provoked, and thinketh no evil." (1 Pet. 3:8,9, 
1:22; Rom. 12:10; 1 John 4:8.) "Let us not love in 
word, neither in tongue [merely], but in deed and in truth 
[sincerely]. And hereby we know that we are of the 



truth and shall assure our hearts before the Lord."— 
1 John 3:18,19. 

Where love rules the heart, even imperfectly, it commands 
that we think as little evil of one another as possible; 
and that we judge each other's motives generously, charitably; 
and if we love others as we love ourselves we will be careful 
to screen each other's imperfections from others, except 
where principles are involved. Love is the very essence of 
our Lord's spirit: and "if any man have not the spirit of 
Christ [to some measure and growingly], he is none of his." 
Let us therefore practice and acquire tongue bridling, not 
merely outwardly, and from "consideration for the feelings 
of fellow men," but as one of the necessary graces of the 
heart which if absent would prove that we are "none of his." 



We have wondered considerably that The Evangelical 
Alliance, the first movement toward ecclesiastical union, 
organized in A.D. 1846 (the U.S. branch later), has kept 
so quiet of late; when "Union" has been heard on every 
side. We are not surprised, therefore, to learn through 
the Presbyterian Banner (July 24) that,— 

"It is the purpose of the Evangelical Alliance for the 
United States to extend its work by the organization of 
local branches of the Alliance in the cities and towns 
throughout the country, with the object of promoting the 
interests for which the parent organization was formed. 

"The constitution to be adopted by the local alliances 
has been prepared, and in its definition of the objects of 
the organization is the following: 

"The Alliance shall stand in the name of Christ on 
the side of practical religion, good citizenship, enforcement 
of law, promotion of sobriety, the prevention of 
cruelty, the alleviation of suffering, the correction of injustice, 
the rescue of the unfortunate, the reformation of 
the depraved, and for such kindred ends as pertain to the 
true social mission of the Church. 

"In the furtherance of such objects it is distinctly declared 
that the Alliance shall not attempt to exercise ecclesiastical 
or administrative authority over the allied churches. 
It shall be the servant of the churches, recommending such 
united action as it deems most wise. It shall be a purely 
voluntary association, which leaves the churches, with all 
their diverging views of doctrine and polity, absolutely 
unsolicited either to worship or to fellowship, which would 
contradict their independent convictions. Nor shall it lay 
the churches under any financial obligations." 

For this we have been waiting for some time. This is 
the road that leads to cooperative Union amongst Protestants, 
and to cooperative fellowship with Romanism. 

But the Alliance is not quite so creedless as the Banner's 
statement implies. It has "Nine Articles" governing 
it; and all who would be associated in it must subscribe to 
them. We quote: 

"The parties composing the Alliance shall be such 



parties only as hold and maintain what are usually understood 
to be evangelical views in regard to the matter of 
doctrine understated." 

Then follow the Nine Articles of Faith, some of which 
are excellent, of course, but being what is "usually understood 
as Evangelical," they contain three items which would 
debar any who had been well "sealed in their foreheads" 
with the truth; viz., profession of faith in the trinity, in human 
immortality and in eternal torment;— quite sufficient 
to keep separate the Cleansed Sanctuary class.* 

Quite probably there will be a change of the name of 
the Alliance, about the time that the Church of England 
joins it, and gives it "life," power, vitality (Rev. 13:15), 
so that thereafter federated Protestants will act with Papacy 
and assume a general supervision of the government and 
morals of the world;— to their betterment in some respects, 
no doubt, but to the prejudice of present truth and its 
servants and agencies. 

It will be noticed in the above quotation that "practical 
religion, good citizenship, enforcement of law," etc., 
are prominent;— first in the list of objects to be attained. 
This means that as soon as the Alliance has its branches in 
good working order, it will take a hand in practical politics 
and make its influence felt in government circles. The 
same disposition is to be noticed in the Christian Endeavor 
and other Young Peoples' Societies: they adopted resolutions 
which show that they are not averse to using the influence 
of their members in guiding the affairs of State. 
No doubt the motives are excellent; but experience, as well 
as Scripture, teaches us that such power will be used dictatorially 
when once obtained. No man will be able to buy 
or sell (exchange) spiritual doctrines, when that power is 
at its zenith, except such as bear its stamp of approval or 
orthodox or evangelical "marks."— Rev. 13:16,17. 

THE SOCIAL VIEW. 



How strangely the affairs of earth sometimes move! 
For instance, the governments of Europe consider Socialism 
their most dangerous enemy, and yet the force of 
circumstances is impelling them to adopt socialistic measures. 
The increasing military armament makes necessary 
increased revenues. Europe imports little except the necessaries 
of life, and taxes on these cannot be increased; for 
it would bear too heavily upon the poor masses. It must, 
therefore, be gotten from the well-to-do. But how? There 
is great opposition there to class taxation such as an Income 
Tax; and the only way out of the difficulty is for 
the governments to take control of certain classes of manufacture 
and raise the additional revenues in the way of 
profits. And this is the essence of socialism— which claims 
that all the large business operations should be conducted 
by the government with the people's wealth, and for the 
benefit of the people. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., Chap. 4. 
R1845 : page 178 

France began the matter a long while ago in making 
of the tobacco business a very profitable government 
monopoly. She is now considering the advisability of 
monopolizing other branches of business. 

Germany has long operated many if not all of her 
railroads at a profit, and is looking about for some other 
profitable monopolies. 

Russia has been trying the liquor business for nearly a 
year in four of her provinces (much after the style of the 
South Carolina dispensary system), and has determined that it 
will be expedient and profitable to extend it. The Czar's 
ukase decrees that the system shall be extended to eight 
provinces on July 1, '96, and to seven other provinces by 
July 1, '97 and to the remainder of the empire by Jan. 1, 
'98. The object is claimed to be a decrease of drunkenness, 
and purer liquors; and it is claimed that these have been the 
results thus far. No doubt it is true that restrictions can be 
enforced by government-employed-and-paid liquor manufacturers 
and sellers, that could not be enforced amongst 
those directly interested in the profits. But undoubtedly 
the profit of the immense business is the chief reason for 
its being monopolized by the government. The report of 
the success of the scheme in Russia, together with recent 
reports that drunkenness is greatly on the increase throughout 
Europe, and their need for revenue, will doubtless lead 
the other nations of Europe to similarly monopolize the 
manufacture and sale of liquors. 

While this would doubtless be the way to regulate the 
evil, it will present the peculiar anomaly of so called 
"Christian nations" engaging in a disreputable business. 
Fancy the Czar, the head of the eighty millions of Greek 
Catholics, and the Kaiser, at the head of some forty millions 
of nominal Christians, providing them with whiskey, 
wine, beer, etc., in the name of God and as the representatives 
of Christ upon the thrones of "Christendom" 

R1846 : page 178 

(Christ's Kingdom). Fancy the signs— for instance, Emperor 

William III., by the grace of God, Exclusive Manufacturer 

and Seller of all Kinds of Intoxicants, to the Christian 

church-nation of Germany. Sarcastically this might 

be termed driving the devil out of the liquor business, and 

giving the monopoly of it to God. To such absurd conclusions 

do the erroneous claims of "Christendom" (that its 

rulers are of divine appointment and that in them is fulfilled 

the claim that the kingdoms of this world are become the 

kingdoms of our Lord and his anointed) lead. 



THE HEBREW VIEW. 



The Eighth Annual Conference of American Hebrew 
Rabbis was held this year in Rochester, N.Y., July 10-12. 
This is an attempt to harmonize Orthodox and Radical 
(infidel) Jews. Dr. Wise, the President of the Conference, 
declared that they had "abolished the barrier of circumcision. 
Another speaker (Dr. E. G. Hirsch) said, "If we 
can keep the old Sabbath, let us; but if we cannot keep it, 
let us have the new." With the Jews, as with others, there 
seems to be a desire for Union no matter what the sacrifice 
of faith or principle. 



The Woschod, a St. Petersburg organ of the Russian 
Jews, declares that Jerusalem will soon have a Jewish university. 
Students of all nationalities and all creeds will be 
admitted, but the rules will be in accordance with the Jewish 
ritual. The Semitic languages and Jewish literature 
will find special attention. The university is to be opened 
in 1897 in localities rented for the purpose, but a suitable 
building will be erected soon after, as the funds are in 
readiness. What is still needed is the permission of the 
Turkish government, and suitable teachers. 

This is one of the best evidences of Palestine's revival. 
It must, we believe, become socially elevated, and 
quite wealthy within less than twenty years, to permit the 
fulfillment of Ezek. 38:8,12,13, before A.D. 1915. 



R1846 :page 178 

THE TIME OF THY VISITATION. 



"And when he was come near, he beheld the city, and wept over it, 
saying, If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the 
things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from 
thine eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, that thine enemies 
shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and 
keep thee in on every side, and shall lay thee even with 
the ground, and thy children within thee; and they 
shall not leave in thee one stone upon another, because 
thou knewest not the time of thy visitation.'"— Luke 19:41-44. 

THE Lord's earthly ministry was fast nearing its close, 

as also was the time of Israel's special favor. To 

Israel first was the gospel of the new dispensation preached; 

and the privilege of preparing to enter the spiritual phase 

of the Kingdom of God was being withheld from the Gentiles 

to fulfil the promise of God to their fathers, that 



his special favor should be to them first— "to the Jew first, 
and afterward to the Gentile. "-Luke 24:46,47; Acts 13:46; 
3:26. 

In fulfilment of his promise God had greatly favored 
Israel, but chiefly in that to them were committed the 
oracles of God— the law and the testimony of God. (Rom. 3:2.) 
And by and by he sent to them prophets and wise 
men to remind them of their privileges and obligations, 
that at the appointed time they might be found worthy to 
enter into their inheritance. But they heeded not the 
prophets (Matt. 23:37), and so, last of all, God sent his 
Son. (Matt. 21:33-46.) And now, for three and a half 
years, the Son of God himself had been preaching to them 
the gospel of the Kingdom. But neither did they reverence 
his Son. They not only despised his teaching, but they 
also hated and reviled him, and were continually plotting 
against his life. 

In the midst of all this ingratitude and wickedness 
God had patiently borne with Israel, but now the time of 
retribution was close at hand. As a nation they had so 

R1846 : page 179 

hardened their hearts by continued perversity that, although 
according to the promises they were looking for and expecting 
the Messiah about that time, they were nevertheless 
unable to discern "the time of their visitation." The 
Messiah had come— born a Jew, of the lineage of David; 
his advent was announced by angel messengers with heavenly 
anthems of praise and benedictions; his anointing likewise 
received the divine testimony from heaven— "This is 
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." His claims 
and his teaching had received the most marked seal of divine 
approval and endorsement in the testimony of numerous 
and very public miracles, and his personal character and 
demeanor were such as to command the most profound respect 
and reverence of all men, even his enemies bearing 
witness to the grandeur of his character. "Never man 
spake like this man," said the officers who were sent to arrest 
him, but who could not, being overawed by the majesty 
of his presence. Many of the people said, "Of a truth 
this is the prophet." "Others said, This is the Christ. 
...When Christ cometh will he do more miracles than 
these which this man hath done?" And when Pilate 
thought to subdue the people when they clamored for his 
death, he brought him forth and said, "Behold the man!" 
—Should a man like that die? "I find no fault in him." 
Alas! so hard-hearted and consequently so blind had 
this people become, that they not only failed to recognize 
the time of their visitation, but they also conspired against 
the Lord to slay him. "He came unto his own and his 
own received him not;" he did "among them the works 
which none other man did," but they heeded not their 
testimony; "the light shined in the darkness, but the darkness 
comprehended it not;" the table of God's rich bounty 
was spread for them in vain, and because of their hardness 



of heart it became unto them "a snare and a trap." 

It was in view of this dreadful condition of heart which 
prevailed throughout the nation, and of the national crime 
which was even then contemplated and which should so 
soon be perpetrated by his people— "his own people" according 
to the flesh— and of the fearful retribution they 
were about to precipitate upon themselves, that Jesus wept 
over them and uttered the plaintive lamentation of our text, 
"If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, 
the things which belong unto thy peace." 

These words were not the demonstration of a merely 
selfish patriotism for his own nation according to the flesh, 
but the deep solicitude of a noble heart which grieved for 
a nation that failed so sadly to realize both its privileges 
and its degradation, and which therefore must soon receive 
the fearful visitation of divine wrath. 

Just here it will be profitable to note what constitutes 
a national sin, as illustrated in Israel. Their great national 
sin was the rejection and crucifixion of the anointed Son 
of God. On the part of the minority of the nation— the 
rulers and recognized teachers— the sin was active: they 
plotted and planned; they sought to catch him in his words 
and in some way to so entangle him as to find a legal cause 
against him; at different times they specially commissioned 
hirelings to arrest him; and finally they violently and publicly 
instigated an excited and clamorous mob against him. 
But on the part of the majority of the people the sin was 
passive, both in the rejection and in the crucifixion. They 
weakly failed to exercise their right of private judgment, 
and although often they heard him gladly, and hung upon 
his words, and said, Of a truth this must be the Christ, 
and on one occasion were even constrained to take him by 
force and make him their king, nevertheless they failed to 
act on their own convictions and dependently inquired, 
"Have any of the rulers or of the Pharisees believed on 
him?" They blindly submitted to their erring and blind 
leaders, and both together fell into the ditch. Thus the 
whole nation, except the remnant that believed, were either 
actively or passively involved in the great sin of the rejection 
and crucifixion of the Lord. 

There is a most potent lesson here for those weak and 
ignoble characters which think to shirk responsibility by 
indifference and passive acquiescence with popular errors. 
Both the active and the passive of the nation of Israel 
suffered alike the penalty of their national crime; for that 
which the Lord in the above words foretold soon came to 
pass. The siege of Jerusalem was one of the most appalling 
calamities. Their enemies stormed the city from without, 
cut off their supplies of food and drove them to all 
the horrors of famine, when parents actually killed and ate 
their own children; and added to all this were the terrors 
of civil war: every man's hand was against his neighbor. 
The punishment inflicted upon the nation extended, not 
only to the inhabitants of the capital city, but to the whole 
people, driving them out of their own land and scattering 
them as fugitives among all nations, never again to be reinstated 



until their King should come "a second time without 
a sin-offering unto salvation;" when their blindness 
shall be turned away and they shall say, "Blessed is he 
that cometh in the name of the Lord." But not until the 
fulness of the Gentiles shall have come into possession of 
the Kingdom which was first offered to, but was rejected 
by, them shall their blindness be turned away. The forfeiture 
of this chief favor, together with the calamities and 
persecution they have suffered ever since, is their national 
penalty. 
There is something touchingly beautiful in this expression 

R1847 :page 179 

of the Lord's sympathy for the blind and erring. What 

moral grandeur is this that could so triumph over vindictiveness 

and hate! What dignity and grace and glory! Lord, help 

thy children to "consider him who endured such contradiction 

of sinners against himself;" "who, when he was 

reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened 

not, but committed himself to him that judgeth righteously;" 

who seemed to forget the sting of persecution against 

himself in his deep sorrow and pity for the blindness and 

moral degradation of his persecutors. 

Hear him again: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that 
killest the prophets and stonest them which are sent unto 

R1847 :page 180 

thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, 
even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her 
wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you 
desolate; for I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth 
till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name 
of the Lord." How long the Lord waited to be gracious, 
how slow was he to wrath, and how plenteous in mercy! 
But, nevertheless, the reckoning day must come and the 
harvest of an evil sowing must be reaped. 

"If thou hadst known," O Israel, "the things that 
belong unto thy peace," how different would have been the 
consequences! But while we consider these words, we call 
to mind the fact that in all these things fleshly Israel 
was typical* of the whole nominal gospel church— "Christendom" 
—and see that these words of lamentation over 
their stumbling and fall apply with equal force, as the 
prophets also indicated, to Christendom— the nominal spiritual 
Israel, which, at this parallel point of time, the harvest 
of this age, similarly fails to recognize the time of her visitation, 
and which, in consequence, is about to precipitate 
upon herself "a time of trouble such as never was since 
there was a nation"— a trouble, therefore, even greater than 
that which befell fleshly Israel; and justly so, for her privileges 
and opportunities have been a thousand times greater. 

Again, therefore, we seem to hear the Master's voice 
saying, "If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this 
thy day, the things that belong unto thy peace." What 



things belong unto the peace of God's professedly consecrated 
people? It is nothing short of the fullest acceptance 
of Christ and his teachings, and obedience to them; for 
not the forgetful hearers, but the doers of the word are 
blessed. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, 
and all other things needful will be added. 

We rejoice to know that even as in the Jewish harvest 
there was a remnant who did know and follow the things 
that belonged to their peace, and who therefore received 
the end of their faith as joint-inheritors with the Lord of 
his Kingdom and glory, so now also there is a believing 
and faithful remnant out of nominal spiritual Israel which 
discerns the time of her visitation. Yes, some of us have 
learned the things that belong unto our peace; and consequently, 
in the midst of the threatened dangers and commotion 
that even now begin to distress Christendom in 
every department of its life— civil, social, financial and religious 
—the peace of God, which passeth the understanding 
of all those who do not possess it, keeps our hearts. 

Praise the Lord for his keeping power! His truth is 
our shield and buckler; and beyond the tempest which, according 
to the sure word of prophecy, we know must soon 
come, we see the glory of the established Kingdom— the 
Kingdom of light and peace. As the Lord said to his early 
disciples, so now he says to us, "Blessed are your eyes, for 
they see, and your ears; for they hear; for verily I say unto 
you, that many prophets and righteous men have desired 
to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; 
and to hear those things which ye hear and have not heard 
them;" for verily the Master himself hath caused us to sit 
down to meat and hath come forth and served us, according 
to his promise. 

Meanwhile all the elements of strife and discord which 
shall eventuate in the predicted and unparalleled trouble 
are in active operation; and, as the time approaches, the 
distress of nations, and of individuals as well, rapidly increases. 
In our view of the civil, social, financial and religious 
situation of Christendom to-day, we have called 
attention to some of these things, and our readers, we trust, 
are sufficiently awake to the signs of the times to note 
many more. 

In religion, as vital godliness has declined, the forms 
of godliness have multiplied, and the people mistake the 
show for reality. Disregarding their right and duty of 
private judgment, they blindly follow their blind leaders, 
as did their Jewish prototypes; and, like them, they are also 
destined ere long to stumble into the ditch together. 
Now, as then, the harvest message comes through unexpected 
and unpretentious channels, and the masses of professed 
Christians, who fail to rightly estimate their personal responsibility 
and weakly lean upon their leaders, ignobly 
surrender their personal liberty and inquire, Have any of 
the priests or reverend doctors of divinity or theological 
professors, etc., believed on him? thinking thereby also to 
shirk their own personal responsibility. But their passive 
submission to the popular current, which is strongly set 



against the Lord and his truth, the active agents in which 
are the very priests and reverend doctors and theological 
professors to whom they look, all heedless of the Prophet's 
warning (Isa. 28:7,8; 29:11,12), will no more shield them 
from personal responsibility and from the impending trouble 
than did such passive submission shield the masses of fleshly 
Israel from the tribulation that involved them all, leaders 
and followers alike. 

Such being the religious condition in Christendom, it 
is no matter of surprise that political, social and financial 
conditions are influenced by it. The great increase of light 
on all subjects, incident to this "day of preparation" for 
the great change of dispensation, has quickened thought and 
activity in every direction, and the listless, sleepy, pleasure-loving 
Church, intoxicated with the spirit of the world 
(Isa. 28:7), has been unable to help men to realize the true 
import of all these things; it has failed to center the attention 
of the people upon Christ and his coming kingdom 
and the signs of its approach, or to win their hearts to him 
and his blessed law of love and justice. Consequently 
strife, selfish ambition and general discontent and unrest 
prevail everywhere, and the dire results are felt in social, 
political and financial circles to such an extent that great 
fear of impending catastrophe is more and more taking hold 
upon all minds. 

How rapidly events are marching toward the predicted 
culmination! Let those whose anointed eyes behold 
with joy the providence of God in permitting the adverse 
winds to rise and then controlling them so as to make them 
eventually work out his own good purposes, rejoice; yet rejoice 
with trembling, for neither have we yet reached the goal 
nor stood all the tests of faithfulness and endurance which 
must prove our worthiness to enter in to the final joy of our 
Lord. Let us be sober, and watch unto prayer. 



■^See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. vii. 



R1847 :page 181 

TRACT SOCIETY'S INTRODUCTORY LETTERS. 



FT has been decided best to recall all of the Introductory 
Letters issued under the auspices of ZION'S WATCH 
TOWER TRACT SOCIETY, and to issue no more of them. 

ZION'S WATCH TOWER TRACT SOCIETY is only a business 
association (has no creed or confession). It merely 
represents a fund entrusted to its officers for use to the best 
of their judgment in the spread of the Truth;— especially 
of those truths set forth in MILLENNIAL DAWN and ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, by means of which many of the donors 



have been brought, by God's mercy, out of darkness into 

his marvelous light. The funds donated are used under 

the direction of the Editor (who is President of the Tract 

Society), just as they were used before the Society was organized. 

It was chartered at the request of some of the 

friends and contributors with a view to the continuance of 

the "harvest" work should the Editor die before the end 

of the "harvest." 

This Society, therefore, would have the same right as 
any other business firm to give a Letter of Introduction to any 
one it might think worthy. But we find that the very word 
"Society" is liable to be misunderstood by some to mean 
Church; and that some are in danger of regarding this 
Society's Letters of Introduction as if they were Commissions, 
Authorizations or Ordination papers. We discontinue 
these Letters because we wish to "avoid the very appearance 
of evil," as the Word teaches. 

Neither one man, nor many men unitedly, can either 
give or take away from anyone authority to preach in the 
name of the Lord. God only can give such authority; and 
he alone could cancel it. He has given this authority to 
all his people, saying: "He that hath my word let him 
speak my word." We sought specially to guard against 
such an idea as that the Letters of Introduction were letters 
of authority, and the Letters themselves state this most 
explicitly; but since they are misunderstood by some, they 
might later on come to be misunderstood by many. 
Hence they are recalled before they can do harm. Indeed, 
they may do good by leading to this emphatic calling of 
attention to God's as the only competent authorization; 
and the pointing out afresh that ZION'S WATCH TOWER 
TRACT SOCIETY is not a religious but a business association. 
It makes no creeds; it merely keeps accounts of the moneys 
received and expended; just as a banking firm receives 
deposits and returns checks or vouchers showing what was 

R1848 :page 181 

done with the money. It makes no demands, nor assessments, 
nor does it beg or importune for money. It merely 
gives notice that it is ready to receive and use, as wisely as 
possible, whatever money may be sent by the interested 
ones, who have been helped out of Satan's darkness into 
the sunlight of God's loving plan by its aid. 

But what shall we do to shield the flock from some 
who have left the truth of which the ransom is the foundation? 
Well, the "sheep" are, very properly, learning to 
be on guard against "wolves in sheep's clothing," and must 
be all the more on guard and receive not every spirit. They 
must all the more carefully watch against the wiles of the 
devil. Let them remember that the true spirit is— 

(1) "First pure, then peaceable." And let them beware 
of any and all coarseness, vulgarity or other uncleanness 
or impurity, in word, act or personal appearance. 

(2) Let them remember that the spirit of Christ is 
never without meekness and gentleness. A contentious, 



quarrelsome, rude, selfish spirit is a sure indication that 
the one possessing it is not fit to be a teacher even or 
"babes in Christ." But specially beware of some who are 
hypocritically smooth and meek and who engender doubts, 
suspicions, fears, and destroy faith and confidence with 
feigned love and tears. The openly contentious are far 
less dangerous than these wolves in sheep's clothing. 

(3) Reject instantly and have no fellowship or communion 
with any who either openly deny the merit of 

Christ's work as our ransom-price, or who do so by the 
sophistry of their arguments, while professing to hold 
to the ransom, upon which they put a false meaning, 
ignoring the true meaning of the word ransom, Gr. antilutron, 
—a corresponding price. Such errors although the 
worst and most destructive are easiest of all to "prove"— 
a moment or two will suffice; then act on the true principle 
and have no fellowship with them, and investigate no further. 

(4) The outward proofs of character may be satisfactory, 
and the first applied tests of doctrine— faith in 

Christ as a savior from sin and its penalty, by a ransom,— 
may be quickly made; but then comes a further criticism. 
For we are not to "swallow" even the less important teachings 
of any except as we find them to be in harmony with 
God's Word. Unless you are absolutely sure of them, 
turn and look at the connections of any Scriptures quoted 
to prove any new point. Accept only such views of Scripture 
passages as agree well with the context. Many are 
susceptible to error through neglect of this rule. 

(5) While "preaching" is one of the very best 
methods for giving and receiving instruction, it is only 
proper for such as have some natural ability in that direction. 
Others should be encouraged to serve in other ways, 

each "according to his several ability." (Matt. 25:15.) 

Some who are not platform speakers are excellent otherwise, 

"apt to teach," and should be appreciated and used in 

Bible Class talks. And even an orator should not be encouraged 

unless he have an aptness for teaching— an ability 

to make matters clear, and not as some to use fine language 

and yet only confuse the hearers. With small groups 

"Parlor talks" and "Bible Class" studies are in our 

judgment preferable to set sermons. 

(6) Even if there be a recognized "preacher" in 

the company, there should be, if possible weekly, a meeting 
at which all could be heard, on the lines of propositions 
1, 2, 3 and 4 above;— a Bible-Study class. 

(7) There should be, if possible, one meeting per week 
for prayer, praise and testimony— a meeting not for doctrinal 
discussion but for spiritual exercise and enjoyment, and for 
self inspection and mutual helpfulness in holy things. 

(8) The congregations established by the apostles 
appear to us to have had both the Congregational and the 
Episcopal features. 

The Congregational feature is seen in that each congregation 
had the control of its own affairs under the Lord, 
its head, to whom alone it was responsible; and each regulated 
its own ministry. 



The Episcopal feature is seen in the fact that it was 
understood and expected that the Lord, the great 
Shepherd of his sheep, would provide pastors, teachers, etc., 
for the perfecting of the saints for the work of the ministry. 
(Eph. 4:11-13.) The congregations looked for the Lord's 
providential leading in this matter, yet were not unmindful 
that there were many false teachers raised up by the adversary, 
and they sought to prove their teachers. 

When, and so long as, teachers were recognized as 
having been God-provided, and so long as they approved 
themselves by conduct and the Word of God, to the congregation, 
they had more honor than others; and their 
opinions were given proportionately the more weight. 
(1 Tim. 5:17; Heb. 13:17; Rom. 12:10; 13:7.) But still 

R1848 :page 182 

the power rested with the congregation to reject any teacher 
according to their judgment of the Word and will of God. 

(9) Love is the only bond of perfectness— the perfect 
bond. Neither bind yourselves nor others with any other 
bond. Love supreme to God will mean that loyalty to his 
Word will outrank all other considerations; love for the 
brethren will mean a generous readiness to see as many as 
possible of each other's virtues and talents and to seek for 
each other's highest spiritual welfare— whatever the channel. 

(10) Avoid all "organization"; meet as a family of 
God; recognize as "brethren" all who profess forgiveness 
of sins through faith in the precious blood and who show 
by their daily life that they are "striving against sin"; and 
choose your honored servants from your midst. In choosing 
seek not your own will or glory, neither that of other 
brethren, but the will and glory of God only, remembering 
the foregoing considerations as you find them Scriptural. 

Should the Editor have occasion to send any special 
messenger to you he will probably give him his personal 
letter of commendation. (The giving of such letters is 
usual among friends whether Christians or of the world. 
But every child of God should feel a special responsibility 
as to whom he recognizes as friends or introduces to God's 
people as teachers.) If a Brother come to you bearing 
such a letter signed by the Editor, you may know that he is 
one with whom the Editor is well acquainted, and who he 
believes has some special talents for serving to you the 
bread of life. 



R1848 :page 182 

CONSECRATION VS. THE WORLD AND ITS AFFAIRS. 



A BROTHER, once very deep in Secretism, and 

who knows that the Editor has had no such experience, 



writes as follows:— 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your remarks under caption 
of Secret and Beneficial Societies in TOWER, of June 15, 
'95, seem rather funny to me. You hit the nail very fairly 
considering that you were hammering so much in the dark. 
I am glad that you defend the principle of protection as 
afforded by legitimate or old line companies, life, fire and 
accident. With you, however, I think their days are numbered. 
No human business was ever organized with broader 
and more philanthropic intentions than Insurance, and no 
business has been so abused and diverted from its real purposes. 
When Insurance fails (as it has failed) from the effect of selfishness, 
we can not hope that any human work will succeed. 

As to the secret societies, they use a ritual applicable 
to each different degree, which is fully as reasonable as that 
of many of the churches, and like those of the churches, it 
is usually of heathen origin. The worship of the Sun appears 
prominently in Masonry, and so it does in the service 
of the Catholic and Episcopal churches. The term "Worshipful," 
as used in masonry, is now practically obsolete, 
but was formerly and generally used as a term of respect. I 
occupied the station of "Worshipful Master" for three 
years, but I never received the adoration of my fellow mortals, 
and I certainly never gave it to others. Your suggestion, 
that it is done ignorantly, is a good suggestion, but it 
does not apply in that case. Perhaps no man in my state, 
during the twenty odd years I was a member of the fraternity, 
gave more careful study to the symbolism of Masonry, 
its moral teaching, and its jurisprudence. 

While masonry does not inculcate the worship of its 
officers, it does what is worse; for in its essence the symbolism 
used in the ceremonies are derived from devil worship. 

Although no longer unequally yoked with those unbelievers 
(2 Cor. 6:14-17), I do want to say for those who 
are still in the bondage that they have much excuse. Masonry 
consists very largely in a series of moral instructions, 
taught agreeably to ancient usage, by types, symbols and 
allegorical figures. It is a system, and a very beautiful 
system— as is very much of Satan's work— when seen from 
the worldly standpoint. 

Your fellow-worker in the best (not the worst) of bonds. 



Another Brother writes:— 

"Masonry is not Christianity; and he who is so deluded 
as to think it is, is led thereby into a labyrinth of 
grievous errors. I think I know what I am talking about, 
for I was for seven years 'Master' of a 'Lodge,' and conferred 
hundreds of degrees. Masonry will not take away 
sins, or save a soul from death; and it is a grave question 
whether or not a child of God has any business spending time 
and money in any worldly institution. There is nothing 
pure that is earthly, but purity comes down from above." 



R1849 : page 182 

An interested Brother writes us as follows:— 

I send in this letter a check for Five Dollars to be 
spent in the Lord's work. 

May I offer a suggestion? I wish very much that the 
TOWER would contain an article on entire consecration. I 
know many of the articles in the TOWER have that thought 
as their basis, but I feel that the Lord is testing us, and that 
an article of that kind would help us. 

When we have consecrated our all to God, I believe 
our all comprises whatever we have— time, money, strength, 
everything. Now I think we (at least, some of us) fail to 
see what a great privilege we could have, in being permitted 
to help spread this blessed gospel of joy and hope in the 
Lord and the resurrection from the dead. We are poor in 
this world's goods, but we can give a little; and that mite 
I think should be used in the Master's service. One of the 
sisters, a dear, good woman, was speaking, a short time since, 
about an organization, known as the A. P. A., and declared 
her belief in its principles and her intention of contributing 
to its support. I was much surprised, as she had just symbolized 
her consecration by immersion. I tried to show her that, 
even if nothing could be said against the order from an 
earthly standpoint, she was running for the prize of the 
high calling; that her health, time, money and all the other 
blessings she enjoys come from and belong to the Lord, 
and should be used in his service; that we are dead to this 
world, its pursuits, enjoyments, hopes, organizations; and 
that if we give money or influence to support worldly things, 
we are not living up to our consecration. 

I believe in the truth as revealed to us to-day, and am 
blessed in being permitted to see clearly the plan of God. 

REPLY.— This letter itself is quite a good expression upon 
the subject of consecration. Other expressions on the subject 
will be found in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., pp. 233-239, 
346-349; VOL. III., pp. 208-210; and others in ZION'S 
WATCH TOWER, May 15, '93, p. 153; Feb. 1, '94, pp. 38-40; etc. 



A young Brother recently interested inquires: Do you 
think it is proper for the saints to use tobacco? We reply: 
Tobacco is not specifically condemned in the Bible; 

R1849 : page 183 

though the principle of discarding every defiling, abominable 
thing is distinctly taught; and therefore every Christian 
is privileged to spend as much money for it and to eat 
and smoke as much of it as he sincerely believes will do him 
good, physically and spiritually, and result to the Lord's 
glory— "Whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do," 
it should be done with an eye single to the Lord's glory. 
-1 Cor. 10:31; Col. 3:17; Matt. 6:22. 



The Apostle says (2 Cor. 7:1), "Having therefore these 
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all 
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the 
fear of God." Speaking for myself, and I believe that this 
is also the judgment of all faithful Christians who have to 
any extent put in practice the Apostle's words, I would say 
that I cannot see how it would be to God's glory, or to his 
own profit, for any Christian to use tobacco in any form. 
He "that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as 
he is pure." (1 John 3:3.) We cannot imagine our Lord 
reeking with the fumes of tobacco or putting into his mouth 
anything defiling. 



R1849 : page 183 

THE BRAZEN SERPENT. 

--AUG. ll.-NUM. 21:4-9.- 



Golden Text— "As Moses lifted up the serpent in the 
wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up." 
-John 3:14.- 

THE incident of this lesson needs no additional words 
of explanation. Its full import is brought before 
us in the Golden Text. The fiery serpents represented sin, 
whose bite is deadly. "The sting of death is sin;" and 
"the wages of sin is death." In sending Israel relief, God 
foreshadowed the greater relief he would afterward send to 
mankind in general,— Christ the sinners' ransom-price. 

The serpent was of brass (literally, copper), which is a 
type of the human nature.* God thus declared in type 
that the man Christ Jesus would be lifted up upon the cross 
as our sin-offering, as it is written, "He [Jehovah, the 
heavenly Father] made him who knew no sin to be a sin-offering 
for us, that we might be made the righteousness of 
God in him." (2 Cor. 5:21.) "God so loved the world 
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth 
in him should not perish but have everlasting life." 
(John 3:16.) As Israel looked to the brazen serpent for 
healing, so must all the sin-bitten children of men look to 
Christ, the sin-offering, for healing from sin and death. 
Christ took the sinners place; he bore the full penalty of 
our sins; his flesh (his humanity) he gave for the life of the 
world. Wherefore, he was also highly exalted to a nature 
superior to the human which he had sacrificed, even to the 
divine nature, and given a name which is above every name, 
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow. (John 6:51; 
Isa. 53:5,6; Phil. 2:7-11.) Thus we view him, not 
only as our Redeemer, but also as our exalted Lord with 
power and authority not only to deliver us from the sleep 
of death but also to train and discipline all the willing and 
obedient up to perfection of character and fitness for 
eternal life. 



The result of the lifting up of Christ will eventually be 
the drawing of all men unto him. "And I, if I be lifted up 
from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said 
signifying what death he should die." (John 12:32,33.) 
Yes; it will be the power of the cross of Christ, it will be 
the love of Christ and of God there manifested, that will 
be the drawing power upon the hearts of men when, by and 
by in his glorious reign, and after the great tribulation of 
this evil day shall have sealed its instruction upon the hearts 
of men, making them more humble and teachable, all his 
goodness and grace shall be brought into effectual operation. 

It would be a great mistake, however, to confound this 
drawing power of the cross of Christ which will by and by 
be realized by all men, with the statement of John 6:37,44,45 
—"All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and 
him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.... No 
man can come to me except the Father which hath sent me 
draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day. It is 
written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of 
God. Every man therefore that hath heard and hath learned 
of the Father, cometh unto me." 

The class here referred to is not the whole world 
drawn by the power of the cross in the age to come, but a 
special class now being selected out from among the world 
by the Spirit of God through his word of truth and given 
to Christ as his peculiar treasure— his bride and joint-heir. 
In the provisions of his wonderful plan God has thus given 
to Christ all the loyal, consecrated, faithful ones of the 
Gospel age. They are his, his jewels, called of God to be 
joint-heirs with him of his glory and kingdom. Had they 
not been thus called of God and in his plan given to Christ, 
they could not of themselves have grasped such an honor. 
To have done so would have been the height of presumption. 
Their exaltation is therefore of God's own appointment: 
"they are called and faithful and chosen;" and 
they are all taught of God— led by his spirit through his 
word of truth. 

And Christ here expresses his pleasure to receive all 
such according to the divine appointment; and he will raise 
them up at the last day— the glorious day of his return and 
the setting up of his Kingdom in the earth— the day, thank 
God, which even now begins to dawn. 



*See TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

R1849 : page 183 

THE NEW HOME IN CANAAN. 

-AUG. 18.-DEUT. 6:3-15.- 

Golden Text— "Thou shalt bless the Lord thy God for 



the good land which he hath given thee."— Deut. 8:10. 

AFTER the forty years' sojourn of Israel in the wilderness 
they were now again on the borders of 
the promised land and about to enter it. All the rebellious 
adult generation had died. Only Joshua and Caleb and 
Moses remained; and even Moses, though faithful and loyal 
to God to the highest degree, could not enter the land of 
promise, because in presumptuously and without authority 
smiting a second time the rock whence flowed the water of 
life, instead of merely speaking to the rock as he was directed, 
he committed a sin which typified the sin unto 
death. The rock represented Christ who was smitten once 
for the world's benefit; but those who would crucify the 
Son of God afresh and again put him to an open shame 
shall not enter into the Canaan of the heavenly rest. 
Moses did not really commit that sin, but his presumptuous 
act being a type of it, he could not enter into Canaan, but 

R1849 : page 184 

must die in the wilderness, though he had come to the very 
borders and in sight of the goodly heritage. 

How solemn this lesson to the Church for whose instruction 
those types were made! Yes, we may come even 
to the borders of the glorious inheritance of the saints; 
and not only so, but we may also lead others there, and yet 

R1850 : page 184 

ourselves be castaways and die the second death, if we cease 

to recognize the one all-sufficient sacrifice of Christ our Redeemer 

and Lifegiver. 

Probably Moses knew nothing of the typical significance 
of the penalty of his rash act; but without a word of 
complaint he accepted the chastening of the Lord and made 
diligent haste to accomplish the work of the Lord for Israel 
before he should lie down to rest. There is a touching 
sweetness as well as a grandeur of nobility in the devotion 
of Moses to the Lord and to his work for Israel. When 
God bade him made ready to ascend the Mount to view 
the promised land and there to lie down and die alone, 
apart from all he had loved and labored for so long, Moses' 
only reply was an expression of deep concern for Israel— 
"And Moses spake unto the Lord, saying, Let the Lord, 
the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation, 
...that the congregation of the Lord be not 
as sheep which have no shepherd." (Num. 27:12-17.) And 
God regarded his request and appointed Joshua to succeed 
his beloved servant Moses. 

Then Moses diligently applied himself to the completion 
of his work, giving his fatherly counsel to his beloved 
people in whose interests he had sacrificed every earthly 
good and for whom he had endured hardness— incessant 
toil and care and privation and reproach and weariness and 
vexation of spirit for forty eventful years. How tender 



and wise his counsel! In it all there is no vaunting of self, 
no boasting of his own faithfulness; but there are strong 
and earnest words of exhortation, encouragement, instruction 
and advice, the account of which read in the entire 
book of Deuteronomy. 

If we read these memorable words so full of wisdom 
and counsel, forgetful of their import to the Church also, 
the antitypes of fleshly Israel, and merely as items of Jewish 
history, we miss discerning the very object of their record. 
"They are written for our admonition upon whom the ends 
of the world [the present evil world] are come." (1 Cor. 10:11.) 
Consider a few of these comforting thoughts in the 
light in which they shine to us, the spiritual antitypical Israel 
of God, to whom the promises and exhortations spoken 
directly to fleshly Israel apply in a wider and fuller sense. 

Deut. 4:23,24,30-40.— "Take heed unto yourselves, 
lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God;... 
for the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous 
God. [See also Heb. 12:29; 10:31.] If thou turn to the 
Lord thy God, and shalt be obedient unto his voice,... 
he will not forsake thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget 
the covenant of thy fathers which he sware unto them [the 
Abrahamic covenant, of which the Gospel Church, as the 
spiritual seed of Abraham, are the chief inheritors.— Rom. 9:8; 
Gal. 3:29]. For ask now of the days that are past, 
...since the day that God created man upon the earth, 
and ask from the one side of heaven unto the other, whether 
there hath been any such thing as this great thing is [which 
God hath done for his spiritual Israel], or hath been heard 
like it? Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking 
out of the midst of the fire [out of the glorious manifestations 
of his adorable presence with the church] as thou hast 
heard, and live? Or hath God assayed to go and take him 
a nation from the midst of another nation by proofs, by 
signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand 
and a stretched-out arm, and by great terrors like all that 
the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes? 
[While in those days no wonders were greater than those 
wrought on behalf of fleshly Israel, they are eclipsed by the 
greater wonders wrought on behalf of spiritual Israel in 
their emancipation from the bondage of sin, and in their 
wonderful leading through all their wilderness way, beset 
as they have been by foes without and within, hotly pursued 
by Satan and tempted, tried and persecuted as they have 
been. What a miracle of grace is every child of God!]" 

The text of this lesson is an exhortation to love and 
loyalty and obedience to God, and to steadfastness in his 
service. Let us ponder its propositions carefully, and let 
them sink deep into our hearts. 

"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God is one Lord: 
and thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, 
and with all thy soul, and with all thy might." It is not 
a mere passing sentiment of appreciation that the Lord desires 
of us: it is all-absorbing love that he desires— a love 
which delights in God, which meditates upon his law and 
strives patiently, and at the cost of any sacrifice, to please 



him. Such love is not natural to us: we must strive for it, 
pray for it and daily and hourly cultivate it. 

Through Moses the Lord indicates how we should endeavor 
to cultivate this love. It is by meditating upon his 
just and holy law, his precepts and instructions which manifest 
to us the glory of his character. Hear him: "And 
these words, which I command thee this day, shall be in 
thine heart, and thou shalt teach them diligently unto thy 
children, and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine 
house, and when thou walkest by the way, and when thou 
liest down, and when thou risest up. And thou shalt bind 
them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be as frontlets 
between thine eyes. And thou shalt write them upon the 
posts of thy house, and on thy gates." 

The Christian who abandons the daily reading of the 
Word of God and meditation upon its precepts is not a 
growing Christian. The precepts and promises of God are 
very rich; but they have no sweetness to the soul that does 
not keep them ever fresh before the mind and delight himself 
in them, and shape all his course in life in strict adherence 
to the principles therein set forth. Let us say with 
the Psalmist: "With my whole heart have I sought thee 
[Lord], O let me not wander from thy commandments. 
Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin 
against thee. "-Psa. 119:10,11. 

Then let us weigh well the counsel of verses 10-12, as 
the principle applies to us with double force. "And it shall 
be when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the 
land which he sware unto thy fathers,... to give thee great 
and goodly cities which thou buildedst not, and houses full 
of all good things which thou filledst not, and wells digged 
which thou diggedst not, vineyards and olive trees which 
thou plantedst not; when thou shalt have eaten and be full; 
then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee 
forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage." 
Beloved, shall the goodness of God ever cause us ungratefully 
to forget him? Many indeed are the forgetful recipients 
of his favors. How much of the divine bounty in 
spiritual things has been accorded to the children of God; 
yet even these blessings misused may be turned into a curse. 
The light misused may turn to darkness, and then, how 
great is that darkness! (Matt. 6:23.) If to serve the flesh 
we make merchandise of the truth received, ere long that 
inestimable blessing becomes our accuser before God and we 
are borne out of the light into the outer darkness. And 
those who thus go after other gods which their own perverse 
wills set up are liable to the penalty of verse 15 which, in 
its application to the reprobates from spiritual Israel, corresponds 
to the faithful warnings of the Apostle Paul in Heb. 6:4-8 
and 10:26-31. 



page 185 

VOL. XVI. AUGUST 15, 1895. No. 16. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: Method of Service, Etc 186 

Views from the Tower 187 

"With What Body do they Come?" 188 

The General Resurrection 189 

The Resurrection of Damnation 190 

The Resurrection of the Just 191 

"Shall Never Die." 193 

"We shall be Like Him." 194 

Bible Study: Crossing the Jordan 196 

Bible Study: The Fall of Jericho 196 

page 186 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1852:page 186 

HOW SOME DO AND OTHERS MAY SERVE. 

Many who are tied down by family duties, or other hindrances, so 
that they cannot go forth giving all their time and strength in the spread 
of the truth, ask us to suggest methods of service. 

You already know of the wonderful privilege you have in the 
"Silent Ministry" of tract distribution, in which all to a greater or less 
extent can engage;— at hotels, depots, conventions, on Circus-day in small 
towns, and at a little distance from churches on Sundays. To have free, 
for the asking, all the tracts you can judiciously use, is a rare privilege; 
and to have tracts which present the truth, is another rare privilege. 

You already know what opportunities for testifying to the real 
"second blessing" are afforded by the various "Prayer Meetings," 
"Class Meetings," "Christian Endeavor Meetings;" and how "a word 
in season" and the gift of a tract or loan of a DAWN has helped many 
a poor sheep "out of darkness into the marvelous light" of God's truth. 

But now we call to your attention two other methods of service. 



(1) Every now and then some of the "blind leaders of the blind," 
fearing that some of their followers may see the light of the Millennial 
Dawn, publish in their town paper an attack upon it. What they cannot 
refute, they feel free to slander and misrepresent, or else to treat 
sarcastically. It does not require great skill to show their misrepresentations, 
point out their sophistry, and in a few words tell how much your 

own heart has been blessed, and your own life made happier and holier, 
by the truth, and to commend it to others;— and then ask the same Editor 
to publish your reply. Offer to loan the DAWN to whoever will read it, as the 
surest way to convince them that its teachings have been misrepresented. 
Send us a marked copy of the paper containing your article, and the addresses 
of all who apply for the book on loan in reply to your offer. 

(2) Another excellent method is to make note of addresses of 
specially good, reverent, honest people and write to them of your hope 
that they like yourself are God's children and truth-seekers; ask whether 
they have ever read The Plan of the Ages; tell them what assistance 

it has rendered you, in the study of God's Word and plan; mention its 
low price, and offer to loan it to them if they are not situated so that 
they can purchase it; and enclose one tract in your letter, selected for 
being most in harmony with their article which you commend. If any 
points in their article must be criticised, do it as gently as possible. 

R1852:page 186 

EPISCOPALEANS AND SALOONS. 

The Anglican Synod which closed its session in Toronto, Canada, 
June 18, has control of certain property which it leases for the manufacture 
and sale of intoxicating liquors. Some objected to this being 
longer continued and the matter was put to a vote in which the majority 
decided that the practice be continued, and it is continued. 

During the discussion, as reported in the secular press, the "Hon. 
S. H. Blake declared that God's church should not do the devil's business. 
Such a policy defeats its own objects. The church ought not to 
take the devil into partnership and defend liquor licenses on the miserably 
low ground of dollars and cents." 

A London journal says that for eighteen years the Rev. Osbert 
Mordaunt, a Church of England clergyman, has been the proprietor of a 
"public house" at Hampton Lucy, Warwickshire. He keeps a salaried 
manager to attend to the liquor business, and devotes the profits to local 
improvements. 

What think you is the Lord's judgment of such business done in 
his name and for his glory? 



R1851 :page 187 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE recent onslaught of the Chinese upon the missionaries 
in certain parts of China, and the general feeling 
against them in all parts, gives force to the remarks of 
Rev. E. R. Donehoo of Pittsburg, who has for a long time 



been identified with Chinese missions in the United States. 
In an interview, published in the public press, July 29, he 
said— "He believes the efforts to convert Chinese from 
Paganism are futile; that although Chinamen go to Sunday 
School and seem to take an interest in the Christian religion 
and even profess Christianity, yet they cling to their heathen 
ideas and ceremonies." "Mr. Donehoo is looked upon 
as the leader and adviser of the resident Chinese, and has 
formed his opinion after years of experience and study." 

If this be true, if Christianity has no influence on these 
people who constitute so large a proportion of earth's population, 
what hope has Rev. Donehoo for the conversion of 
the world? In what manner does he propose that every 
knee shall be made to bow and every tongue to confess 
Jesus Christ? How will he expect to see fulfilled the prayer 
of our Lord— "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on 
earth even as it is done in heaven?" 

We have long seen that the task which Christians have 
set for themselves— to convert the world and make of it God's 
Kingdom— is a hopeless one. After more than eighteen centuries 
not only is there but a fragment of the world Christianized, 
but many, yea, the majority of those who bear the name 
of Christ have evidently neither part nor lot in the matter; 
and like some of old are twofold more the children of destruction 
than they were before.— Matt. 23:15. 

Surely, Mr. Donehoo and all others, seeing their own 
impotency to fulfil the promises of God, should begin to inquire 
for the Bringing Back of the King. The eyes of their 
understanding should quickly see that in him is the only 
hope of victory over Satan, sin, ignorance and degradation. 

One great difficulty in the way of such is the false view 
of the King and the Kingdom, presented to them by Pre-millennialists; 
—that Christ will come again in the flesh 
and with his Church in the flesh set up a fleshly Kingdom. 
Here is the opportunity for all whose eyes are open to the 
correct view of the subject to show, to all who have ears to 
hear, that the Kingdom of God cometh not with outward 
show, neither shall any say, Lo, here! or lo, there! for it will 
be in their midst, a spiritual, invisible, powerful Kingdom, 
like that of the present "Prince of this world," Satan, 
except that its objects and methods will be right and pure 
and good, and its servants the servants of righteousness. 

Discourage the hopes some are building upon Communistic 
Colonies, etc., all of which will certainly fail; 
and encourage them to look beyond the enveloping great 
and general trouble, which will completely destroy present 
institutions, to the new order of things which will be established 
in the hands of the seen agents and representatives 
of the coming Kingdom— "Abraham, Isaac and Jacob 
and all the prophets."— See Luke 13:28; Psa. 45:16. 

SOCIAL AND FINANCIAL VIEW. 



Ten suicides in one day, in London, is the sad record 



for July 27, '95, never before equaled. But statistics show 
that the number of suicides is largely on the increase. 
One lesson to us is, that notwithstanding the greater 
advantages and opportunities of life every way, over all 
past times, yet the poor human family is still and increasingly 
a "groaning creation." Their groans and pains are 
often directly and indirectly the result of sin reigning in 
them and producing discontent. Perhaps pride or ambition 
have utterly failed to attain foolish or sinful aims; or perhaps 
after attaining have failed and have wrecked the little 
emptiness which filled the soul. 

R1851 :page 188 

Well has the Apostle said to Christians that "Godliness 
with contentment is great gain." And we might add 
that the godliness which does not bring contentment is of 
little value, and not likely to last. We do not mean the 
contentment of sloth and indolence; but the intelligent 
contentment which springs from full confidence in the 
Lord's love, wisdom and power to cause all things to work 
for good to those who devotedly love him. Such have the 
peace of God to rule their hearts and can sing:— 

"Content whatever lot I see 

Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 

They alone in the storms of life can lift up their heads and 
hearts and rejoicing sing:— 

"My Lord how full of sweet content 
My years of pilgrimage are spent! 
Could I be cast where thou art not, 
That were indeed a dreadful lot. 

"While place we seek or place we shun 
The soul finds happiness in none; 
But with our God to guide our way 
'Tis equal joy to go or stay." 



Business prosperity has suddenly returned to the 
United States to the great relief of many who for some 
time have been finding it difficult to hold on to life and its 
necessities. WATCH TOWER readers have been pinched 
considerably, for amongst them are not many great or rich. 
About 5,000 have been unable to even pay for their TOWER. 
The colporteurs too, who have found it difficult to pay their 
ways during the past year and a half are doing better now, 
and we rejoice with them. 

Of course the Tract Fund suffered too, but we refrained 
from mentioning the fact lest it should cause pain to some 
who have been unable to do all that their hearts had hoped 
in the beginning of the year; and lest some should strain 
themselves or deny themselves life's necessities in order to 



have a share in this service. Indeed now that the pressure 
is easing up we may say to the praise of our Lord that he 
has supplied the necessities of the work most wonderfully, 
—from one source or another: hundreds of thousands of 
tracts have been printed and shipped to all parts of the 
world; and MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., in Swedish 
and in Danish are nearly ready. 

At the beginning of the year we feared that we should 
be unable to keep Brother McPhail on the road continuously: 
but as the reports of his visits showed them to be 
profitable to the Lord's flock spiritually, and as the Lord 
continued to supply the means, he has been continued; and 
now we have in view another traveling representative, 
hoping to add thereby to our Lord's glory and to your spiritual 
prosperity. Remember that the Tract Society's "pilgrims" 
never solicit money and never take up collections. 



The revival of business will be unfavorable to some. Be on 
your guard; and be not overcharged with the cares of this life. 

Some seem to forget that present prosperity is as much 
in line with our expectations and expositions of Scripture 
as were the adverse times. We have repeatedly pointed 
out that the "pangs" of trouble will grow more sharply 
severe and more frequent until the birth of the new order 
of things, applying the great Apostle Paul's simile of 
1 Thes. 5:3. Indeed, we expected the present interval of 
quiet and prosperity six months earlier than it came; and 
so announced in our issue of July 1, '94, p. 226, and 230. 
See also Jan. 1, '92, View; and MILLENNIAL DAWN Vol. 
I, Chap. 15. 



R1852:page 188 

"WITH WHAT BODY DO THEY COME?" 



THE following is a quotation from the Easter Sermon 
of T. DeWitt Talmage, D.D., with comments thereon. 
Mr. Talmage said, 

'"Why should it be thought with you an incredible 
thing that God should raise the dead?' Things all around 
us suggest it. Out of what grew all these flowers? Out of 
the mold and earth. Resurrected. Resurrected. The radiant 
butterfly, where did it come from? The loathsome 
caterpillar. That albatross that smites the tempest with its 
wing, where did it come from? A senseless shell. Near 
Bergerac, France, in a Celtic tomb, under a block, were 
found flower seeds that had been buried 2,000 years. The 
explorer took the flower seed and planted it, and it came 
up, it bloomed into bluebell and heliotrope. Two thousand 
years ago buried, yet resurrected. A traveler says he 



found, in a mummy pit in Egypt, garden peas that had been 
buried 3,000 years ago. He brought them out, and on 
June 24, 1844, he planted them, and in thirty days they 
sprang up. Buried 3,000 years, yet resurrected! 

"Do not this waking up of men from trance, and this 
waking up of grains buried 3,000 years ago, make it easier 
for you to believe that your body and mine, after the vacation 
of the grave, shall rouse and rally, though there be 
3,000 years between our last breath and the sounding of the 
archangelic reveille? Physiologists tell us that while the 
most of our bodies are built with such wonderful economy 
that we can spare nothing, and the loss of a finger is a 
hindrance, and the injury of a toe-joint makes us lame, still 
we have two or three apparently useless physical apparati, 
and no anatomist or physiologist has ever been able to tell 
what they are good for. Perhaps they are the foundation 
of the resurrection body, worth nothing to us in this state, 
to be indispensably valuable in the next state. The Jewish 
rabbis appear to have had a hint of this suggestion when 
they said that in human frame there was a small bone which 
was to be the basis of the resurrection body. That may 
have been a delusion. But this thing is certain, the Christian 
scientists of our day have found out that there are two 
or three superfluities of the body that are something gloriously 
suggestive of another state." 

A writer in the American Practitioner and News, a 
medical journal, comments as follows,— 

"In the celebration of the great festival of the Church 
commemorative of the risen Lord it was expected that the 

R1852 : page 189 

sermons delivered would repeat with poetry, eloquence, and 
sometimes with logical force, whatever science, history and 
philosophy may have contributed to the argument of the 
resurrection; but the scientific world was hardly prepared 
for such a breath-taking novelty as that put forth by the 
great Brooklyn divine. 

"In truth, the facts of science give little if any support 
to the hypothesis of the resurrection of the physical body; 
and, recognizing this, wise preachers generally confine themselves 
to St. Paul's allusion to the seed, etc., and call upon 
their hearers to take the rest upon faith. 

"The statements that seeds have been preserved for 
thousands of years, and then have grown, is on a par with 
the stories of frogs and other lower forms of life that have 
lain imprisoned in clay or rock for centuries or kiliads, and 
have been found still living when their prison houses were 
broken by the miners. The truth of the statements has 
been wisely questioned; but, if they be true, they give no 
help to the argument for the immortality of the soul, and, 
with greater force be it said, absolutely no support to the 
hypothesis of a resurrection of the physical body. 

"It is strange that any man in possession of the truth, 
and with a mind capable of reasoning upon the truth, should 
parade any such analogical rubbish before an audience of 



cultivated men and women! For such arguments can have 
no weight till the fable of the Phoenix rising from his own 
ashes and the resurrection of a dead tree from the decaying 
compost of roots and branches can be scientifically demonstrated. 

"Tis not worth while to argue such questions, since 
there can be no analogy between a resurrection of a body out 
of grave mold and the development of a plant or animal from 
an impregnated seed or egg. One is only a case of delayed 
development, while the other can be nothing less than the 
reconstruction of dead and disintegrated elements. 

"As for the hypothesis that there is in the body an indestructible 
germ that will resist death, and on resurrection 
day reconstruct the body, there is nothing in all the realm 
of anatomy and physiology to support it. It is an ancient 
conceit, and has far less significance than the fable of the 
Phoenix. And to say that this hypothesis gains any support 
from the fact that there are in the body some organs whose 
function is not fully understood is absolute nonsense. Dr. 
Gilbert asks Dr. Talmage to look at the decayed and tissue-stripped 
wrecks at the end of a season of dissection. We 
would invite him to look at the ashes and caput mortuum 
after a cremation, and find the elements out of which the 
old body of the subject is to be reconstructed.... 

"The hypothesis of the resurrection of the physical body 

R1853 : page 189 

can find no support in either science or philosophy. If it 
is to be received as truth, let it be taken on faith as a fact 
of revealed religion; but do not let us make it ridiculous 
by trying to support it upon far-fetched facts and impossible 
analogies." 



The foregoing conclusions based upon a scientific examination 
of the facts are in most thorough accord with 
God's revelation— the Bible. It is the statement, "I believe 
in the resurrection of the body," made by various 
church-creeds, but not by the Bible, that misleads so many. 
Many think the expression a quotation from the Scriptures, 
and hence endeavor to believe it, despite every evidence of 
fact and reason to the contrary. The Bible never makes 
the absurd statement that the bodies which we bury will be 
raised again. On the contrary, in explaining the philosophy 
of the resurrection, and illustrating it, Scriptures state 
most emphatically, "Thou sowest not that body that shall 
be."-l Cor. 15:36-38. 

It is a fact that very many corpses become fertilizers 
for the roots of trees, which absorb their elements, and that 
thus, during centuries, the constituent elements of many human 
bodies have passed repeatedly from tree to fruit and 
from fruit to animal organism again. And to believe that 
in preparing the resurrection body God will use his omnipotent 
powers to recover every atom of matter which once 
composed the old body is absurd; especially when he has 



said nothing of the kind, but does speak to the contrary. 
Indeed, if it be true that our bodies are continually in process 
of decomposition and change, which waste is continually 
supplied by food, and that a complete change of the 
entire system is accomplished every seven years, then a man 
dying forty-nine years old would have had substance enough 
for seven bodies if every atom of it were given back to him 
in a resurrection body. And if such a conclusion seems 
foolish, is it not equally foolish to suppose that God will 
seek the elements which composed the body at the time of 
death, as necessary for his work of reconstruction? He 
who has created all things is surely as able to create bodies 
from new matter as from the old elements, which should 
require to be sought for throughout the animal and vegetable 
kingdoms. It is such foolish misrepresentations of the 
Scripture teachings which makes infidels of many men of 
sense;— who do not examine the Bible on the subject for 
themselves, but judge it by the testimony of its professed 
expounders, Dr. Talmage and others. 

THE GENERAL RESURRECTION. 



By the term general resurrection we mean that provision 
for attaining everlasting life which God has provided 
for humanity in general. As the Church of this Gospel age 
is "not of the world," but a specially select or elect class, 
"chosen for a purpose," so their resurrection is to be totally 
different from that of the world. Their resurrection 
is called in Scripture the first or chief resurrection, in which 
only the "blessed and holy" will have a share. We leave 
the consideration of that special resurrection until after we 
have considered the general resurrection. 

While the fact that a resurrection is provided for all 
through Christ's death is abundantly stated in the Scriptures, 
minute and detailed descriptions of it are not given. 
God evidently did not design to acquaint the world with 
the detail of his plans before the time; and he furnished 
only such data as would enable his Church to reason it out 
in the light of the present due time. 

To understand why God has provided a resurrection 
for all is important in its bearing upon the subject. It is 
because Jesus Christ by God's grace tasted death for every 
man— because he thus redeemed all from the death penalty 
inherited through father Adam. God's object in providing 
a ransom co-extensive with the fall was that, as by 
Adam's disobedience many were made sinners and shared 

R1853 : page 190 

his death penalty, even so, by the obedience and sacrifice 
of "the man Christ Jesus," all may by faith in him be 
justified from sin, and attain eternal life through resurrection. 

Our Lord declared that eventually, "All that are in the 
graves shall hear the voice of the Son of Man and come 



forth; they that have done good [the justified and approved 

of God through Christ] unto the resurrection of life, and 

they that have done evil [all not so approved] unto the resurrection 

of damnation [literally, judgment]." (John 5:28,29.) 

The resurrection unto life, refer to the saints, the 

"overcomers," and will be considered later; we now 

have to do only with 

THE RESURRECTION OF DAMNATION. 



The expression— "unto the resurrection of damnation" 
would better be translated "unto resurrection by judgment." 
The translators of our common English version supposed 
that there was no hope except in the present life, and consequently 
could think of no object God would have in calling 
the unjustified from their graves, except to damn (i.e., 
condemn) them publicly, and send them to eternal torment; 
and they translated accordingly. Had they translated correctly, 
they or others might the sooner have gotten the true 
import of our Lord's words. Judgment (Greek, krisis) 
signifies a trial, with a sentence as a result. The world of 
mankind, by reason of Adam's disobedience, all passed under 
his sentence (Greek, krima, rendered "judgment" in 
Rom. 5:16) once, and consequently needed no more sentencing: 
the one sentence forfeited all rights to life on the 
part of Adam and his children: but our Lord was about to 
finish the great sin-offering at Calvary, and, as one of the 
results of his ransom-sacrifice, he declared, in the words under 
consideration, that there would result not only a resurrection 
of the justified to life, but also a resurrection by 
judgment of the, as yet, unjustified ones. 

In considering the meaning of "resurrection by judgment," 
it is needful that we recognize a difference between 
mere awakening from the sleep of death, and full resurrection. 
The awakening that we may expect for the world 
will be similar to that of Lazarus of Bethany, of the son of 
the widow of Nain and of Jairus' daughter;— the restitution 
of a small measure of life, such as had been previously 
enjoyed. But so far from this awakening being a full, 
complete resurrection, it will be only the first step necessary 
in that "resurrection by judgment" which is to be thrown 
open to all. That awakening will be after the Kingdom 
of Christ and his bride (the overcomers, the saints) has been 
fully established;— after the nations then living shall have 
been brought under the influence of the Kingdom, and 
been considerably blessed by the knowledge of the truth, 
then fully revealed. 

As soon as they are awakened the knowledge of the 
Lord will begin to reach them, and then their judgment or 
trial will begin. If obedient to the knowledge which will 
then reach them, they will gladly accept Christ as their 
Redeemer and King, and come under subjection to the terms 
of his New covenant; and then, under the provisions of that 
time, their restitution will begin. It will progress rapidly or 



slowly according to the degree of their zeal and love for the 
Lord and for righteousness. It will thus be a restitution by 
judgment, or a resurrection by or according to judgment: a 
judgment according to their obedience or disobedience. 

Thus resurrection, secured for all by our Lord's death, 
will be granted or offered to all; but it will be forced upon 
none. Whoever does not choose to gladly accept it, whoever 
does not enter into the very spirit of the Lord and his 
righteous arrangements, will be accounted a "sinner," and 
will be cut off from life at the close of his first century of 
experience if he does not by that time heartily accept, or if 
at any time afterward he should grow weary of well-doing. 

Full resurrection— full raising up to the grandeur of 
life and nature lost in Adam will, therefore, not be attained 
by any of the world (sharers in the "resurrection by judgment") 
until the close of the Millennial age of trial and 
restitution. (Restitution by trial and resurrection by judgment 
are synonymous expressions.) And even then, it will 
be only such as shall be "accounted worthy"— only such 
as, by that time, under the discipline of that age shall have 
developed characters fully in conformity with that of our 
Lord. Their perfection will be the resurrection of all that 
was lost by Adam and redeemed by Christ;— perfect manhood, 
as Adam possessed it when in God's image, before 
he sinned and fell; but with the addition of knowledge and 
character, incident to the experiences of the fall, the redemption 
and the thousand years restitution, uplifting and resurrection 
by judgment. 

Some have raised the question whether or not God 
whose "work is perfect" could recreate and awaken men 
in an imperfect condition. We reply, No; God does not 
deal with or judge in any manner the imperfect man. Hence, 
as soon as Adam became a transgressor God sentenced him 
and abandoned further trial. In accordance with this we 
have the statement, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath 
committed all judgment unto the Son." Thus the law of 
God's Empire stands firm that "all unrighteousness is sin," 
and that "the wages of sin is [not another trial, but] death." 
Meantime God's mercy, without impairing his law, provided 
Christ as the Ransomer and Judge of fallen man;— 
to judge them in their imperfection and to bring them up to 
perfection. Indirectly this will be God's judgment, as we 
read, "God hath appointed a day in the which he will judge 
the world in righteousness, by that man whom he hath ordained" 
-Christ. (Acts 17:31,32.) And the Apostle explains 
that "Christ died and revived [oldest Greek MSS.] 
that he might be Lord both of the dead [mankind] and 
living [angels, etc.]." (Rom. 14:9; 1 Pet. 3:22.) He 
gained this right to judge and to help fallen man by purchasing 
him with his own life,— "a ransom for all." The 
angels who "kept not their first estate" needed not to be 

R1854 : page 190 

purchased before they could be judged or tried; because 
they had not been sentenced to death and are not in death. 



But the fallen angels are to be granted a trial (1 Cor. 6:3), 

R1854:page 191 

and hence it is stated that our Lord shall "judge [both] the 
quick [living] and the dead at his appearing and kingdom." 

However, the fact that mankind are all said to be 
"dead" does not imply that they must all become totally 
unconscious in death, nor that any will be judged or tried 
while unconscious in death. On the contrary, Adam was 
a "dead" man as soon as God pronounced the sentence of 
death upon him, although he was 930 years in dying; for 
life represents the perfect state in which there is no element 
or degree of death. Thus the Apostle writes to the Church, 
Ye are "passed from death unto life [reckonedly]." And our 
Lord said to one, "Let the dead bury their dead." "He 
that hath the Son hath life [reckonedly, already]; and he 
that hath not the Son of God hath not life." (1 John 5:12.) 
The same thought of judging or trying the "dead" is put 
before us in Rev. 20: 12. "I saw the dead, small and great, 
stand before God:. ..and the dead were judged," etc. 

In perfect accord with this view (and no other) is that 
peculiar statement of John 5:25: "Verily, I say unto you, 
The hour is coming* when the dead shall hear the voice of 
the Son of God; and they that hear shall LIVE." According 
to the general conception this should read, they that 
live shall hear, but this would not have been true and in 
harmony with the plan; hence the peculiar and guarded 
expression used, which is only appreciable as we come to 
see more deeply into God's plan for that coming age. All 
are dead— under death's dominion; death has passed upon 
all. The Redeemer has come, the ransom has been paid, 
and in due time all the dead "shall hear (be brought to a 
clear conception of it), and they that hear (receive and obey 
it) shall [in due time] LIVE"— reach perfection of life- 
perfection of being. 

As a matter of fact, no one will be judged in an unconscious 
state of death. All will be awake in the sense of 
having consciousness; but during the entire Millennial age, 
while being raised up out of death to perfection of life, they 
will still be "dead," although like the Church of the present 
time they will be reckoned as though they had passed 
from death to life, from the moment that they accept the 
New Covenant of the Lifegiver. 

It will be necessary for all of the "body of Christ," 
the saints, to die; for sacrifice, even unto death, is their 
covenant; but it will not be necessary for every individual 
of the world to go down into the unconsciousness 
of the tomb in order to comply with the sentence 
upon Adam;+ for as we have shown they are already 
legally dead and can get no life except from Christ, 
the Redeemer and Life-giver. If we were to be held to 
the letter of the penalty, it would mean that we would not 
only surrender every spark of life, but that it is forever forfeited. 
It is from this penalty— as a whole— that we were 
redeemed by the precious blood. Hence, he who has become 



Lord [rightful controller] of the dead can stop the 
dying at any stage he may please, and begin the life-giving 
processes of the New Covenant. We may expect therefore 
that as soon as the Church has been exalted to Kingdom 
glory the restitution or revivifying or raising up processes 
will begin— with those "dead" men and women then (in 
the ordinary sense of the word) "alive." When it shall have 
progressed considerably (possibly a century or two later) 
the process will extend to the awakening of some of those 
"dead" ones who had lost every spark of life. When their 
judgment shall have proceeded to a reasonable degree, others 
will be awakened, until all that are in the graves, "the 
dead, small and great," will be standing judgment before 
the great white throne which God has so graciously provided 
and promised. 

While the bodies with which they will be awakened or 
"come forth" from hades (the grave) will be physical 
bodies, human bodies, of flesh and blood and bones, they 
will not be the same bodies; for not the body, but the being 
is to be restored. And they will be very different at 
the completion of their restitution from what they will be 
at its beginning— at the awakening. Their awakening will 
be in bodies such as men have at present— imperfect bodies 
—mentally and morally; but we should suppose that a 
reasonable amount of physical restitution would be granted 
at once such as our Lord's miracles intimated. We do not 
suppose that any will "come forth" blind, deaf, leprous, 
etc., and it will take the "resurrection by judgment," during 
the "times of restitution," to develop gradually to perfection 
the features and organs marred by the fall. 

This method which God has adopted, of "resurrection 
by judgment"— a resurrection which will not be complete 
until the thousand years are finished— is manifestly a wise 
one. It affords every possible opportunity for even the 
most debased to take of the water of life freely. It gives 
say twenty times as much experience with the effects of 
righteousness as each had known in the unsatisfactory pleasures 
of sin in the present life. It carries the identity of 
man, from the time of his experiences with sin, on to the 
completion of his experience in divine favor and righteousness; 
whereas much of the benefit would be lost in any other 
manner of resurrecting the world of which we can conceive. 
If resurrected (lifted up to perfection) at the moment 
awakened, men would not know themselves or each other, 
—so great would be the changes mentally, morally and 
physically. 

THE RESURRECTION OF THE JUST. 



The resurrection of the just or righteous is marked off 
in Scripture as totally distinct from the general or world's 
resurrection above considered; but the name just does not 
signify that any of Adam's race can be said to be "righteous" 
or perfect, in the absolute sense, but that the overcomers, 



the Church, are reckoned so,— accepted as perfect 
in the Beloved, their Lord and Redeemer. 



*Sinaitic MS. omits "and now is." 

+It may occur to some that Heb. 9:27, "It is appointed unto men 
once to die," is a contradiction to this; but only because of a total 
misapprehension of the meaning of this scripture, which is fully explained 
on page 78 of Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices, which most of 
our readers already have. 

R1854 : page 192 

This resurrection of the just began with our Lord, the 
only actually just or perfect one. He was not of Adam's 
seed, but was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners. It will be completed in the resurrection of "the 
Church which is his body." It is therefore called "His 
resurrection" (Phil. 3:10), "the resurrection" (Emphasis 
in the Greek- 1 Cor. 15:42; Phil. 3:11), the first or "chief 
resurrection."— Rev. 20:6. 

This is called "the resurrection of [or to] life," in contrast 
with the "resurrection by judgment" (John 5:29), 
because those who are accounted worthy to share this resurrection 
will have already passed their judgment or trial in 
the present life; and will have been accepted by the Lord 
as "blessed and holy," "overcomers;" and therefore it 
will not be necessary for them to pass through the thousand 
years' judgment with the world. Nor will it be necessary for 
them to wait for life until the end of the world's judgment, 
trial or probation. (1 Cor. 1 1:32.) Having been already declared 
"worthy" (Rev. 3:4,5), they will be given the gift 
of life, the life, perfection in life, at the beginning of Christ's 
reign of glory and power— for they are to reign with him 
as his Bride and joint-heirs. Hence it is that in describing 
the resurrection of the Church the Apostle (1 Cor. 15:51,52; 
1 Thes. 4:16,17) declares that (instead of being 
awakened imperfect and requiring a thousand years to 
reach perfection, as will those of the resurrection by judgment) 
the members of the true Church will, at the appointed 
time, each receive life in complete measure instantly— "the 
dead in Christ" first, and afterward those who are alive and 
remain at that time. 

While telling us through the Apostle that we can see 
the glories of our resurrected condition only dimly now, the 
Bible nevertheless gives us some clue to our future condition. 
It describes the resurrected condition of the Church, 
the overcomers, saying, "Thus is the [Greek emphatic, 
special] resurrection of the [Greek emphatic, special] dead, 
—It is sown in corruption, it is raised in incorruption; it 
is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory; it is sown in 
weakness, it is raised in power; it is sown an animal body, 
it is raised a spiritual body."— 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

This was advanced truth to the Church, whose highest 
conceptions as Jews had been a resurrection in a body of 



flesh, an animal body, subject to many of the present 
blemishes. But the Apostle led them up, step by step, to 
see the reasonableness of his statement. He began by showing 
the possibility of the dead coming to life again. He 
next showed that if the resurrection of the dead be denied 
it would imply a disbelief in Christ's resurrection; for if it 
was possible for God to raise Christ from the dead, it is 
equally possible for him to raise whoever else he may choose, 
and this he shows is the hope set before the Church in the 
gospel.— Verses 16-21. 

Verse 21 shows that the right or authority to awaken 
the dead, and to bring some or all to perfection, was gained 
by our Lord by his death as a ransom for all (See also Rom. 14:9); 
and verse 22 makes the statement that just as all who 
were in Adam shared his sin and death, so all who are in 
Christ share his victory and life. Angels were not in Adam, 
and did not share his sin and its penalty, death; neither 
did the lower animals. Only those who were in him, his 
unborn posterity, and they all without exception, shared 
both his sin and its penalty. So all in Christ will share his 
victory and have everlasting life;— but no others, for "he 

R1855 : page 192 

that hath not the Son shall not see life [in its perfection], 
but the wrath of God abideth on him." 

"All in Christ" has therefore the sense of all vitally 
united to and related to Christ in faith and obedience;— 
now the chosen "little flock" only, but by and by, in the 
Millennial "day of Christ," it will include "whosoever 
will" of all the ransomed race. 

Having established this broad fact, that all in Christ 
shall be made fully alive, shall have "eternal life," the next 
step (verse 23) is to show that there are two orders or classes 
amongst these, (1) the Christ class— "the Church which 
is his body," and of which he is "the Head, God blessed 
forever" (Eph. 1:22,23; Rom. 9:5); and (2) afterward 
those who are Christ's during his presence [during the 
Millennial reign.]" 

The first mentioned class is known in Scripture under 
the various titles, "joint-heirs with Jesus Christ" their 
Lord, "brethren," "the bride, the Lamb's wife," "the 
living stones" constituting, with "Christ Jesus the Chief 
corner stone," the spiritual or "holy temple" in and 
through which the world during the Millennial age shall 
have access to God, and the "royal priesthood" which 
under the great High Priest shall minister for those who 
would approach God during the Millennium, "the members 
in particular of the body of Christ. (Rom. 8:17; 
John 20:17; Rev. 21:9; 1 Pet. 2:5,9; 1 Cor. 12:27.) 
The second mentioned class which will include all of the 
human family accounted worthy of eternal life during the 
second presence or Millennial reign of the Christ (Rev. 20:4) 
are Scripturally known as the children of Christ to whom 
he will be the Everlasting Father— the life-giver to eternity. 
-Isa. 9:6. 



Having thus explained the two classes that will get 
perfect life, eternal life, through Christ Jesus— the Bride 
and the children— the Apostle proceeds as we have just seen, 
to describe the first (chief) resurrection, that of the class termed 
the Bride, the Body of Christ,— the "overcomers" of the 
Gospel age,— showing that as they will all have finished 
their course, they will get the perfection of life instantly, 
being made without further process or trial incorruptible, 
glorious, honorable, powerful spirit-beings. And then, lest 
any should get the idea that all will be thus changed 
from flesh to spirit-beings in the resurrection, he adds 
(verse 44), "There is an animal body and there is a spiritual 
body." Then he proceeds to show (verses 45-48) that 
the first Adam is the sample of what an earthly or animal 
body will attain to in the resurrection, and that the Lord 
in his resurrection, "a life-giving spirit," is an illustration 
of the resurrection condition of the Church; and he assures 

R1855 : page 193 

us that so surely as we have been born of the flesh and 
thus attained something of the likeness of the earthly or 
animal man, so, being begotten by the spirit to the new, 
"divine nature," we, if subsequently born of the spirit, 
shall also bear the likeness of the Lord, the heavenly one, 
and ourselves be heavenly beings.— Verse 49. 

Lest we should stumble into supposing that our resurrected 
bodies will be merely called spiritual, but yet actually 
be flesh and blood, as now, the Apostle adds, "Flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." The promise 
and hope held before the Church was always the hope of the 
Kingdom. For it all have prayed, "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven;" and our Lord 
said, "Fear not, little flock, it is your Father's good pleasure 
to give you the Kingdom." (1 Cor. 15:50; Luke 11:2; 
12:32; Dan. 7:18,22.) Attention is thus called to the 
fact that the Church, the "little flock," the kingdom class, 
which is to bless the world, is to be made spiritual, like 
Christ, and be no longer "flesh and blood," after its resurrection; 
while the blessing it is to bring to the willing and 
obedient of the world will be "restitution," of all the human 
powers represented in the first man created, the perfect, 
earthly, fleshly image and likeness of the invisible God, 
who is a spirit. 

Then the Apostle, putting himself in the place of his 
readers, knew that their next thought would be— Ah, then! 
If all the Church must be spiritual to have a share in the 
Kingdom, and if the dead in Christ are to be raised spirit 
beings, like the Lord after his resurrection (who as a spirit 
being could be invisible to men, and was invisible during 
the forty days before his ascension except for the few occasions 
of a few moments each when he appeared in various 
forms as the angels have often done*), then how great would 
be our loss if we should be "alive"+ when the Lord comes 
and sets up his Kingdom? 

The Apostle gives we may presume as clear and explicit 



an answer to this supposed query as was due to be understood 
at that time. He says, "Behold, I show you a 
mystery, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed; 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump." 

Mark! the Apostle's positive assurance is, that a change 
from the flesh and blood conditions of human nature must 
take place with all who would be inheritors of the Kingdom; 
for the change now commenced in the spirit of their 
minds must be fully completed, and in the resurrection God 
will give them bodies in harmony with their new minds; 
they must be fully "partakers of the divine nature" before 
they could share the realities of the Kingdom. The Apostle 
makes this so positive that his readers should have no 
cause to think that he expected a fleshly King, or fleshly 
joint-heirs with him in that Kingdom. The subjects of the 
Kingdom will undoubtedly be human beings; but the 
rulers will be spirit-beings, completely "changed;" for 
"flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God." 

Many overlook this, the real point of the Apostle's 
argument, and imagine that he has said that some of the 
Church, alive at the second presence of the Lord, will not 
die. But he says nothing of the kind. Indeed, if he had 
so said his words would be a contradiction of other statements 
of Scripture, which declare of the Church, the body 
of Christ, "Ye shall die like men;" and our Lord's statement, 
"Be thou faithful unto death and I will give thee a 
crown of life." Notice that the Apostle does not say that 
we shall not all die, but that "we shall not all sleep." 
Those living at the time of Christ's second presence, when 
he has begun the setting up of his Kingdom, will not need 
to sleep after they die, and thus wait for the Kingdom. 
Instead, to them the moment of death will be the moment 
of change; they will not sleep for a moment, but will be 
changed the same moment in which they will die, instantly, 
—"in the twinkling of an eye." This will be at or during 
the sounding of the Seventh or last trump,— in the beginning 
or early part of its sounding; for it is a symbolic 
trumpet, which will sound during the entire Millennium. 

After describing thus particularly the chief resurrection 
of the dead to spiritual nature, body, powers, etc., and that 
those of the same class living at the time will experience 
a similar change without sleeping in unconsciousness, the 
Apostle returns to the consideration of the blessing of the 
world, by this elect Church, during the Millennium, and 
the full making alive of all in Christ during his presence 
and kingdom, saying,— 

"So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, 
and this mortal shall have put on immortality [when 
the Church has been glorified with her Lord], then shall be 
brought to pass [during that Millennial reign] the saying 
which is written [as a general promise to the world— 
'He will swallow up death in victory; and the Lord God 
will wipe away tears from off all faces; and the rebuke of 
his people will he take away from off all the earth.' By 
the close of that Millennial reign, it can be said] Death 
is swallowed up in victory! O death, where is [now] thy 



sting? [Sin and wilful sinners being destroyed by that time, 

there will be nothing thereafter to cause death.] O grave, 

where is thy victory?" The Lord with his Church, his 

bride, shall have conquered Adamic death and the prison-house 

of death, the grave, shall have been opened, and all 

the prisoners shall have had fullest opportunity to accept 

Christ, and the everlasting life which he will offer to 

all, under the terms of the New Covenant sealed with his 

own precious blood; and all desiring life upon those 

terms shall have received it; and all rejecting the gracious, 

righteous terms shall have been reckoned wilful sinners 

and been destroyed from among the people.— Acts 3:23. 

"SHALL NEVER DIE." 



"Whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die."— John 11:26. 

This text, misinterpreted by many, is made the basis 
for a very erroneous theory; namely, the claim of some that 
they are already "living the resurrected life, and will never 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., Chap. v. 
+While the world is said to be "dead," the word "alive" is used 
of the Church. 

R1855 : page 194 

die." They assume a "holier than thou" manner, and 

adopt a vegetable diet, refusing animal food, etc., saying 

that animal foods are proper enough for common people, 

but not for those believers who have entered "the resurrected 

life." If their attention be called to the fact that 

our Lord ate lamb, fish, etc., and placed no restrictions, 

they reply: That was before his resurrection. You call 

their attention to the fact that he ate animal food (fish), 

twice at least, in the presence of his disciples, after his resurrection 

(Luke 24:41-43; John 21:13), and they are 

silenced for want of an answer, but not convinced; for 

they "love to have it so."— Jer. 5:31. 

Satan evidently gets a pretty thorough hold upon their 
self-willed minds; for they begin to misapply Scriptures, 
by the wholesale, to fit their theory; and if you quote to 
them the teachings and practices of the apostles, to the 

R1856 : page 194 

effect that everything, that can be eaten with thanksgiving 
to God, is proper and not to be despised (1 Tim. 4:3,4), 
their answers show that they think themselves far beyond 
the apostles in wisdom and in divine favor. This of itself 
should be a warning, to all truly led and taught of the 
Spirit, to let alone and avoid anything with such tendencies 



to self-esteem and self-righteousness. 

Other texts, which they wrest to their own delusion, 
are such as— "He that hath the Son hath life." "He that 
believeth in me hath everlasting life." "You hath he 
quickened," etc., etc. They do not wish to examine the 
context, which would clearly show that we have everlasting 
life by faith, and must wait for its actual reception until 
the time "When he who is our life shall appear," and, by 
actual resurrection change, give us the eternal life, actually, 
in our new bodies. If their attention is called to their error 
they are disappointed, and pass to another of their proof-texts, 
and so on,— unconvinced, because unwilling to be 
convinced. 

The strongest of their proof-texts is the one cited above, 
which they think may somehow belong to them, although 
they admit reluctantly that others believed on the Lord and 
died, all along during the past eighteen centuries. They 
still cling to their misapplication of the words,— "He that 
liveth and believeth in me shall never die;" and fancy that 
the apostles and others who died could not have been so 
advanced as themselves,— for the apostles ate animal food. 

When the passage is examined in its connection (John 1 1:23-26), 
it will be seen that it refers to those who shall 
be fully made alive in the resurrection. 

Not only is the resurrection power vested in our Lord, 
but also power to keep the resurrected believers alive everlastingly; 
—the dead shall be made alive, in the resurrection, 
and if they still believe will "never die." 

"YOU HATH HE QUICKENED." 



"You hath he quickened who were dead in trespasses 
and sins." "If the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from 
the dead dwell in you, he. ..shall also quicken your 
mortal bodies, by his spirit which dwelleth in you." 

These passages speak of those who are "begotten of the 
spirit" and are awaiting God's due time, the resurrection, 
morning, to be "born from the dead." Figuratively, they 
are already dead to sin, and, figuratively also, alive toward 
God and righteousness. The new will, or new mind, being 
brought under the influence of the spirit of God has now 
a power for spiritual activity in God's service, and may 
reckonedly begin the resurrected life, in the sense of bringing 
word and act and thought into captivity to the will of 
God in Christ. 

Nevertheless, we still have the newly begotten will or 
heavenly mind, "the mind of Christ," as a treasure in our 
earthen vessels (2 Cor. 4:7), and it will never be satisfactory, 
to God or to us (except reckonedly through Christ), 
until the treasure of the new mind or will, polished by the 
Lord, is set as a jewel in a heavenly, spiritual casket or body, 
by an actual quickening, as described in 1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

"WE SHALL BE LIKE HIM." 



To those who, after reading the foregoing and our 
other writings on the subject, still think that our risen Lord 
is a man, that he was put to death in the flesh and was 
quickened or resurrected in the flesh, and that the same 
body that hung upon the cross and was laid in Joseph's 
tomb is the Lord's present body,— merely caused to shine 
and therefore called a glorious body, a spiritual body, etc., 
—to such readers we can say little more. Some seem to 
be unable to comprehend that a spirit-body is not a flesh-body 
and a flesh-body not a spirit-body. Our Lord's words 
to Nicodemus make the subject very clear. He says, "That 
which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born 
of the spirit is spirit;" and that no one can even see the 
Kingdom of God, nor enter into it, except he be not only 
begotten, but also born of the spirit.— John 3:3-6. 

On the one hand, while they admit that our Lord was a 
spirit-being before he was born into this world, and that as 
such he did not have flesh and bones (Luke 24:39), some 
even deny that he changed his nature and became human, 
that "he was made flesh" (John 1:14), and claim that he 
was a spirit being all the time as before, and merely used 
the flesh as clothing and pretended that it was he, pretended 
to be touched with a feeling of our infirmities, pretended 
to be tempted like as we are, pretended to weep and pray, 
while really he was still as ever the mighty one incapable 
of suffering and death. They claim that our Lord did not 
die, but that it was merely the fleshly body which he used 
as a robe that cried, "My God! My God! Why hast thou 
forsaken me?" and died. And yet these same people imagine 
that somehow Christ got so fastened to that body of 
flesh and bones that he could not get along without it since, 
although they will admit that such a marred and torn fleshly 
body is totally unsuitable for a spiritual heaven, they 
think that it was taken there, and that ever since our Lord 
is compelled to put up with its inconvenience and to bear 
the scars and marks of thorns and nails. These same people, 
of course, think similarly of the resurrection of the 

R1856 : page 195 

Church,— that the sin-deformed and maimed bodies of the 
present time will be resurrected and taken to heaven to be 
perpetual inconveniences and disagreeable reminders of the 
sins and blemishes of the present evil world. 

Another class admits that when our Lord was "made 
flesh" his change from spiritual to human nature was complete, 
and that thereafter he was the "man Christ Jesus," 
and that it was necessary that he should be a man, because 
nothing else than a man's life could redeem the life of the 
man Adam and those who died in him;— that as by a man 
came death, by a man should come the resurrection of the 
dead. (1 Cor. 15:21.) They know, too, that the Scriptures 
say that Christ was rich, but for our sakes became poor 



(of a lower nature), and that he took the human nature for 

the purpose of tasting death for every man. They admit 

that he did all this and that the Scriptures declare that he 

who was "put to death in the flesh" was "quickened [resurrected] 

in Spirit," yet somehow they cling to our Redeemer's 

flesh-body of humiliation, which he took for a 

purpose and fully and completely used for that purpose of 

"tasting death for every man." (Heb. 2:9.) He is to die 

no more and hence has no further use for such a body. 

They forget to reason that if our Lord's nature could be 

changed once, from a spirit-nature to a human-nature, then 

it could be changed again, from human to divine nature. 

In some manner, however, they get quite confused on the 

resurrection and fancy (1) that all of the same dust must 

be in the resurrected body; or (2) that at least some of 

the particles of the old body must be there, as a start for 

God to work upon in producing the new body; or (3) that 

the new body must at least be flesh and bones, and exactly 

like the one buried. 

A few, driven to the extremity by the Apostle's words, 
"Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God," 
say, Oh, no! flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom, 
but flesh and bones can. They do not see that the term 
"flesh and blood" is another way of saying "human nature," 
as in the expressions, "All flesh is grass," and "Flesh and blood 
hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father in heaven." 

With the wrong thought in mind they stumble over 
our Lord's statement (Luke 24:39), "A spirit hath not 
flesh and bones as ye see me have." Understood aright, 
this passage proves that our Lord's real body has not flesh 
or bones, for was he not at his resurrection made a 
"quickening spirit," and is he not now the express image 
of the Father's person, and is it not plainly written that 
"God is a spirit?" Our Lord, as one born of the 
spirit, was spirit since his resurrection, and demonstrated 
the fact on this very occasion by coming and going 
like the wind— they could not tell whence he came nor 
whither he went. "So is every one that is born of the 
spirit" and consequently is spirit. (John 3:6,8.) It was 
in order that he might not alarm them that he appeared in 
flesh and material clothing, and he wanted them to get the 
full benefit of this fact, and practically said, You are alarmed 
and think you see a spirit, but you see only flesh and bones, 
etc., you do not see a spirit, "a spirit has not flesh and bones 
as ye see me [to] have [or to possess]," assumed for the very 
purpose of communicating with you, and of a form well 
known to you for the past three years. He avoided the expression 
"flesh and blood" for that would have meant, A 
spirit hath not human nature as ye see me have; and this 
would have been untrue, for he was changed and was no 
longer human but highly exalted. 

He to whom nothing is real except that which he can 
see or touch, is unprepared to understand spiritual things. 
"The natural man receiveth not the things of the spirit of 
God; neither can he know them, for they are spiritually 
discerned." Such cannot believe in God except as a great 



man; they have seen nothing greater than human nature, 
and to them the words "divine nature" can mean nothing 
higher than shining human nature. 

Our Lord gave the early Church a great lesson on this 
subject which they learned well; but it, like many other 
lessons, is wasted upon many who consider themselves part 
of the Christ to-day. He first taught them that he was no 
longer dead, but alive. To help them grasp the situation, 

R1857 :page 195 

the poor mangled body of his humiliation was removed from 

the tomb; although that body was not any longer he nor 

its elements even a part of his new resurrection body. 

Since "we shall be like him" in our resurrection, and 

since our resurrection is a part of "his resurrection" (Phil. 3:10; 

1 Cor. 15:23), it follows that the inspired record of 

our resurrection would in every particular correspond to 

his, which was not so particularly described. (See 1 Cor. 15:42-45.) 

So, then, he was sown in dishonor, raised in 

glory; sown in weakness, raised in power; sown a natural 

body, raised a spiritual body. As we shall be changed if 

we are faithfully his, so he was changed and there put on 

incorruption, immortality. (Verses 52,53.) This was but 

the completion of his begetting of the spirit at his baptism: 

that which was begotten was the new, spiritual nature; it was 

the same that was quickened into activity in the work of sacrifice 

given him to do; and it was the same that three days 

after his work was finished was born. "That which is 

born of the spirit is spirit;" and he was thus "the first born 

from the dead," "the first-born among many brethren." 

All this is implied, nay asserted, in the declaration, We 
shall be like him and see him as he is. (1 John 3:2.) Considered 
carefully with its connections, this statement proves 
much. The Apostle declares to the "sons," "It doth not 
yet appear what we shall be [but, if we are to be flesh-beings 
with present blemished bodies, or bodies at all like them, 
this statement would not be correct, for we know, alas, too 
well! what we are]; but we know that when he shall appear 
we shall [by being changed from mortal to immortal, 
from animal or human bodies to spiritual bodies, from 
flesh and blood to incorruption] be like him; for we shall 
see him as he is." The only conclusion is that if we be 
not like him, of the same (spiritual) nature, we could not 
see him as he is, for unless changed and made like he is, 
we would be like him as he was. 

"Thou sowest not that body which shall be." The 
children of Adam are all of one seed, one kind, and in the 
general resurrection of judgment those accounted worthy 
will again have human bodies, like to the perfect sample, 
—the first man Adam, created in God's image. They will 
be of the same kind or nature, just as corn always produces 
corn, and oats always produce oats. The same kind of 
corn or oats is produced, but not the very grains that were 
buried. Those who experience a change of nature, from 
human to divine, now, through Christ, will not have human, 



Adamic bodies when perfected in the resurrection, but spirit 
bodies, now begotten and quickened shall be born in the 
resurrection,— like unto Christ's glorious body. 



R1857 : page 196 
CROSSING THE JORDAN. 
-AUG. 25.-JOSH. 3:5-17.- 



Golden Text— "When thou passest through the waters I will be with 
thee, and through the rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou 
walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be burned; 
neither shalt the flame kindle upon thee."— Isa. 43:2. 

THE Golden Text emphasizes the sentiment of this 
lesson to the children of God. As Israel in passing 
through the Jordan had nothing to fear because the ark of 
the Lord, the symbol of the divine presence stood in the 
midst of the threatening danger, so the Christian has nothing 
to fear so long as he realizes the divine presence and 
approval. Through rivers and seas of trouble he may wade, 
and through fiery furnaces of affliction he may pass, but 
none of these things can harm him while the Lord is with 
him. 

The Lord's presence and love realized under such circumstances 
as they cannot be under ordinary conditions 
give such strength to faith and hope and love as could not 
otherwise be gained. And thus all things are made to work 
together for good to them that love God, to the called according 
to his purpose. 



R1857 :page 196 

THE FALL OF JERICHO. 

-SEPT. l.-JOSH. 6:8-20.- 



Golden Text— "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down 
after they were compassed about seven days."— Heb. 1 1:30. 

LONG before the Canaanites had been accursed! Long 

before their land had been promised to the children 

of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob ! The Lord's time had 

now come to give possession; and the place of entrance 

was close to Jericho. Jericho was accursed or condemned: 

its time of judgment had come as that of Sodom four centuries 

before in the same rich, fertile valley. But God 

would vary the method for a purpose. As he had made of 

the Sodomites an illustration of those who would suffer 

everlasting destruction or second death (Jude 7), 

so he would now illustrate another thing in the Jerichoites: 



he would show in their slaughter, how the "old man" of 
our fallen nature is to be utterly destroyed by us as "new 
creatures" under the lead and instruction of the real Joshua 
—Jesus. 

Nothing could be done,— none could fight against 
Jericho until they had been circumcised; which typified 
the circumcision of the heart, the putting away, the cutting 
off, of the love of sin from the hearts of the true Israelites. 
The next lesson to be typified was that our power over our 
natural desires (represented by the Jerichoites) must come 
from God. The natural desires and appetites are protected 
by strong walls, the will of the flesh, which first must be 
broken down before we as "new creatures" can conquer 
our natural selves, our depraved appetites or desires. 

This power of God in the type was shown in the fall 
of Jericho's wall; but before it fell the faith of the circumcised 
ones was made active as shown in the seven days 
marching around the city and seven times on the seventh 
day representing completeness. The slaughter of the Jerichoites, 
then, represented the victory of true Israelites over 
self-will, self-love, self-indulgence and over every enemy of 
the new nature— for the two are contrary one to the other 
and one or the other must die.— Compare Gal. 5:16,17. 

Everything in Jericho was accursed, condemned or devoted; 
and so everything in and of our carnal nature is 
condemned or devoted— every living creature must be put 
to death. This represents that every active influence and 
principle of the fallen nature must be destroyed, "Mortify 
[kill] therefore, your members which are upon the earth; 
fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil concupiscence 
[desire], and covetousness [greed], which is idolatry." 
-See Col. 3:5-10. 

Yet the deliverance of Rahab (who afterward married 
into the tribe of Judah and became an Israelite, and has 
the honor of being one of the ancestors of our Lord Jesus), 
shows in type that some of our members once enemies of the 
new nature may be so transformed that instead of being the 
servants of sin they may become servants of righteousness, 
through full consecration. For instance, talents for speaking, 
writing, teaching, singing, etc., once used in the service 
of Satan and sin may be reckoned dead and quickened 
to newness of life and activity in God's service. But as 
such a transfer could only be through a reckoned death 
and quickening through faith in the great sacrifice for sin, 
this too must be illustrated in the type. And it was illustrated 
in the act of faith which displayed the scarlet cord. 

R1858 : page 196 

The inanimate valuables, the gold, silver, brass and 
iron vessels, etc., were all consecrated, too, but not to destruction; 
they were to be devoted to the Lord's service. 
So with the truly circumcised Israelites indeed: not only 
are all their carnal powers to be destroyed as servants of sin 
but all that they possess is to be consecrated to the Lord's 
service, their treasures of gold and silver and their ordinary 



possessions represented in the vessels of brass and iron. 

All must now be considered as belonging to the Lord: and 

any appropriation of these to their own selfish uses brings 

a curse as was illustrated by the sin of Achan, who appropriated 

of the spoils of Jericho, some gold and silver and 

a fine Babylonish garment. The result of his covetousness 

was his own destruction and for a time he troubled all 

Israel. 

So, amongst the spiritual Israelites covetousness of gold, 
silver and the fine Babylonish garments, is a most fruitful 
source of spiritual weakness and in many leads to destruction. 
"For the love of money is a root of all evil: which 
while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. They 
that will [to] be rich fall into temptation and a snare, and 
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in 
destruction and perdition. But thou, O man of God, flee 
these things; and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, 
love, patience, meekness."— 1 Tim. 6:9-11. 

The blowing of the trumpets by the priests may well 
be understood to typify the proclamation of God's Word 
against sin and his assurance to his people that he is able 
and willing to give the circumcised new creatures victory 
over their carnal propensities. Not until we understand 
the assurance of the Word of the Lord and have faith therein 
are we able to blend the shout of victory with the sound 
of the trumpets and see the obstacles to self-mortification 
fall before us. 



page 197 

VOL. XVI. SEPTEMBER 1, 1895. No. 17. 



CONTENTS. 



Items,— Tabernacle Shadows 198 

" Dawn Vol. II, in Dano-Norwegian 198 

Views from the Tower 199 

Sobriety, Vigilance, Steadfastness 200 

Peace! Perfect Peace!— Poem 202 

"Remember Lot's Wife." 202 

"They Had All Things in Common" 204 

Bible Study: Caleb's Reward 206 

Bible Study: The Cities of Refuge 208 

Encouraging Letters 208 

page 198 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



TABERNACLE SHADOWS. 

Many of the truths of the Gospel were "preached beforehand" 
in the types and shadows of the Jewish economy. In the service of 
the tabernacle in the wilderness were embodied the principles of the 
entire plan of salvation, based upon the sacrifice of Christ, as represented 
in the bullock whose blood, sprinkled upon the mercy seat, 
made atonement. 

The significance of each article in the tabernacle, as well as of the 
sacrifices made therein, is set forth in TABERNACLE SHADOWS OF 
BETTER SACRIFICES, a pamphlet of 104 pages, leatherette bound, 
illustrated. Price 10 cents, postpaid; 75 cents per dozen. 



MILLENNIAL DAWN VOL. II. IN DANO-NORWEGIAN. 



This volume is about ready. Orders sent in now will be filled in 
rotation as received. 

Although the cost of these foreign translations is much greater than 
the English, because the demand is less and the editions smaller, yet 
the price of MILLENNIAL DAWN in the German, Swedish and Dano-Norwegian 
languages will be uniform with the English. Some warm-hearted 
friends of the Truth, knowing that the English editions are 
sold at cost, and realizing that the foreign editions would cost nearly 
double, because smaller, volunteered to pay the difference through the 
Tract Fund, so that the foreigners, who often are less able to purchase, 
might have the benefit of the low prices of the English. Their donation 
amounts to four hundred and twenty dollars on each foreign 
volume. 



R1858 :page 199 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



IT is not at all improbable that the killing of missionaries 
in China may lead to a Chinese war in which 
Great Britain will take a hand, and that event might 
be considered by Japan opportune for a resistance of Russian 
interference, and the result might be another war. Such 
conditions would bring increased prosperity to the United 
States and Europe for three or four years, supplying munitions 
of war, etc., and this would put off the financial 
pressure and great time of trouble a little while. Then the 
awakening and opening up of China would put her millions 
of cunning imitators into competition with the mechanics 
of civilized lands and ultimately make the pressure upon 
labor all the heavier. 



Meantime a great reaction is taking place both in England 
and France, against radical socialism and in favor of 
conservatism, as shown by recent elections. Not for a long 
time before has the majority in the English House of Commons 
been of the Tory party. 

But the reaction is less than it seems on its face to be: 
in fact, the Tory party has abandoned its old lines, and while 
retaining its old name it is really a "moderate" party in 
every sense. And so long as financial conditions are at all 
bearable the majority of the people in all civilized lands 
prefer to have the judgment and management of affairs in 
the hands of the well educated and well-to-do, rather 
than risk the untried schemes of political novices. We 
may reasonably expect, therefore, that we will see comparative 
quiet and prosperity for the next few years, to be 
followed by a greater depression and a socialistic reaction. 



In the United States, as well as in Great Britain, the 
growing tendency in religious circles is to ignore doctrines 
and to make morality and conservatism the tests of fellowship. 
In both countries there is an increasing tendency 
to unite for the "purifying of politics," on the "liquor 
question," etc. For instance, take the following clipped 
from the daily press: 

"METHODISTS IN POLITICS. 

"Cleveland, O., Aug. 22.— An important circular signed 
by every presiding elder of the Methodist church in Ohio has 
been sent to the members of that denomination throughout 
the state. It calls for united political action on the part of 
all Methodists in an effort to elect to the next legislature as 
many members as possible who will fight the saloons. The 
circular states that 'special services' will be called for by 
the elders in this connection in every Methodist church 
in Ohio." 

"SOMETHING NEW UNDER THE SUN. 

"At Ayer yesterday thirty-one clergymen, representing 
six denominations, Baptist, Congregationalist, Roman 
Catholic, German Evangelical, Unitarian and Universalist, 
organized a ministerial union to be known as the United 
Religious Association, the object of which is 'fellowship 
and acquaintance with each other's religious doctrines, local 
cooperation with each other on the basis of love to God 
and man, and to the furtherance of all social reforms and 
the bringing in of the kingdom of God.' Rev. P. A. 
McKenna, of the Catholic church at Marlboro, said that he 
was present with the willing consent of Vicar General 
Byrne, in the absence of the archbishop, and expressed the 
most cordial interest in the objects of the association. He 
was especially emphatic in his Americanism and was heartily 
applauded by his Protestant associates." 



It is remarkable that at a time when the so-called 
"higher critics" and "advanced religious thinkers" are 
tearing in pieces the Scriptures and discarding the very 
foundation of all Christian faith, the great sin-offering 
given by our Redeemer for the sins of the world, we find 
some defenders of the Bible and the true faith where we 

R1858 : page 200 

might not have thought to look for them. The following 
is a portion of a letter written not long since by Rev. 
Morgan Dix, D.D., pastor of Trinity Church, New York, 
to Rev. C. Gauss of the Prof. Epis. Theol. Seminary near 
Alexandria, Va., and published by the latter's consent in the 



N.Y. Tribune, as follows:— 

"The recent startling appearance of pantheistic teachers 
in our Church in the person of liberal theologians so-called, 
the open denial of several of the facts stated in the 
creed, the contemptuous repudiation of the authority of our 
Church, the substitution of ideas derived from the philosophy 
of evolution for the doctrine of the Gospel as the 
Church has received the same, and the avowed determination 
to throw the ordination vow to the winds, and freely 
to proclaim whatever views the individual minister may 
evolve from year to year, and from day to day, out of his own 
consciousness— these signs of the hour increase my respect 
for the men of the old school, who hold, simply and sincerely, 
the inspiration of the sacred Scriptures, the destructive 
properties of sin, the need of atonement for sin through 
the precious blood of Jesus Christ, and the power of divine 
grace as the sole agency which can put health and strength 
into the enfeebled and corrupted nature of men. Thus am 
I, like many others of my own school, in stronger sympathy 
with the men at Alexandria than they perhaps suspect; 
believing that we are fighting the same battle for God in 
Christ against a world fallen and out of Christ, and that we 
are aiming substantially at one and the same end. It looks as 
if society was preparing to rise up in general revolt against 
the Gospel as we have learned it from the Apostles of Jesus 
Christ, and the Church which he has made the witness and 
keeper of his revelation. If it does, so much the worse for 
society. I am very truly yours, MORGAN DIX" 



The present Pope is pushing forward to regain as much 
ground as possible. 

Some fifteen years ago Chile found that the Jesuits 
were its worst foes and put an end to clerical interference 
in politics, etc., although the population and government 
are overwhelmingly Roman Catholic. But the present pope 
has smoothed out the difficulty and gotten government and 
people to forget the injury previously inflicted and to return 
into sympathy with the Papal authorities. Chile has sent 
an Ambassador Extraordinary to Rome and in every way 
is prepared to forget the past and return gradually to a 
condition as bad as before, or worse. 

Effort is being made to have Mexico, whose experience 
was similar, also to return to the evil control of Papacy. 
It is the constant scheme at Rome to get back the 
absolute control of the people formerly held by the Papal 
clergy. A movement is on foot to have the Mexican government 
consent to the coming of a Papal Nuncio, with 
powers similar to those of Mgr. Satolli in the United States. 



The effort to capture Great Britain for Rome is meeting 
R1859 : page 200 



with considerable opposition. Writing against the 

union of the Church of England with the Church of Rome 

the Dean of Canterbury says: 

"Great as is the evil of division, let us be sure that 
it is incomparably less than that of such a spurious, hollow, 
artificial unity as is held out by the See of Rome, unity 
purchased by the subjection of reason and conscience to 
the arbitrary decrees of a self-styled infallible human 
authority." 

With a view to extending the Catholic movement in 
England the Pope has just canonized as saints the following 
Englishmen, Hugo Farrington, Richard Whiting, John 
Beck and Adrian Fortesque, martyrs. 



The eight thousand members of the St. Adelbert 
Roman Catholic Church of Buffalo, N. Y., who have rebelled 
against the arbitrary rules of the bishop, have decided to 
secede and organize as an Independent Catholic Church. 
We learn that these are in sympathy, at least in harmony, 
with the Polish seceders at Cleveland, mentioned some 
time since. 



A Madrid cablegram of Aug. 18 tells that as the 
Spanish troops were embarking for the reinforcement of 
the army in Cuba, the Archbishop declared that the Pope 
like a new Moses had raised his hands toward heaven and 
was praying that the Angel of Victory might accompany 
the Spanish army. 

We are well aware that the Pope's prayers are usually 
with the oppressors in every clime; but in the days of 
Pope Leo IX. it became proverbial that people and ships 
which he blessed usually met with disaster. 

Ah, how much the world needs the real Pope, the real 
Anointed One, our Lord Jesus, with the true Church, the 
Royal Priesthood, to take control of the world as the 
promised priest after the order of Melchizedek— a priest 
upon his throne. "Thy Kingdom come! Thy will be 
done on earth as in heaven." 



R1859 : page 200 

SOBRIETY, VIGILANCE, STEADFASTNESS. 

-1 Pet. 5:8,9.- 

WHAT more appropriate watchwords than these could 
express the proper attitude of the Christian soldier? 
—"Be sober, be vigilant; because your adversary, the 
devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he 



may devour: whom resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing 
that the same afflictions are endured by your brotherhood 
in the world." 

The "brotherhood" includes all the soldiers of Christ 
throughout the world, and this symbol of their present 
character is not a mere empty sound; for there is a mighty 
conflict in progress, a war being waged, and the encounter 
is one of desperate earnestness. Those who know nothing 
of this great conflict, and who have no part in it, though 
they may bear the name of Christ— Christians— really have 

R1859 : page 201 

no right to that name; for they are not Christ's soldiers. 
Jesus himself was a soldier, and fought the battle through 
to the bitter end, and gained the victory. And he is the 
Captain of all those who accept the redemption he purchased 
and that follow in his footsteps, and he will lead 
them on to certain victory, if they faint not.— Gal. 6:9. 

The Apostle Paul gives the same idea of the Christian 
life. He represents it as a desperate warfare, and urges all 
the true soldiers of Christ to "put on the whole armor of 
God, that they may be able to stand against the wiles of the 
devil; for," says he, "we wrestle not against flesh and 
blood, but against principalities, against powers, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual 
wickedness in high places. ...Stand, therefore, having 
your loins girt about with truth, and having on the 
breastplate of righteousness," etc.— Eph. 6:10-18. 

When we consider how strongly our adversary is intrenched 
in the world— in its ideas, its maxims, its institutions, 
its policy, its hopes, aims and ambitions— and the 
Christian life as in direct opposition to all these; and when 
we further consider how, because we were once partakers of 
the spirit of the world, the enemy of our souls has strongly 
intrenched himself in our weak fallen natures; and still 
further, how, with shrewd subtlety, this invisible, intelligent 
personal foe is plotting and scheming to allure, deceive and 
lead us into sin— when with sober judgment we consider 
all these things, then indeed we realize that we are in the 
midst of a great conflict. 

The three points of attack by the enemy are, as the 
Apostle John (1 John 2:16) enumerates them, "the lust of 
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life." 

The first of these includes all those appetites and passions 
common to the whole human family, which in their 
legitimate uses under the full control of reason and conscience, 
are right and proper, but which, unduly cultivated 
until they become the masters of reason and conscience, 
degrade and debase the man. 

The second,— "the lust of the eyes,"— includes all 
those ambitions to acquire and possess whatsoever things 
the eye (the natural eye or the eye of the understanding) 
perceives to be good; i.e., to be gratifying to the carnal 
mind, the old unregenerate nature. This disposition impels 
to self-gratification regardless of the rights and liberties 



of others in any direction. It craves wealth, or fame, or 
power, or social distinction, and to these ends it inclines 
to harness every energy of mind and body. 

The third,— "the pride of life,"— is the blossom of 
selfishness, so abhorrent to God and to all good men. It 
is that disposition in a man which glories in his shame. 
When the lusts of the flesh and the lusts of the eyes have 
brought their curse of narrowness, bigotry and conceit; and 
when they have gone further in depriving fellow-men of 
their rights and privileges, then pride, the exultation of 
meanness, has its short triumph, and loftily soars above the 
unfortunate subjects of its power and gloats over the desolation 
it has wrought. 

These three points of attack by the great enemy are 
the points which the Lord would have us guard with unwearied 
vigilance. Be sober, be vigilant, and watch that 
the enemy gain no approach to the citadel of your heart 
by any one of these routes. 

That he makes repeated attacks is certain; and that 
these attacks come suddenly and without warning, and 
often with terrible force, is a matter of experience with all: 
hence the necessity for sober and constant vigilance. Be 
assured the ever watchful enemy will take advantage of our 
unguarded moments and our unfortified conditions if such 
there be. Even with all the watchfulness and readiness 
which we can command, the ability to withstand the enemy 
and to resist his attacks causes more or less suffering, and 
often taxes the powers of endurance to the utmost. Indeed, 
we must expect that the tension on our powers of endurance 
will sometimes be so great as to threaten disruption, 
and as to surely cause it if we trust to our own strength. 
We are forewarned to think not strange of the fiery trial that 
shall surely try us if we are indeed the sons of God and 
soldiers of Christ, as though some strange thing happened 
unto us. (1 Pet. 4:12-16.) These things should be expected 
and carefully prepared for by the Christian soldier. 

Peter intimates that the power by which we are to resist 
the adversary is the power of faith— "whom resist, 
steadfast in the faith." And John expresses the same 
thought, saying, "This is the victory that overcometh the 
world, even our faith." (1 John 5:4.) If we are not strong 
in the faith, how can we endure hardness for it? Faith 
must grasp the exceeding great and precious promises of 
God and appreciate their value. Faith must lay hold also 
upon the power of God and find the grace to help in every 
time of need. And faith in a personal righteous God, 
whose eye is ever upon us, must steadily cultivate those elements 
of character which are always pleasing and acceptable 
to him, and which Peter tells us are most essential to 
our final overcoming in this warfare.— 2 Pet. 1:5-10. 

He urges that, in addition to our faith in the exceeding 
great and precious promises which inspire zeal and give 
us renewed courage, we should give all diligence to add to 
our faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge 
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience 
godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to 



brotherly kindness charity." Then he adds, "For if ye do 
these things, ye shall never fall." 

The steady persistent cultivation of these graces of 
character will also clarify our spiritual vision, enabling us 
the more fully to comprehend the truth of God, and thus, 
"by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on 
the left," we shall be able to "withstand all the fiery darts 
of the adversary" and to win the victory of faith and make 
our calling and election sure. 

With this view of the great battle of life to the Christian, 
what a work we realize to be before us, and what necessity 
for sobriety, vigilance and steadfastness! It is a life 
work, a life battle against a mighty foe intrenched in our flesh. 

R1859 : page 202 

The powers without are strong indeed, but the 

civil war with the powers within is by far the most to 

be dreaded. If we become in any measure intoxicated 

with the spirit of the world;— if we give way to self-gratification, 

love of ease, pleasure, a little indulgence of any 

R1860 : page 202 

of the old dispositions of envy, malice, pride, vain-glory, 
vaunting of self, headiness, highmindedness, wrath, strife, 
or any such thing— even a little, Oh, how great is the 
peril to which we are exposed! 

Beloved, let us war a good warfare against the world, 
the flesh and the devil, seeking and finding, daily and hourly, 
fresh supplies of grace; for every day and every hour 
is a time of need if we are but awake to realize it. It is 
to the warfare with the powers intrenched within that we 
are again referred, when it is said, "He that is slow to anger 
is better than the mighty; and he that ruleth his spirit 
than he that taketh a city." (Prov. 16:32.) Yes, the task 
is a greater one, and represents a greater, as well as a nobler, 
effort. Let us fight the good fight of faith along this 
line. Let our lives be a daily and hourly struggle to overcome 
the evil that is in ourselves, to purify and beautify 
our own characters. Thus shall we be the more fully prepared 
to strive faithfully and steadily against the foes without 
—to war a good warfare to the end. 

The Apostle, out of the fulness of his love and sympathy 
for all his comrades in the army of the Lord, adds to 
his earnest exhortation this parting benediction— "The 
God of all grace who hath called us unto his eternal glory 
by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make 
you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you." It is only 
through endurance of hardness as good soldiers of Christ 
that this desirable condition can be attained— viz., perfect 
self-control and ability to resist evil, established faith, patience 
and virtue, settled, abiding rest in Christ, and 
hope through his word of promise. This undoubtedly was 
the Apostle's own experience as he grew old in the Master's 
service, and so may it be ours. Let each departing year 



find us nearer the glorious summit of perfection! 



R1857 : page 202 

PEACE! PERFECT PEACE! 



"Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace whose mind is 
stayed on Thee; because he trusteth in Thee."— Isa. 26:3. 

Peace! perfect peace! in this dark world of sin? 
The blood of Jesus whispers peace within. 

Peace! perfect peace! by thronging duties pressed? 
To do the will of Jesus, this is rest. 

Peace! perfect peace! with sorrows surging 'round? 
On Jesus' bosom nought but calm is found. 

Peace! perfect peace! 'mid suffering's keenest throes? 
The sympathy of Jesus brings repose. 

Peace! perfect peace! with loved ones far away? 
In Jesus' keeping we are safe, and they. 

Peace! perfect peace! our future all unknown? 
Jesus we know, and he is on the throne. 

Peace! perfect peace! death shadowing us and ours? 
Jesus has vanquished death and all its powers. 

It is enough: earth's struggles soon shall cease, 
And Jesus call us to heaven's perfect peace. 

E. H. BICKERSTETH. 



R1860 : page 202 
"REMEMBER LOT'S WIFE." 



IT WAS in connection with our Master's prophetic 
warnings respecting the trials of the present day that 
he used the words, "Remember Lot's wife" (Luke 17:32); 
and their significance should be comprehended by all who 
are walking in the light. 

The lesson is that those who, under the special guidance 
of the Lord, are now fleeing for life to the mountain 
of the Lord's Kingdom, will be held to a much stricter 
account than others. Lot and his family were not accused 
of sharing the evil practices of the Sodomites: his wife's 



outward fault was merely that of looking back; but we 
may reasonably suppose that this implied a heart out of 
harmony with her deliverance and in some degree sympathetic 
with the evil things and evil people which God had 
condemned as unworthy of life. She at heart clung to 
the accursed things, even though she did not outwardly 
return to them, but fled from them; and therefore God 
brought her no further. She became a monument of the 
folly of sympathizing with evil-doers after knowing that 
God has given them up. 

Quite a number now need to have their attention 
called to the antitype of this incident referred to by our 
Lord as typical. Quite a number are disposed to sympathize 
and fraternize with those who are under divine condemnation 
now, and as such sentenced to the second death, 
destruction, typified by the destruction of Sodom, which 
we are directly told was "set forth as an example" or 
type.— Jude 7. 

Those who assume to be more gracious and long 
suffering than the Lord make of themselves opponents, 
who, instead of being students of the principles of righteousness, 
attempt to be judges and teachers of Jehovah. 
The proper attitude of heart accepts God's conduct as not 
only wiser, but more just than our own; and consequently 
when we see any who have ever enjoyed the light of present 
truth abandoned by the Lord and led into outer-darkness, 

R1860 : page 203 

we are to conclude that before being thus abandoned there 
must have been in them "an evil heart of unbelief in departing 
from the living God." "He is faithful who hath 
promised," "If any man will do my Father's will, he 
shall know of my doctrine." Whoever therefore loses the 
doctrines of Christ after once having had them, has surely 
done more than get his head confused. His heart had 
separated from the Lord's ways previously; for as long as 
we abide in him as his "elect," it will not be possible 
for any of the snares of this evil day to entrap us, and none 
shall pluck us out of the hand of the Lord our Shepherd. 

It is proper for us to be watchful of each other's welfare 
doctrinally as well as otherwise. When we see a brother 
walking contrary to the Lord's instruction into the snare 
of the wicked, we are to "have compassion," and while 
praying for him we are to use our best judgment as to how 
to help him, "making a difference" according to the circumstances 
of the case. Some should be dealt with energetically 
—"pulling them out of the fire." (Jude 22,23.) 
But while we should always be on the alert to render assistance 
whenever needed, to convert a brother from the error 
of his ways (James 5:19,20), we should make no such 
effort for him as would tend to make us fall from our own 
steadfastness into the error of the wicked.— 2 Pet. 3:17. 

When we see others walking in forbidden paths, in the 
way of transgressors, we are not to follow them there in 
order to help them out; but to show them the right path 



by keeping in it and calling to them. When we see some 
confusing themselves with doctrines and teachings of men, 
when they know that they are fundamentally wrong, we are 
not to wade through those doctrines in order to help them 
out; but we are to remind them that the study of any 
doctrine which will not square with the foundation is not 
only a misuse of consecrated time, but that all trifling with 
that which we know to be error is wrong and dangerous, as 
all violations of conscience and principle are dangerous. 

For instance, at the very foundation of all Christian 
doctrine lies the doctrine of the ransom. It implies that 
God is holy and man a sinner. It implies that God is just 
as well as loving. It implies recovery or restitution, as well 
as a fall into sin and death. Any teaching, therefore, which 
either openly denies, or quietly ignores, the "ransom for 
all, to be testified in due time," must be a doctrine at variance 
with the doctrines of God's revelation, whether it be 
old or new, whether advocated by friends or foes, the 
learned or the unlearned, in the name of evolution or in 
some other name. Our attitude toward it should be prompt 
and decided opposition. If others waver we who have 
learned that this is the test by which all things are to be 
proved need not waver. If friends get into the quicksands 
of no-ransom errors, whose name now is legion, and which 
are growing continually, we should lend them a helping 
hand to get out, "pulling them out of the fire," by reminding 
them of the Rock Christ Jesus, whereon our feet 
of faith are firmly established, and throwing to them the rope 
of divine promises throughout which is woven the scarlet 
thread of the ransom, and exhort them to come back to the 
rock and not attempt to find another rock at the bottom of 
the quicksands. And we must use great plainness of speech 
in showing them their danger and in pointing out their 
way of escape. 

We must not accept their invitation to join with 
them in exploring what men can say or write which would 
tend to make the Word of God of none effect, which would 
claim that God has all along been the sinner and man his 
dupe; or that the hope of mankind is in their own evolution 
and not in the ransom and restitution of Scripture; or 
that he who redeemed will not be the same who will, as the 
Good Physician, restore and bless all who will accept his 
grace "in due time." If, after kind and faithful remonstrance 
on your part, they still persist in exploring and 
delving into such evident contradictions of God's Word, let 
them go. Remember that there must be something wrong at 
their hearts, else they would have no pleasure in the unfruitful 
works of darkness, but would rather reprove them; and their 
delight would be in the great divine plan of the ages. (Psa. 1:1-6.) 
Remember, too, that God has promised to keep 
and guide the minds of those whose hearts are loyal and true 
to him. We should, therefore, conclude that if the Lord is 
either thrusting any one out of the light, as unworthy of it, 
into the outer darkness of the world, or if he is permitting 
unfaithful ones to be seduced by the great enemy, it is not 
our mission to follow them into the outer darkness in conversation, 



reading, etc., but to remain with the Lord and 
with those who walk in the light, and to seek others to take 
the places and the crowns of those who deny or ignore the 
precious blood of the covenant wherewith once they were 
sanctified.-Rev. 3:11; Heb. 10:29-31. 

Neither are we to waste sympathy upon those who depart. 
If we can neither persuade them nor pull them out 
of the fire, we must let them go, and should turn at once 
and render aid to others more worthy. When the Lord 
has put any one out of the light (Matt. 22:13,14), we cannot 
hope to bring them back. Had it been proper for them 
to stay in the light he would not have permitted them to 
be put out of it. 

We do not here refer to slight differences in understanding 
which should be patiently dealt with, and explained 
or overlooked, as all the children of one school have not 

R1861 : page 203 

attained to the same "step" or degree of knowledge; but 
we do refer to those radical differences, all of which 
may be quickly proved by the test of the ransom doctrine. 
If they agree not with this, it is because there is no light in 
them. And such are to be to us no longer brothers in 
Christ, but should be considered and treated as of the 
world— "as a heathen man or a publican." Such are not 
to be numbered among our friends; for the friendship of 
such is enmity against God. We are not to receive or 
entertain such at our houses, nor to bid them or their work 
God-speed in any manner. (2 John 8-11.) Some 

R1861 : page 204 

who have neglected the plain statement of God's Word on 
this subject have suffered spiritually for their disobedience. 

Let us more and more be of one mind with the Lord. 
His friends only must be our friends; his enemies only our 
enemies. If we affiliate with the Lord's enemies we will 
at least get into a lukewarm condition towards him and his 
friends; and the lukewarm he will spew out of his mouth. 
And we want to cultivate warmth of heart toward all who 
trust in the precious blood and are consecrated to our Redeemer 
as the only Lord. There must be no lukewarmness 
there. Whatever their peculiarities according to the flesh, 
we cannot be otherwise than "brothers" to them in spirit, 
with all that helpfulness and sympathy which brotherhood 
in and with Christ implies. 

But we will not, must not, cannot have any fellowship 
with the ungodly, the sinner against light and truth, nor 
the scorners of the grace of God. Whoever are our Lord's 
enemies must be our enemies, because enemies of the light, 
the truth, the way: and although if they are destitute we should 
feed them (Rom. 12:20), yet so long as they are the opponents 
and adversaries of the Lord's cause, of which Christ and 
his cross are the centre, they are our adversaries and we 
theirs. The Lord loves positiveness with harmlessness, and 



of us it should be true, as it is prophetically written of our 
Lord and the true members of his body in Psalm 139:16-24. 

Whoever therefore is being led of the Lord's messengers 
to the place of safety, as were Lot and his family delivered 
from the destruction of Sodom, let him "remember 
Lot's wife" and not look back or otherwise manifest 
sympathy with those whom the Lord has condemned and 
abandoned to destruction. 



R1861 : page 204 

"THEY HAD ALL THINGS IN COMMON.' 



"And all that believed were together, and had all things in common; and 
sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every 
man had need. And they, continuing daily with one accord in 
the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their 
meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, 
and having favor with all the people."— Acts 2:44-47. 

SUCH was the spontaneous sentiment of the early 
Church: selfishness gave place to love and general 
interest. Blessed experience! And without doubt a 
similar sentiment, more or less clearly defined, comes over 
the hearts of all who are truly converted. When first we 
got a realizing sense of God's love and salvation, when we 
gave ourselves completely to the Lord and realized his gifts 
to us, which pertain not only to the life that now is, but 
also to that which is to come— we felt an exuberance of joy, 
which found in every fellow-pilgrim toward the heavenly 
Canaan, a brother or a sister, in whom we trusted as related 
to the Lord and having his spirit; and we were disposed to 
deal with them all as we would with the Lord, and to share 
with them our all, as we would share all with our Redeemer. 
And in many instances it was by a rude shock that we were 
awakened to the fact that neither we nor others are perfect in 
the flesh; and that no matter how much of the Master's 
spirit his people now possess, they "have this treasure in 
earthen vessels" of human frailty and defection. 

Then we learned, not only that the weaknesses of the 
flesh of other men had to be taken into account, but 
that our own weaknesses of the flesh needed constant guarding. 
We found that whilst all had shared Adam's fall, all 
had not fallen alike, or in exactly the same particulars. All 
have fallen from God's likeness and spirit of love, to Satan's 
likeness and spirit of selfishness: and as love has diversities 
of operation, so has selfishness. Consequently, 
selfishness working in one has wrought a desire for ease, 
sloth, indolence; in another it produced energy, labor for 
the pleasures of this life, self-gratification, etc. 

Among those actively selfish some take self-gratification 
in amassing a fortune, and having it said, He is wealthy; 



others gratify their selfishness by seeking honor of men; 
others in dress, others in travel, others in debauchery and 
the lowest and meanest forms of selfishness. 

Each one begotten to the new life in Christ, with its 
new spirit of love, finds a conflict begun, fightings within 
and without; for the new spirit wars with whatever form 
of selfishness or depravity formerly had control of us. The 
new "mind of Christ," whose principles are justice and 
love, asserts itself; and reminds the will that it has assented 
to and covenanted this change. The desires of the flesh 
(the selfish desires, whatever their bent), aided by the outside 
influences of friends, argue and discuss the question; 
urging that no radical measures must be taken— that such 
a course would be foolish, insane, impossible. The flesh 
insists that the old course cannot be changed, but will agree 
to slight modifications, and to do nothing as extreme as 
before. 

The vast majority of God's people seem to agree to 
this partnership, which is really still the reign of selfishness. 
But others insist that the spirit or mind of Christ shall 
have the control. The battle which ensues is a hard one 
(Gal. 5:16,17); but the new will conquers, and self, with its 
own selfishness, or depraved desires, is reckoned dead.— 
Col. 2:20; 3:3; Rom. 6:2-8. 

But does this end the battle forever? No;— 
"Ne'er think the victory won, 
Nor once at ease sit down; 
Thine arduous task will not be done 
Till thou shalt gain thy crown." 

Ah, yes! we must renew the battle daily, and help divine 
implore and receive, that we may finish our course 
with joy. We must not only conquer self, but as the Apostle 
did, we must keep our bodies under. (1 Cor. 9:27.) And 
this, our experience, that we must be constantly on the alert 
against the spirit of selfishness, and to support and promote 
in ourselves the spirit of love, is the experience of all who 
likewise have "put on Christ" and taken his will to be 
theirs. Hence the propriety of the Apostle's remark, 

R1861 : page 205 

"Henceforth know we no man [in Christ] after the flesh." 

We know those in Christ according to their new spirit, and 

not according to their fallen flesh. And if we see them 

fail sometimes, or always to some degree, and yet see evidences 

that the new mind is wrestling for the mastery, we 

are properly disposed to sympathize rather than to berate 

for little failures; "remembering ourselves lest we also be 

tempted [of our old selfish nature in violation of some of 

the requirements of the perfect law of Love]." 

Under "the present distress," therefore, while each 
has all that he can do to keep his own body under and the 
spirit of love in control, sound judgment as well as experience 
and the Bible tells us that we would best not complicate 
matters by attempting communistic schemes; but each 
make as straight paths as possible for his own feet, that that 



which is lame in our fallen flesh be not turned entirely out 
of the way, but that it be healed. 

(1) Sound Judgment says that if the saints with divine 
help have a constant battle to keep selfishness subject 
to love, a promiscuous colony or communism would certainly 
not succeed in ruling itself by a law utterly foreign 
to the spirit of the great majority of its members. And it 
would be impossible to establish a communism of saints only, 
because we cannot read the hearts— only "the Lord knoweth 
them that are his." And if such a colony of saints could be 
gotten together, and if it should prosper with all things in 
common, all sorts of evil persons would seek to get their 
possessions or to share them; and if successfully excluded 
they would say all manner of evil against them; and so, if it 
held together at all, the enterprise would not be a real success. 

Some saints, as well as many of the world, are so fallen 
into selfish indolence that nothing but necessity will help 
them to be, "not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, 
serving the Lord." And many others are so selfishly ambitious 
that they need the buffetings of failure and adversity 
to mellow them and enable them to sympathize with 
others; or even to bring them to deal justly with others. 

Such communities, if left to the rule of the majority, 
would sink to the level of the majority; for the progressive, 
active minority, finding that nothing could be gained by 
energy and thrift, over carelessness and sloth, would also 
grow careless and indolent. If governed by organizers of 
strong will, as Life Trustees and Managers, on a paternal 
principle, the result would be more favorable financially; 
but the masses, deprived of personal responsibility, would 
degenerate into mere tools and slaves of the Trustees. 

To sound judgment it therefore appears, that the method 

R1862 : page 205 

of individualism, with its liberty and responsibility, is the 
best one for the development of intelligent beings; even 
though it may work hardships many times to all, and sometimes 
to many. 

Sound judgment can see that if the Millennial Kingdom 
were established in the earth, with the divine rulers 
then promised, backed by unerring wisdom and full power 
to use it, laying "judgment to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet," and ruling not by consent of majorities, 
but by righteous judgment, and as "with a rod of iron"— 
then communism could succeed; probably it would be 
the very best condition, and if so it will be the method chosen 
by the King of kings. But for that we wait; and not having 
the power or the wisdom to use such theocratic power, 
the spirit of a sound mind simply bides the Lord's time, 
praying meanwhile, "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done 
on earth as it is done in heaven." And after Christ's 
Kingdom shall have brought all the willing back to God and 
righteousness, and shall have destroyed all the unwilling, 
then, with love the rule on earth as it is in heaven, we 
may suppose that men will share heaven's mercies in common, 



as do the angels now. 

(2) Experience proves the failure of communistic 
methods in the present time. There have been several 
such communities tried for many years; and the result has 
always been failure. The Oneida Community of New 
York is one, whose failure has long been recognized by 
sensible people. Another, the Harmony Society of Pennsylvania, 
soon showed that the hopes of its founders met 

failure, for so much discord prevailed that it divided. The 
split-off, known as Economites, also located near Pittsburg. 
It flourished for a while, after a fashion, but it is now quite 
withered; and possession of its property is now being disputed 
in the Society and in the courts of law. The leading 
men in the Community have about died out, and the 
unintelligent and ambitionless who clung to them for a 
home, a living and a head, are likely to be gulled into the 
control of Cyrus Teed, a false Christ, who would like to 
handle their money. And other societies are starting now, 
which will be far less successful than these, because the 
times are different: independence is greater, respect and 
reverence is less, majorities will rule, and without wiser 
leaders are sure to fail. Wise worldly leaders are looking 
out for themselves, while wise Christians are busy in 
other channels,— obeying the command, "Go thou and 
preach the gospel." 

(3) The Bible does not teach Communism, but does 
teach loving considerate Individualism, except in the sense 
of family communism— each family acting as a unit, of 
which the father is the head and the wife one with him, his 
fellow-heir of the grace of life, his partner in every joy and 
benefit as well as in every adversity and sorrow. 

True, God permitted a communistic arrangement in 
the primitive Church, referred to at the beginning of this 
article; but this may have been for the purpose of illustrating 
to us the unwisdom of the method; and lest some, 
thinking of the scheme now, should conclude that the 
apostles did not command and organize communities, because 
they lacked the wisdom to concoct and carry out 
such methods. For not a word can be quoted from our 
Lord or the apostles advocating the communistic principles; 
but much to the contrary. 

True, the Apostle Peter (and probably others) knew 
of and cooperated in that first communistic arrangement, 
even if he did not teach the system. It has been inferred, 

R1862 : page 206 

too, that the death of Ananias and Sapphira was an indication 
that the giving of all the goods of the believers was 
compulsory; but not so: their sin was that of lying, as 
Peter declared in reviewing the case. While they had the 
land there was no harm in keeping it if they got it honestly; 
and even after they had sold it no harm was done: the wrong 
was in misrepresenting that the sum of money turned in was 
their all, when it was not their all. They were attempting 
to cheat the others, by getting a share of their all without 



giving their own all. 

As a matter of fact, the Christian Community at Jerusalem 
was a failure. "There arose a murmuring"— "because 
their widows were neglected in the daily ministration." 
Although under the Apostolic inspection the Church 
was pure, free from "tares," and all had the treasure of the 
new spirit or "mind of Christ," yet evidently that treasure 
was only in warped and twisted earthen vessels which could 
not get along well together; because while all were blemished, 
all were not blemished in the same manner and degree. 

The apostles soon found that the management of the 
community would greatly interfere with their real work- 
men - commission to preach the gospel— "That repentance 
and remission of sins should be preached in his name, beginning 
at Jerusalem." So they abandoned those things 
to others. The Apostle Paul and others traveled from 
city to city preaching Christ and him crucified; but, so 
far as the record shows, they never mentioned Communism 
and never organized a Community: and yet St. Paul declares, 
"I have not shunned to declare unto you the whole 
counsel of God." This proves that Communism is no part 
of the gospel, nor of the counsel of God for this age. 

On the contrary, the Apostle Paul exhorted and instructed 
the Church to do things which it would be wholly 
impossible to do as members of a communistic society 
—to each "provide for his own;" to "lay by on the first 
day of the week" money for the Lord's service, according 
as the Lord had prospered them; that servants should obey 
their masters, rendering the service with a double good will 
if the master were also a brother in Christ; and how masters 
should treat their servants, as those who must themselves 
give an account to the great Master, Christ.— 1 Tim. 5:8; 
6:1; ICor. 16:2; Eph. 6:5-9. 

Our Lord Jesus not only did not establish a Community 
while he lived, but he never taught that such should 
be established. On the contrary, in his parables he taught,— 
that all have not the same number of pounds or talents 
given them, that each is a steward and should individually 
(not collectively, as a commune) manage his own affairs, 
and render his own account. (Matt. 25:14-28; Luke 19:13-24. 
See also James 4:13,15.) And, when dying, our 
Lord commended his mother to the care of his disciple 
John, and the record of John (19:27) is, "And from that 
hour that disciple took her unto his own home." John, 
therefore, had a home; so had Martha, Mary and Lazarus. 
Had our Lord formed a Community he would, doubtless, 
have commended his mother to it instead of to John. 

Moreover, the forming of a Commune of believers is 
opposed to the purpose and methods of the Gospel age. 
The object of this age is to witness Christ to the world, and 
thus to "take out a people for his name;" and to this end 
each believer is exhorted to be a burning and a shining light 
before men— the world in general— and not before and to 
each other merely. Hence, after permitting the first Christian 
Commune to be established, to show that the failure 
to establish Communes generally was not an oversight, the 



Lord broke it up, and scattered the believers everywhere, 
to preach the gospel to every creature. We read,— 
"And at that time there was a great persecution 
against the Church which was at Jerusalem; and they were 
all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and 
Samaria, except the apostles," and they went everywhere 
preaching the gospel.— Acts 8:1,4; 11:19. 

It is still the work of God's people to shine as lights 
in the midst of the world, and not to shut themselves up in 
convents and cloisters or as communities. The promises 
of Paradise will not be realized by joining such Communes. 
We advise all TOWER readers to have neither part nor lot 
in such communities. The desire to join is but a part of 
the general spirit of our day against which we are forewarned. 
(Isa. 8: 12.) "Trust in the Lord, and wait patiently 
for him." He will establish righteousness and equity in 
the earth. "Watch ye, therefore, and pray always, that ye 
may be accounted worthy to escape all these things, and 
to stand before the Son of Man."— Luke 21:36. 



R1862 : page 206 

CALEB'S REWARD. 

-SEPT. 8.-JOSH. 14:5-14.- 

Golden Text.— "He wholly followed the 
Lord God of Israel."— Josh. 14:14. 

IN ALL the promises to the faithful prior to the 

Gospel age there were no intimations of spiritual 

things,— of the high calling to joint-heirship with Christ, 

of the privilege of being transformed new creatures, partakers 

of the divine nature, etc. Thus, for instance, Caleb 

wholly followed the Lord God of Israel and received as his 

reward a choice portion of the land of Canaan. 

We observe also many similar promises made to Israel 
as a nation conditioned on their obedience to God and their 
faith and loyalty:— They should eat the good of the land; 
their days should be long upon the land which the Lord 
gave them; their enemies should not triumph over them; 
they should be blessed in basket and store, etc., etc. These 
were the immediate temporal rewards of earthly things 
promised to the obedient. But the promises to be realized 
to them even beyond the grave were also of an earthly 
kind. To Abraham God said, "Lift up now thine eyes 
and look from the place where thou art, northward and 

R1862 : page 207 

southward and eastward and westward; for all the land 
which thou seest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever." 
And Stephen and Paul, referring to this earthly 
promise to Abraham and to his seed according to the flesh, 



remind us that this promise was never fulfilled to Abraham 
in his past life (nor has it yet been fulfilled to his posterity 
—"for an everlasting possession"); but that he died in 
faith believing that when he should be awakened from death 
in due time the promise would be verified.— Acts 7:5; 
Heb. 11:8-10. 

These observations suggest several important questions. 
— (1) May the Christian expect the temporal rewards or 
earthly prosperity as a present reward of faithfulness to 
God? (2) Shall the spiritual seed of Abraham share the 
earthly inheritance with the fleshly seed? or (3), vice versa, 
If the higher promises were made to the spiritual seed, 
the Gospel Church, can they apply also to the fleshly seed? 

Considering the second question first, we answer, No; 
for the saints of the Gospel age are to be changed from 
the human to the spiritual, divine nature. They are to be 
made like unto Christ's glorious body, who is now "the 
express image of the Father"— "the King immortal, invisible 
and dwelling in light which no man can approach 
unto, whom no man hath seen, nor can see;" and with 
Christ they are to inherit all things. (1 Cor. 15:51-53; 
Phil. 3:21; 2 Pet. 1:4; Phil. 1:5; 1 Tim. 1:17; 6:16; 
Rev. 21:7; Rom. 8:17.) While the fleshly seed of Abraham 
will rejoice to sit, each man, under his own vine and 
fig tree with none to molest or make them afraid (Micah 4:4), 
the spiritual seed will be reigning with Christ in 
glory, and from their exalted position will be able to bless 
all the families of the earth; and not only so, but even to 
judge angels.-Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29; 1 Cor. 6:3. 

Nor can the fleshly seed of Abraham, even the most 
worthy and faithful prophets and martyrs, inherit the 
"exceeding great and precious promises" which belong to 
a subsequent dispensation of divine favor; for it is written 
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God,"— 
the spiritual plane of that kingdom being here referred to, 
—though they will inherit its earthly phase, as it is written: 
"Ye [unfaithful Jews] shall see Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God [the 
earthly phase], and you yourselves thrust out." (Luke 13:28.) 
These two phases of the kingdom will be in communication 
and cooperation during the Millennium— the one, the 
higher, spiritual and invisible, and the other, perfect human 
and visible among men. Thus it is written, "Out of Zion 
[the spiritual phase] shall go forth the law, and the word of 
the Lord from Jerusalem [the human, visible phase]." 
(Isa. 2:3.) And while the promise to Abraham, "In thee 
and in thy seed ['which seed', says Paul, 'is Christ'— 
Head and body] shall all the families of the earth be 
blessed," shall be fulfilled in the spiritual seed primarily, 
yet the exalted earthly phase of the kingdom are to be the 
blessed channels or agencies through which the blessing 
shall flow to all the kindreds of the earth. And thus, as 
the Apostle declares, the promise of God— "In thee and in 
thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed"— 
shall be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the 
law (the fleshly seed), but to that also which is of the faith 



of Abraham. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's 
seed and heirs according to the promise.— Rom. 4:16; 
Gal. 3:16,29. 

This calls to mind the two phases of the kingdom of 
God as presented in MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. I., Chap. 
XIV., and the separate and distinct inheritance and office of 
each. We are also reminded of the Lord's teaching that 
not all the natural descendants of Abraham are to be 
heirs with him of the promise, but only such as Abraham 
would be honored in owning as sons— such as partake of 
his spirit or disposition.— See John 8:39,44. 

While to the natural seed of Abraham is promised all 
the land which Abraham saw, and the privilege of dwelling 
in it in safety, and while the inheritors of the earthly phase 
of the kingdom are to be princes in all the earth (Psa. 45:16), 
to the spiritual seed of Abraham, which seed is Christ- 
Head and body— are given the "exceeding great and precious 
promises."— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

This brings us to the consideration of our first inquiry, 
May the Christian expect the rewards of earthly prosperity 
for his faithfulness to God, either in the present life, or in 
that which is to come? 

We have already shown that Christians, members of 
the body of Christ, have beyond this life "an inheritance 
incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved 
in heaven" for them (1 Pet. 1:4); consequently 
the earthly inheritance of human perfection and a peaceful 
home, each under his own vine and fig tree, could not 
confine to earth the immortal spirit beings, partakers of the 
divine nature, the scope of whose powers must necessarily 
extend to the utmost bounds of creation. 

Nor can the rewards of present temporal prosperity in 
worldly things be expected by those who are running for 
the prize of this high calling to glory, honor and immortality 
as kings and priests unto God; for the way to the 
crown is the way of the cross, the way of sacrifice, as well 
to every member of the body of Christ as it was to our 
Head and Lord, Christ Jesus. He was "a man of sorrows 
and acquainted with grief;" the reproaches of them that 
reproached God fell upon him; though he was rich, for 
our sakes he became poor; so poor that he said, "The 
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but 
the Son of man hath not where to lay his head." There 
was no reward of earthly prosperity for the Lord's faithfulness, 
but the reverse— privation and persecution were 
realized, even unto death. And the servant is not above 
his Lord: if they have persecuted him they will persecute 
us also; and the reproaches of them that reproached him 
will also fall upon us. The only present reward for which 
the followers of Christ may look is the heartfelt manifestations 
of the Lord's love and approval. "In the world," 
said he, "ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have 
peace." 

It should be observed also that while rewards of temporal 
prosperity were promised and given to fleshly Israel 
as a nation and as individuals, yet the very cream of that 



nation, the faithful patriarchs and prophets received no 
such temporal rewards, but like the Gospel Church, they 
endured hardness as good soldiers and nobly fought the 
good fight of faith; and their abundant reward will be in 
the glory of the earthly phase of the Kingdom of God. 
Note the account of their faithful endurance as recorded 
by PaulinHeb. 11. 

The temporal rewards and punishments and general 
discipline of fleshly Israel were typical of the Lord's similar 
discipline of the world in the age to come; while his 
selection out from among that people of a worthy class of 
overcomers for the earthly phase of the Kingdom was 
typical of his selection during the Gospel age of a class of 
overcomers for the spiritual phase of the Kingdom. In any 
case, it pays to wholly follow the Lord God of Israel, who 
is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him to walk 
in his ways.— Heb. 11:6; Prov. 8:32-36. 



R1862 : page 208 

THE CITIES OF REFUGE. 

-SEPT. 15.-JOSH. 20:1-9.- 



Golden Text.— "Who have fled for refuge to lay 
hold upon the hope set before us."— Heb. 6:18. 

THE cities of refuge were appointed in Israel for the 
protection against summary punishment of any who 
might accidentally take human life, but not for any wilful 
murderer. There were six of these cities in central localities, 
to any one of which the man-slayer might fly and there 
find protection until his case could be legally tried. These 
cities did not shelter the wilful murderer, but the authorities, 
after a fair trial, delivered such up to the just penalty of 
their crime, which was death.— Deut. 19:11-13; 
Num. 35:30-34. 

If the killing proved to be accidental the man-slayer 
must still remain in the city of refuge until the death of 
the high priest then in office. This restraint upon his 
liberty was the penalty for his carelessness, and thus an 
additional protection to human life. 

This feature of the typical Mosaic law strongly foreshadowed 
the refuge which the sinner may find in Christ. 
He is our shield and hiding-place from the penalty of all 
sin, save that which is wilful. He is no shelter for obstinate, 
unrepentant sinners; but for every one born in sin 
and shapen in iniquity, and thus sinners by the accident of 
birth or heritage, yet earnestly desirous of escaping from 
sin and its just consequences, and seeking refuge in him by 
faith, there is protection. We are all under sentence of death; 
Justice is the avenger; and only those in Christ are shielded. 

But, mark you, the sinner must continue to abide in 
this city of refuge as long as the high priest liveth— i.e., as 



long as Christ continues in the priestly office, which will be 
until he is able to present all the redeemed who abide in 
him under the New Covenant conditions faultless before 
the throne of God, at the end of his Millennial reign as 
king and priest. Then, being made actually perfect by 
the great Redeemer-Physician, they will be able to stand, 
not in the imputed or reckoned righteousness of another, 
as formerly, but in their own glorious perfection, yet 
never forgetful of the great atoning sacrifice and the 
patient work of restitution which made possible such a 
glorious consummation. 

Like the cities of refuge Christ is easy of access to all 
who diligently seek him, and who have no will in opposition 
to righteousness, nor to any of his measures of just 
and righteous discipline. 



R1862 : page 208 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



MY DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I desire to write you 
at this time. I seem to be learning more and more the 
necessity of watching against the spirit of division, which 
Satan seems more and more trying to inject into the Church, 
if possible, to overthrow the faith of some. When I think 
of well-informed men that have fallen, because of not 
watching against that hydra-headed monster, Envy, it 
makes me tremble. And I ask myself: "Can it possibly be 
that I may live too unguarded, and finally forsake the Truth 
and be a 'cast-away'?" Oh, yes, it is possible, but I pray, 
"Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit 

R1863 : page 208 

[of love] within me." Satan would have me to enviously harbor 

evil against a dear brother some times, and then my 

only refuge is "the precious blood" of Christ. How I 

realize that this "earthen vessel" needs to be constantly 

replenished with the spirit of the truth, oil, lest the fires of 

love go out. May the dear Lord keep all the precious sheep 

safe and secure. And this he certainly will do if our part 

be done. "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it 

are the issues of life." "Looking diligently lest any man 

fail of the grace of God." (Prov. 4:23; Heb. 12:15.) 

This I want to do. 

May the precious love of our dear Lord be a consolation 
to you, my dear Brother, in all your labors for his 
name's sake. Also may the dear ones in the office be 
shielded from every fiery dart, by "the breastplate of faith 
and love." They are dear brethren and sisters, yet I see they 
are open to an attack from the Evil one in a way others are 
not. How necessary the warning of the Apostle: "Let 



him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall." 

Oh, that the constant prayer of all may be, Lord, 
"Keep thou my way for me." I find that we Colporteurs 
need to "watch and pray" constantly, especially where 
there are two or more together, lest the spirit of division 
creep in there too. May we all "walk worthy of the vocation 
wherewith we are called, with all lowliness and meekness, 
with longsuffering, forbearing one another in love, 
endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of 
peace."— Eph. 4:1-3. 
Yours in the hope of our high calling, 

JAMES D. WRIGHT. 



page 208 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Your letter with the volumes 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN at hand, and I have found 
much pleasure in studying them. I find food that no other 
book outside the Bible has given me. Thank God that 
millions of heathen Chinese who have no knowledge of 
that "only name whereby men must be saved" are to be 
given a knowledge! I have felt since I have been in 
China that all my faith had been taken away, and many 
times, when facing realities, as if I should die in the struggle. 
I find much opposition to what seems to me to be the 
correct interpretation of the Scriptures, and while I stand 
alone in a sense, yet I am perfectly happy and God blesses me. 

I enjoy the TOWER very much, and would like to send 
you the money for DAWNS and TOWER but I haven't it. 
Since I withdrew from the Alliance Mission I have had no 
stated salary, and many times am short of what many would 
call the necessities of life; but my needs have all been 
supplied; praise God! 

I have many things to think about, and it is not easy 
to surmount the hills of difficulty. I need the prayers of 
faith, and trust you will remember me sometimes when at 
the throne of grace. God bless and use you abundantly! 

In the hope of his coming, G. HOWARD MALONE. 



R1863 : page 208 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-Books duly to hand. Am 
now through with the third volume, and re-reading VOL. I., 
as there were very many things I did not see in it the first 
reading. I notice you say, that, if the readers derive one-fourth 
the joy from these books that the writer did in preparing 
same, you will be satisfied. I will say, four times the 
joy I received in reading them, is more than one man can 
hold; so your joy must be full. Yours in the Lord, 
M. P. THORI. 



page 209 

VOL. XVI. SEPTEMBER 15, 1895. No. 18. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items:— True Love vs. 

False Love; etc., 210 

Views from the Tower 211 

Poem: God Holds the Key 212 

The Privilege and Power of Prayer 213 

Concerning Profitable Meetings 216 

Bible Study: Israel Renewing the 

Covenant 219 

Bible Study: Review 220 

Bible Study: The Times of the Judges 220 

page 210 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS'-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1864: page 210 

TRUE LOVE VS. FALSE LOVE. 

God is love! Beware of people who while expatiating on love and 
attempting to shine as its exponents do so at the expense of God's character. 
Some of them affect to be so loving that they cannot admit that 
God could destroy Satan and the wicked as he declares he will do. 
Their argument sets themselves up as the standard, and they say, 
"Surely God cannot be less loving than I,— and I would save Satan 
and everybody." Poor foolish hearts, "Going about to establish their 
own righteousness, they have not submitted themselves to that righteousness 
which is of God;" and of which God's Word and conduct are the 
highest exponents. Thus their foolish heart becomes darkened. Those 
only will be loved of the Lord and kept from falling, and those only 



will be made up as his "jewels," who reverence his Word and make up 
the standard of their judgment from it; and who do not attempt to pervert 
it to their own conceptions. 

Beware of all who make a great palaver about love! for Satan 
often uses it as the garment of light to cover bad conduct or bad doctrines 
—whose real lovelessness he would thus screen from criticism. 
For instance, true love begins with God, and says, "Let God be true, if 
it prove every man a liar." False love often is really self-love, which 
would not hesitate to trail even divine honor and love and justice in the 
dust, in order to glorify self as the founder of a theory; for instance, 
the theory which charges "all the sin and wickedness and crime" of 
the present and past upon God. Shall we suppose that those who thus 
blaspheme God's holy name, and charge him with all the sin and deviltry 
of the past six thousand years, really love God with all their heart, 
mind, soul and strength? Surely not! The loving and appreciative 
heart recognizes God as the embodiment of the highest standard of love 
and justice, truth and righteousness. Such a theory would be an abomination 
to anyone possessing the true love of God even to a limited degree. 
Such should not even need the assurances of Scripture that it is 
"every good and perfect gift that cometh down from the Father of lights;" 
that "in him is no darkness [evil] at all;"— that "his work is perfect;" 
that "God tempteth no man" with evil, neither is he tempted by any. 

If any man believe and speak according to such a theory, it is because 
there is no light in him; he is full of darkness. 

See our issue of March 1, '95, "Christian Common Sense." 



R1863 : page 211 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



FAILING to receive from the present Czar assurances 
of a more liberal government than his father's, the 
Nihilists of Russia are conspiring and threatening his life. 
Bombs, arms, revolutionary literature and nine hundred 
conspirators have recently been seized at Moscow. 

The war between the German Socialists and the German 
Emperor progresses. The latter has taken to flattering 
the army, and recently, at the celebration of the 
twenty-fifth anniversary of the victory of Sedan, speaking 
to his Guard at the close of the review of 30,000 troops he 
said: "May the whole people find in themselves strength 
to repel these monstrous attacks. If they do not I now 
call upon you to resist the treasonable band, and to urge a 
war which will free us from such elements." A Berlin 
correspondent telegraphs,— "Never before has he [the 
Emperor] so energetically and plainly appealed to the army 
as the final arbiter in the struggle against Social Democracy.' 

Two days later the editor of "Vorwarts" was arrested 
and two editions of his journal seized, for articles criticizing 
the national war policy, considered uncomplimentary 
to the Emperor. The real secret is that the Social Democrats 
are increasing, and polled 1,500,000 votes at the last 



election. 

These things show that while the movement toward 
political liberty has been rather quiet for some time, it has 
not died. It will be on hand to fulfill the predictions of 
Scripture in due time. It cannot overwhelm the mountains 
[governments], and sweep them into the sea [anarchy] 
(Psa. 46), until first the servants of God are "sealed in 
their foreheads." 



The Benedictine monks of St. Vincent (Beatty, Pa.) 
have long made a beer almost as celebrated as that made 
by the monks near Ligonier, Pa. Roman Catholic temperance 
workers are endeavoring to have Satolli rebuke and 
close both distilleries. 

Through the "Wine and Spirit Gazette" we learn 
that a London wine firm is advertising by circular to give a 
"guaranteed summary" of their "most important customers." 
These are classified as follows: 

Titled Gentlemen, 358 

Judges of the courts, 9 

Army and navy officers, 708 

Bishops, 9 

Archdeacons, 16 

Other clergymen, 2,203 

Medical doctors, 1,522 

Baronets, knights, M.P's, etc., 2,600 

Attorneys, merchants, etc., 4,250 

Think of it! All these the customers of one firm! 

The oldest Presbyterian church in Pittsburg has, for 
about thirty-five years to our knowledge, and probably 
longer, rented property for the wholesale, and latterly for 
the retail, liquor business. The revenue of course has 
been a snug sum; and now it is proposed to demolish the 
present structure and to erect a very fine Office Building, 
in which all the Presbyterian Missions and other Boards 
and Societies can be housed, with rooms to let to others— 
none of which, we hope, will be rented for the liquor traffic. 

We rejoice that the evidences are that the anti-alcoholic 
sentiment is spreading, tho slowly, so far as professing Christians 
are concerned; but we have no hope that anything short 
of "Thy Kingdom come" will release the race from this 
great slave-holder and tyrant, Alcohol. 



The Governor of California recently decided in reference 
to the "Boy's Brigade", that neither it nor any other 
organization could be allowed to drill and carry weapons, 
unless first they had sworn allegiance to the State,— that 
they would never bear arms against the State, and that they 

R1863 : page 212 



would bear arms and do duty for the State, the same as the 
regular National Guard. Thus the Church and State are 
being drawn together by well-intentioned but deluded 
leaders. The Governor properly looked out for the welfare 
of his charge, and other Governors of other states will 
probably take similar action in time. 

What a great mistake it is to attempt to mix the good 
fight against sin, inculcated by the Prince of Peace, the 
Chief Captain of all the soldiers of the cross, with any 
other soldiers and any other methods or warfare. The 
Salvation Army was the first innovation on this line, and is 
the least objectionable; but doubtless it has opened the door 
to the Boy's Brigade, and the results are not yet. The 
tendency is always downward, however noble the original 
intention. The simplicity of the gospel of Christ should 
never be lost sight of. 



Free Masonry was an attempt at a religious military 
movement. The Boston newspapers tell that at their recent 
Conclave there the saloons did a thriving business, and that 
many of the Sir Knights carried their crosses upside down 
as they crowded each other in and out of the saloons. The 
papers tell also of their religious services; we quote:— 

"After the Deus Misereatur, the Eminent Commander 
Seymore gave the orders: Attention, Sir Knights! Draw 
swords! Present swords!' The Apostles' Creed was then 
repeated. Then followed: 

"Eminent commander— 'Return swords.' 

"Prelate— 'The Lord be with you.' 

"Knights— And with thy spirit' At this point the 
Sir Knights knelt. 

"Prelate— 'O Lord, show thy mercy upon us;' 

"Knights— And grant us thy salvation.' 

"Prelate— 'O God, make clean our hearts within us;' 

"Knights— 'And take not thy Holy Spirit from us.' 

"Prelate— Let us pray.' 

"The prayers that followed included the collect for 
the 1 1th Sunday after Trinity, the collect for peace, the 
collect for and against perils, and the prayer for the President 
of the United States and all in civil authority. 

"The commemoration of the order followed. After 
the prayer of St. Chrysostom and the Grace, was the hymn, 
'My Faith Looks Up to Thee.'" 

As Christ was crucified by his kinsmen according to 
the flesh, so he is frequently put to an open shame and 
wounded afresh "in the house of his friends." Alas! 
how many have taken his name in vain,— to no purpose, 
to the dishonor of his cause! Let each one of us who has 
named the name of Christ put on Christ and walk in him; 
clothed, not with showy symbols, but with humility and 
true devotion. 

Yet according to the course of this world there are few 
organizations that can boast as many noble men as the Sir 



Knights, and concerning them one of their number, a 
chaplain, preaching, said: 

R1864: page 212 

"All these men have vowed by heart and hand to uphold 
Christ and Christianity. Remember also that these 
are only a vanguard of the mighty army that, when Christianity 
or education need assistance, are bound to protect 
them." 

As God sometimes uses the wrath of man to praise 
him, so he has used human antagonisms and superstitions 
to keep the world in general equilibrium during the period 
in which he is selecting, polishing and testing his "little 
flock" for his Kingdom. When it is complete and exalted 
to power, the scene will change radically. Truth will then 
be mighty, and error shall no longer prevail. The world 
knew not our Captain, and likewise knows not his real 
"soldiers of the cross." "As he is, so are we in this 
world."- 1 John 4:17. 



The Christian Endeavorers are showing more and 
more of a disposition to take a hand in Politics and Reform. 
They see not the grandeur and greatness of the 
Kingdom for which we wait, in which God's will shall 
"be done on earth as it is done in heaven." They see not 
how God is preparing to establish this Kingdom, so they 
propose to take a hand themselves and wait for the King 
no longer. The Canadian branch recently "Resolved" 
that, "Christ will never be King of this world till he is 
King of politics." This is in accord with the sentiments 
of the Order in the U.S., as heretofore pointed out. Indeed, 
a movement is now on foot to have united action by 
the Christian Endeavorers, the Epworth Leaguers and the 
Baptist Young People of Philadelphia in favor of some reform 
candidates in Philadelphia; and the same thing is 
agitated in New Jersey. We have already pointed out that 
this seemingly harmless Political Crusade is likely to result 
in a measurable union of Church and State. 

R1870 : page 212 

GOD HOLDS THE KEY. 

God holds the key of all unknown, 

And I am glad; 
If other hands should hold the key, 
Or if he trusted it to me, 

I might be sad. 

What if to-morrow's cares were here, 

Without its rest? 
Rather would I unlock the day, 
And as the hours swing open, say 



"Thy will is best." 

The very dimness of my sight 

Makes me secure; 
For, groping in my misty way, 
I feel his hand— I hear him say, 

"My help is sure." 

I see not all his future plans; 

But this I know, 
I have the smiling of his face, 
And all the refuge of his grace, 

While here below. 

Enough! this covers all my want, 

And so I rest; 
For what I cannot, he can see, 
And in his care I sure shall be 

Forever blest. 



R1864: page 213 

THE PRIVILEGE AND POWER OF PRAYER. 



"And Jesus spake a parable unto them to this end, that men 
ought always to pray and not to faint."— Luke 18:1-8. 

TO THE thoughtful, appreciative mind, one of the 

greatest privileges which the Word of God offers 

is that of personal audience and communion with the King 

of kings and Lord of lords. When we consider how great 

is our God, and how exalted his station, how wonderful is 

the condescension that thus regards our low estate! He it is 

whose glory covereth the heavens, and whose kingdom 

ruleth over the whole universe. He it is who is without beginning 

of days or end of years: "From everlasting to 

everlasting thou art God." He is the immortal, the self-existing 

One, "dwelling in the light which no man can 

approach unto, whom no man hath seen nor can see." The 

heavens declare his glory and the firmament showeth his 

handiwork. In all his vast universal domain there is nothing 

hidden from him, nor can he be wearied by its care. His 

wisdom, who can fathom? and his ways, who can find them 

out? or who hath been his counsellor? His mighty intellect 

grasps with ease all the interests of his wide dominion, 

from immensity to minutia. His eye never slumbers nor 

sleeps, nor can the smallest thing escape his notice, not 

even a sparrow's fall; and the very hairs of our heads are 

all numbered. It is his skill which clothes with life and 

beauty the grass of the field, which to-day is, and to-morrow 

is cast into the oven. And are not we, the creatures of 

his hand, "fearfully and wonderfully made," and the subjects, 



too, of his love and care?— "O Lord, thou hast 

searched me and known me. Thou knowest my downsitting 

and mine uprising; thou understandest my thought 

afar off. Thou compassest my path and my lying down, 

and art acquainted with all my ways; for there is not a 

word in my tongue, but, lo, O Lord, thou knowest it altogether. 

Thou hast beset me behind and before, and laid 

thine hand upon me. 

"Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, 
I cannot attain unto it. Whither shall I go from thy 
spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I 
ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed 
in the grave, behold thou art there; if I take the wings of 
the morning and dwell in the uttermost part of the sea, 
even there shall thy hand lead me,. ..even the night shall be 
light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee, 
but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light 
are both alike to thee."-Psa. 139:1-12. 

Fallen creatures though we be, from the noble estate 
in which we were created, God so loved our race, even 
while we were yet sinners, as to make provision at great 
cost for our redemption and restitution and subsequent 
eternal glory. And therefore it is,— because he loves us,— 
that through Christ he extends to us the gracious favor of 
coming to him as children to a father. Wonderful is the 
condescension, wonderful the love and favor of our God! 

Yet our God is a God to be revered: he is not one 
like ourselves, our equal, into whose presence we may come 
without that ceremony and decorum due to his glorious 
person and office. (Job 9:1-35.) The court of heaven 
has regulations and ceremonies of respect and due deference 
which must be complied with by every man who would 
gain an audience with the King of kings; and it behooves 
us to inquire what those regulations are before we presume 
to address him. Here the Word of God gives explicit 
directions. Our Lord Jesus, the appointed "days-man" 
for which Job so earnestly longed (Job 9:32,33), said, 
"No man cometh unto the Father, but by me. I am the 
way." (John 14:6.) Then he gave us an illustration of 
the manner in which we should address him, in what is 
known as the Lord's prayer. (Matt. 6:9-13.) The illustration 
teaches (1) that we (believers in Christ) may consider 
ourselves as in God's estimation reinstated (through 
faith in Christ) to the original position of sons of God, 
and that we may therefore confidently address him— "Our 
Father." (2) It indicates on our part worshipful adoration 
of the high and holy One, and profound reverence for the 
glorious character and attributes of Our God.— "Hallowed 
be thy name." (3) It expresses full sympathy with his 
revealed plan for a coming Kingdom of righteousness, 
which will be according to his will.— "Thy Kingdom come, 
thy will be done on earth as it is done in heaven." This shows 
the attitude of heart to be toward righteousness, and fully 
submitted to the divine will and purpose, that God may 
work in it to will and to do his good pleasure. (4) It expresses 
in plain and simple language its dependence on God 



for daily needs, and the confidence of a child in the Father 
for the supply of those needs out of his abundant fulness.— 
"Give us this day our daily bread." (5) It seeks forgiveness 
for trespasses, and recognizes also the obligation thus 
incurred to render the same to those trespassing against us 
—"And forgive us our debts as we forgive our 
debtors;" and (6) it seeks to be guarded against 
temptations and to be fortified by God's abounding grace 

R1865 : page 213 

against all the wiles of the adversary*— "And abandon us 
not to trial, but preserve us from evil." 

Such are the principles which must ever characterize 
our attitude of mind and heart when we would avail ourselves 
of the privilege of addressing the throne of heavenly 
grace. In brief, our prayers, to be acceptable to God, must 
express confident faith, loving esteem and reverence, full 
sympathy with the divine plan and submission to the divine 
will, childlike dependence upon God, acknowledgment of 
sins and shortcomings and desire for forgiveness, with a 
forgiving disposition on our part toward others, and an humble 
craving for the divine guidance and protection. These may 
not always all be expressed in words, but such must at least 
be the attitude of the soul. 

Those who thus come to God are privileged always to 



*The Sinaitic and Vatican MSS. omit the words, "for thine is the 
kingdom, and the power, and the glory forever. Amen." Matt. 6:13. 

R1865 : page 214 

have their interests considered at the throne of grace, and 
the welcome we shall always find there may be judged of by 
the cordial invitations to come often and tarry long. Well 
might we hesitate to avail ourselves of such privileges were 
we not thus assured, but having this assurance we may come 
with confidence to the throne of grace.— Heb. 4:16; 13:6. 

The Lord knew how necessary to our spiritual life 
would be this communion with himself. Tempest-tossed 
and tried, how much we need our Father's care and the 
comfort and consolation which his presence and sympathy 
realized imparts. And have not all the meek and 
contrite in heart the promise not only of the occasional 
attentive hearing, but of the abiding presence of both the 
Father and the Son, our Lord Jesus? Jesus said, "He 
that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that 
loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my 
Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to 
him. Judas— not Iscariot— saith unto him, Lord, how is 
it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the 
world? Jesus answered and said unto him, If a man love 
me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, 
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with 



him."-John 14:21-23. 

The thought which this promise of the abiding presence 
of the Father and Son conveys to our minds is that 
their thought and care and interest will be constantly upon 
us, and that at any instant we may engage the special 
attention of either or both. The same idea is also conveyed 
by the words of the Apostle Peter (1 Pet. 3:12)— 
"For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous, and his 
ears are open unto their prayers." And we are urged to 
be "instant in prayer," to "pray always, and not to faint," 
to "pray without ceasing;" for "Like as a Father pitieth 
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for 
he knoweth our frame, he remembereth that we are dust." 
"As the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his 
mercy toward them that fear him," and "As far as the 
east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions 
from us." Yea, "the mercy of the Lord is from 
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his 
righteousness unto children's children, to such as keep his 
covenant and to those that remember his commandments 
to do them. "-Rom. 12:12; Luke 18:1; 1 Thes. 5:17; 
Psa. 103:13,14,11,12,17,18. 

We cannot come too often, then, to the throne of the 
heavenly grace, if we are of those who can claim the abiding 
presence of the Father and the Son— if we are of them 
that love him and keep his commandments and who recognize 
the Lord Jesus as the only way of access to the Father. 
And even "if any man sin"— be overtaken in a fault— so 
that from his outward conduct he might be judged as not 
loving the Lord, yet, if he repent, let him remember that 
"we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the 
righteous," who "is the propitiation [satisfaction] for our 
sins," "who also maketh intercession for us." "Who," 
then, "shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? It 
is God that justifieth. Who is he that condemneth? It is 
Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even 
at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession 
for us."-l John 2:1,2; Rom. 8:33,34. 

Wherefore, the Apostle urges, "Seeing then that we 
have a great High Priest that is passed into the heavens, 
Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession; for 
we have not a High Priest which cannot be touched with 
the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted 
like as we are, yet without sin. Let us, therefore, come 
with confidence to the throne of grace, that we may obtain 
mercy, and find grace to help in time of need."— 
Heb. 4:14-16. 

With such urgent and loving invitations let no child 
of God hesitate to come to him often or to tarry long in 
communion and fellowship with him. It is our privilege 
to enter into our closets and shut the doors and pray to 
our Father which seeth in secret, who will reward us openly. 
(Matt. 6:6.) And not only so, but he will go with us 
through all the business and hurry and commotion of the 
day; and at any instant in the midst of cares and perplexities 
we may turn our prayerful thoughts to him for wisdom, 



for strength and Christian fortitude, or for comfort and 
consolation for ourselves or others. And though we hear 
no responding voice, if we are attentive to the course of 
his providence we will shortly see the shaping of events and 
circumstances for our good and the good of others in answer 
to such prayers. Beloved, have we not many a time 
proved this true?— in perplexities, in tribulations, in afflictions, 
in persecutions, in bereavements, in temptations 
and trials? 

In coming to God we need have no fear that he is too 
busy with other matters of greater importance, or that he 
is weary of our coming to him repeatedly with things of 
small importance. It was to assure us against this very thing 
that our Lord spoke the parable of the importunate widow, 
who was heard and answered on account of her importunity. 
In so doing we evince both the earnestness of 
our desires and our faith that our prayers will be answered, 
if we faint not from lack of faith or zeal when the answer 
is delayed, as often it must necessarily be, since time is an 
important element in all God's work. 

All night, until the break of day, Jacob wrestled in 
prayer, saying, "I will not let thee go, unless thou bless 
me." Paul thrice besought the Lord until he was assured 
his grace would be sufficient for him. The Lord himself 
frequently spent whole nights in prayer, and he prayed earnestly 
and with many tears. (Luke 6:12; Matt. 14:23; 
Mark 6:46; 1:35; Luke 5:16; Heb. 5:7.) And the 
Apostle Paul says, "In everything, by prayer and supplication 
[earnest pleading] with thanksgiving, let your requests 
be made known to God."— Phil 4:6. 

The Apostle himself acted on this principle when he 
urged, in his letter to the Romans, that the saints "strive 

R1865 : page 215 

together [Greek, agonize] with me in prayers to God for 
me," that he might safely accomplish a certain work which 
seemed to be of the Spirit's leading.— Rom. 15:28-32. 

"In every thing."— That signifies that our heavenly 
Father is deeply interested in everything that relates to us 
and ours. What thing is too small for his notice who 
numbers even the very hairs of our heads? In to-day's 
household or business cares, then, we may have his loving 
sympathy and helpfulness. Do a mother's counsel and a 
father's wisdom seem inadequate to restrain and guide 
aright the wayward course of impetuous and over-confident 
youth, they may bring their cares and fears to the Lord; 
and, as the children cross the threshold to meet the world's 
temptations, his wisdom and providence may be invoked 
to so shape their circumstances and surroundings as to show 
them eventually the sure safe way and the folly of pursuing 
any other. 

Do business cares perplex and annoy? remember the 
Lord's caution, "Be not overcharged with the cares of 
this life," and the Apostle's warning, "They that will be 
rich fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish 



and hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and utter 
ruin; for the love of money is the root of all evil, which, 
while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, 
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But 
thou, O man of God, flee these things and follow after 
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. 
Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life." 
And, remembering these things, come to the throne of the 
heavenly grace for wisdom and direction as to how you 
may so adjust your temporal affairs as not to be overcharged 
with the cares of this life. It is right to be charged with 
them to the extent of diligence (Rom. 12:11) and the 
utilization of such diligence in the Lord's service; but it 
is the overplus, the corroding care, that interferes with peace 
of mind and communion with God, that is to be avoided. 

Does poverty pinch and cause anxious thought? take 
that also to the Lord in prayer; and then, while diligently 
using the means at hand, to provide things decent and 
honest, patiently and confidently wait and watch the indications 
of providence, assured that he who feeds the fowl 
of the air, which neither sow nor reap nor gather into 
barns, and who clothes the grass of the field, which to-day is 
and to-morrow is cast into the oven, is both able and willing 
to clothe and feed you and yours. 

And so through all the list of earth's trials and cares, 
its wants and its woes, its bereavements and disappointments 
and calamities and distresses, its failures and shortcomings 
and sins and mistakes, we may take them all to 
the Lord in prayer and receive that strength and sympathy 

R1866 : page 215 

and consolation and help we so much need. Let us live 
in the presence of the Father and the Son who have promised 
to abide with us. It will sweeten our days and comfort our 
nights and ease our burdens and lighten our cares and 
brighten our hopes, and, in a word, it will lift us up above the 
world into a higher and purer atmosphere. Such is the will 
of heaven concerning us: let us appreciate and avail ourselves 
of the privilege. 

By all the encouragements of precept and example, 
the Lord assures us that the fervent prayer of a righteous 
man (a justified and consecrated child of God) availeth much. 
(Jas. 5:16.) We are urged also to come in faith. Jesus 
said, "If ye have faith and doubt not,. ..all things 
whatsoever ye shall ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." 
(Matt. 21:22.) As he was addressing his consecrated 
disciples, it must of course be understood that all 
their petitions would be subjected to divine wisdom, and 
therefore the answers to their prayers, though always sure, 
might not always be in the way expected, but they would 
always be considered and answered in some way for their 
highest good. 

What a blessed privilege, dear fellow-disciples of 
the Lord, is ours, to be instant in prayer, to pray always— 
to lift up our hearts and minds to God at any time and in 



any place and to realize thus daily and hourly that the 
Father and our dear Lord Jesus continually abide with us. 
And then, when the active duties of the day have been 
performed under his eye and supervision, or at any time 
when the soul realizes its necessity, how precious is the 
privilege of entering into our closets and there alone with 
God unburdening our hearts. 

While secret prayer is the blessed privilege of every 
child of God, and one without which his spiritual life cannot 
be sustained, it is also the privilege of Christians to 
unite their petitions at the throne of grace. This united 
prayer is specially commended by the Lord. (Matt. 18:19.) 
"Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree on 
earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be 
done for them of my Father; for where two or three are 
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of 
them." 

With such promises as these, together with an experience 
of their fulfilment, who can doubt the love and favor 
of our God and of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ? 
Therefore let us be encouraged to pray always and not to 
faint when the answers seem to tarry long, for time is often 
required to work out the deep designs of an allwise and 
loving Providence. Remember the words of the angel to 
Daniel. Daniel said, "While I was speaking and praying 
and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and 
presenting my supplication before the Lord my God, for 
the holy mountain of my God; yea, while I was speaking 
in prayer," the answer came by the hand of an angel who 
said, "O Daniel, I am now come forth to give thee skill 
and understanding. At the beginning of thy supplications 
the commandment came forth, and I am come to show 
thee; for thou art greatly beloved."— Dan. 9:20-23. 

On another occasion, when Daniel had mourned three 
weeks, fasting and praying, because of his inability to 
understand, the angel of the Lord came and said, "Fear 

R1866 : page 216 

not, Daniel, for from the first day that thou didst set thine 
heart to understand, and to chasten thyself before thy God, thy 
words were heard, and I am come for thy words."— 
Dan. 10:2,3,10-12. 

Even so shall it ever be with all the beloved of the 
Lord: at the beginning of our supplications God begins 
to set in operation the influences and to shape the circumstances 
which are designed to work out the intended blessing 
for us— if we faint not, but continue instant in prayer, 
thereby evincing our continued earnestness of desire, and 
if we confess our sins, and set our hearts to understand, 
and chasten ourselves before him. How many prayers are not 
heard or are hindered because the one who asks does not 
first purify himself of evil in his own heart? "Ye ask, and 
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it 
upon your lusts;" i.e., you ask selfishly and without regard 
to the will of God. (Jas. 4:3.) But to the chastened 



and sanctified comes the promise— "Before they call 
[reading the desire of the heart even before it finds 
expression in words] I will answer [will begin so to shape 
events as to bring the answer soon or later]; and while they 
are yet speaking I will hear." (Isa. 65:23,24.) While 
this is in connection with a prophecy relating to the Lord's 
people in the Millennial age, it nevertheless is true of all 
his faithful ones of this age. Praise the Lord for all his 
loving kindness to even the least of his lowly children! 



R1866 : page 216 

CONCERNING PROFITABLE MEETINGS. 



WE have received a number of requests from friends 
of the truth for advice as to the most profitable 
methods of conducting meetings. One Brother writes: 

"A few brethren who have been reading DAWN express 
their willingness to meet somewhere to study in consecutive 
order, and I ask suggestions for a plan suited to beginners. 
Pray for us, that we may commence this study in the right 
way, and be the recipients of many blessings. 

"Yours in the faith, J. W. McLANE." 

Another Brother recently removed to a new neighborhood 
says: 

"I find in this locality a fine field for labor. Several 
here to whom I have given tracts already manifest interest. 
I have conversed freely with them on Bible subjects, and 
have their promise to attend meetings at my house. So if 
you can aid me by suggestions I will be thankful. 

"I am, dear brother, yours in the service of the Master, 
"JOSHUA L.GREEN." 

Another Brother writes:— 

"We have a number of persons here who wish to 
assemble themselves together for worship. We would be 
pleased to have some instructions from you as to how to go 
about it. 

"I hope you can give us some way which will be satisfactory. 
Some of us have left the churches and are now 
free from all precepts of men. To speak for myself, I left 
the Presbyterian church. 

"Yours in Christ, C.C.FLEMING." 

We are glad to note the increasing desire for the study 
of God's plan of the ages; and also to see that the importance 
of method and order are recognized in this. We 
give our advice as follows:— 

(1) You would best first re-read some things already 
written which bear upon this subject— in our issues of May 
1, '93, page 131; Sept. '93, page 259; Oct. 15, '93, page 
307; Mar. 1, '94, page 73; April 1, '95, page 78; May 1, 
'95, page 109. 

(2) Beware of "organization." It is wholly unnecessary. 



The Bible rules will be the only rales you will 
need. Do not seek to bind others' consciences, and do 
not permit others to bind yours. Believe and obey so far 
as you can understand God's Word to-day, and so continue 
growing in grace and knowledge and love day by day. 

(3) The Bible instructs you whom to fellowship as 
"brethren;"— only believers who are seeking to walk, not 
after the flesh, but after the spirit. Not believers of any 
and every thing, but believers of the Gospel record— that 
mankind is fallen into sin and its penalty, death, and that 
only in Christ is there salvation, "through faith in his 
blood" "shed for the remission of sins", as "a ransom [a 
corresponding price] for all." Any who merely believe 
in Christ as a noble and good person, a grand example of 
righteous living, etc., may be agreeable as neighbors or 
business acquaintances, but they are not "believers," and 
hence are not "brethren," any more than are Jews, 
Mohammedans, Infidels, publicans and sinners— for practically 
these also so acknowledge him. 

(4) You come together, then, as God's children, bought 
back from sin and death with the great price, and resolved 
henceforth to live not unto yourselves, but unto him who 
died for you. (2 Cor. 5:15.) Your meetings should 

have certain objects in view, viz:— 

(a) Worship, praise and prayer. 

(b) Mutual helpfulness in waging victorious warfare 
against the world, the flesh and the devil within and 
without. 

(c) And to these ends you meet also for the study of 
God's Word, which he provided for our instruction and help 
in the narrow way which leads to those blessings prepared 
by him for those who love him and who demonstrate their 
love by their efforts to serve, honor and obey him. 

(5) Thus seen, a knowledge of doctrines is not 

our ultimate object in meeting, but the building up of 
characters, which, as attempted copies of the character of 
God's dear Son, will be "accepted in the Beloved." But 
God declares that knowledge of the doctrines which he 
has revealed in his Word will be of great value to us in our 
endeavors to grow in his grace. 

Hence, after worship, praise and prayer, Bible study 
should be recognized in its two parts,— (a) The study of 
God's plan,— what he tells us he is doing for us and for 
the world; what he has done; and what he will yet do; 
that we may be enabled as sons to enter into the very spirit 
of the great work of God and be intelligent co-workers 
with him. (b) The study of our duties and privileges in 
God's service, toward each other and toward those that are 
without, to the end that we may build up such characters 

R1867 : page 216 

as would be pleasing and acceptable to God now and in the 
age to come. 

And since for general convenience these meetings 
should not last much longer than from one and a half to 



two hours, it will generally be found best to have at least 
two meetings per week, one for the consideration of 
Christian graces and testimony and mutual helpfulness; 
and the other for Bible study. And at every meeting our 
songs and prayers of thankful worship should ascend as incense 

R1867 : page 217 

before God; and in this worship all should share. 

Amongst us, as in the early Church, the preaching of 
formal discourses is the exception, rather than the rule. The 
exception should be where some brother has the necessary 
qualifications— clear appreciation of the truth and ability 
to set it forth so as to be helpful to the Lord's flock, with 
qualifications also of voice, education, etc., and withal, 
surely one who is meek and not likely to become puffed up, 
or to preach himself, rather than the cross of Christ. 

But, whether there be preaching or no preaching, the 
other meetings, in which all can and should take part (both 
brethren and sisters), should be kept up; and each of the 
saints (consecrated "believers") should seek in them to 
do good, as well as to get good. —See Rom. 14:19; Eph. 4:11-32; 
IThes. 5:11. 

(6) What shall be our Standard by which we may 
know the truth and prove it? We answer, The Word of 
God "is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may 
be perfect [-ed in knowledge and conduct], thoroughly 
furnished unto all good works.— 2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

But how shall we understand the Bible? For centuries 
good men as well as bad men have searched its pages. 
The former have found therein blessings, it is true, but 
so far as doctrines are concerned only confusion; satisfactory 
plan, order, justice and wisdom none have ever 
found there in all that time. The due time for the 
mystery of God's plan to be finished had not yet come; 
and it was "sealed up," "hidden," until that due time. 
But now, we who are living in the time of "the cleansing of 
the Sanctuary,"* and particularly since the time of blessedness 
at the end of the 1335 days+— in the present harvest, 
and in the beginning of the sounding of the Seventh 
Trumpet— we have a very different experience from the 
saints of past times. To us it is given to know the mysteries 
of the Kingdom of God, which many prophets and 
many righteous persons of the past were not privileged to 
see. Thank God for the light of present truth! Now we 
can see a plan of God— a plan which covers every detail 
of history past, and of revelation future; a plan that is 
complete,— lacking and disjointed at no part; a plan that 
is in strictest conformity with divine Justice, Wisdom, 
Power and Love, and with every text of the divine Word; 
and which thus proves itself to be not only a reasonable 
plan, but the plan of God, in comparison with which all 
other theories and plans are defective and evidently erroneous, 
out of harmony with the divine attributes and with 
the divine Word. 



Those who have come to an understanding of the 
plan of the ages, recognize it as of divine and not of 
human origination. It is the key to the mysteries of God 
which God himself has provided, and for which we all 
unite in rendering to him all praise. Its light is that of 
the millennial dawn, bringing with it peace and joy to 
thousands. We give all praise and honor to the Divine 
Author from whom cometh every good and perfect gift, 
and who thus, according to his promise (Luke 12:37), 
continues to feed his Church with spiritual "meat in due 
season." God, still our Teacher, uses as heretofore instrumentalities, 
and has provided for his people's instruction 
and use the orderly presentations of MILLENNIAL DAWN to 
point out to them his plan of the ages and the duties and 
privileges of this "harvest" time; because the "due time" 
has come for "the mystery" to be finished. (Rev. 10:7.) 
And those who have received instruction in the Word, in 
private, through the use of MILLENNIAL DAWN as a teacher 
sent of God (Eph. 4:11-14) have no more reason 
to ignore it as God's mouthpiece in united study than in 
their own private study;— no more, either, than they would 
a living teacher. 

And should any be disposed to worship the humble 
human instrumentality chosen of God as the channel for 
this blessing of present truth, we say to such,— "See thou 
do it not; for I am thy fellow servant [not thy Lord], and 
[fellow servant] of thy brethren the prophets [all true 
teachers or mouthpieces of God]:. ..Worship God." (Rev. 22:9.) 
The water of life and the Giver of it, and not 
the earthen vessel through which it is sent, are to be reverenced. 
The earthen vessels have naught whereof to glory. 
What have we of ourselves that we did not first receive of 
theLord?-l Cor. 4:6,7. 

The God-given plan of the ages is what we should all 
use in the study of the Bible, if we would get the treasures 
of wisdom, and grace, and strength for service in these 
perilous harvest times, for which it is divinely provided. 
Each one who recognizes this as a God-given light should 
use it in the study of the Word. Each should make it his 
own light as God intended. Each should become so proficient 
in its use as to be able to answer every question that 
could be asked respecting the general plan of God. 
But alas! some seem to feel that this is Brother Russell's 
plan, and that they should originate their own. But this 
is a great mistake. It is not our plan, but God's. If not 
God's plan, it is of no value. We do not want any human 
plans. Surely men cannot make plans for God that he will 
recognize; for his own plans have been since "before the 
foundation of the world." God has but one plan, and it 
is unalterable; and now that he has revealed it, we confess 
that it is wonderful, yet as simple as it is beautiful. It is a 
plan, however, that men could not conceive or arrange. 
Its thoughts are higher than man's thoughts; and hence 
in all the centuries past men have never even approximated 
this divine plan of the ages. 

So then the Bible, the standard, should be studied in 



the light of this God-given teaching, until each one is proficient 
—an able teacher of it. Then each should let his 
light shine— humbly serving it to others. 

Some, alas! when their eyes are opened to see God's 
loving plan of the ages, while surprised, and thankful to 
God for the present truth, neglect to do more than hastily 
taste of it; and then they hasten on, as they say, to "hunt 
for more." What they should do would better be to use 
well what God has already given us as his people. There is 
a famine in the land; not for bread, nor for water, but for 
the Word of the Lord. (Amos 8:11.) Our Lord and 
Master has come to his waiting people, and spread for 
them a bounteous table of truths, new and old, in order. 
(Matt. 13:52.) We certainly have no right to ask for 
more or other blessings, until we have feasted to the full on 
what has been set before us. Then we should exercise 
ourselves, using the strength received in serving the feast 
to others. Neglecting this, it would certainly be with bad 
grace that any would attempt to break open any parts of 
the storehouse not yet unlocked. Remember the illustration 
of the time-lock-H- which opens easily, without burglarizing, 
at the appointed time. 

"Thy words were found [not made, nor gained by 
human skill or labor], and I did eat them." (Jer. 15:16; 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., Chap. iv. 
+See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. III., Chap. iii. 
++MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p. 23. 

R1867 : page 218 

Rev. 10:10.) Our Lord has always provided for his 
Church the food necessary to her welfare; and he always 
"giveth liberally." The proper attitude for the Church 
is to be active in eating the food already received and in 
using the strength derived from it. She is not to leave the 
table bountifully spread to pray for more. When more 
would be beneficial more will be sent by the hand of some 
"servant" of God and the Church. Nor will the true 
"servant" find it necessary to make the food; for it will 
be given him by the great Householder. It will be "found" 
by him, and when he presents it to the Lord's family, they 
will be able to discern upon it the stamp of divine truth. 
And after partaking of it liberally they will dispense it to 
others. 

Sufficient labor for all comes after we have "found" 
the truth,— labor in eating it, studying and appropriating 
it, and labor in serving it to others. The labor and bitterness 
of experience come not with the getting and first tasting 
of the truth, but with the conflict of the truth with 
our own and other people's prejudices. Then comes the pleasurable 
but often painful labor of serving it to others that they 
may find it easily and eat it. The eating of the truth (the proving 
of it, and then the appropriating of it to strength) is 



no small task. When a new food comes to us, our eyes first 
criticize it. If it looks good, we handle it and smell of it; 
and finally, still approved, we judge further by biting it 
with our teeth; and then our palate judges by the taste, 
while our teeth prepare it for nutrition. So every child of 
God has considerable labor in the way of proving and 
eating his spiritual food, after the Lord has provided it and 
he has "found" it. The proving is a necessity because 
Satan through his agents is permitted to offer us poisonous 
food. God would have us exercise our spiritual senses and 
judge or prove all we eat by the standard, and thus to learn 
to distinguish good from evil. This searching and proving 
and appropriating, opposed by the world, the flesh and the 
devil, require considerable energy and overcoming quality, 
and leave little enough of time and energy to help others. 
Let us remember, however, that we cannot break open 
any secrets which God may wish to conceal as not yet 
appropriate "meat in due season"; nor should we wish to 

R1868 : page 218 

do so. The small boy who bangs away at the unripe 

apple until it falls get food which makes him very sick: 

the ripe apple is very easily plucked. The unripe chestnut 

burr is difficult to pluck and very troublesome to open, 

and when open its fruit is unwholesome; but the ripe burr 

will fall and open of itself and its meat is sweet. Our diligence 

should be rather to watch the ripening processes 

of divine providence, and to hold our minds and hearts 

in humble readiness for all the rich fruitage of the advancing 

seasons, assured that our Master knoweth what things 

we have need of and will supply them to us in due time 

—directly or indirectly, it matters not so long as it is 

truth, from him and for us. 

In the study of the Word of God in the light of the 
DAWN, let each one make use of concordances and marginal 
references and various translations of the Scriptures 
as he may have opportunity; remembering that nothing is 
to be accepted as truth which does not harmonize with the 
letter and spirit of God's Word. It is the Word of God 
that is to be eaten; the DAWNS and TOWERS are divinely 
provided helps for the cutting of the food into eatable 
portions,— enabling us to "rightly divide the Word of 
truth," and thus facilitating the eating of it. 

Such meetings for the study of the Word in the light 
of the now revealed plan of the ages have been termed 
"Dawn Circles." The plan originated with Brother Rahn, 
of Baltimore, several years ago, and he and the other 
members of the class report much profit therefrom. The 
same plan has been pursued in perhaps a score of other 
cities, and always with success when rightly conducted. In 
illustration see letters from Brother Townsend in our issue 
of Dec. 15, '94 and Bro. Jeffery in issue of Jan. 1, '95. 
Since the "Circles" are no longer an experiment, but have 
practically demonstrated their value, it seems advisable to 
announce the matter so that all the students of the truth 



can have the benefit of the experience of others. We advise 
the holding of these Circles everywhere, and suggest 
that you invite to them only such as are believers in the 
efficacy of the precious blood of Christ, and of genuine 
Christian character. But any one should be welcomed 
who is desirous of learning the way of God more perfectly. 
As the Apostle says, "Him that is weak in the 
faith [not fully committed to Christ] receive ye, but not 
to doubtful disputations"— you do not meet to discuss the 
unbeliever's doubts, but to confirm the believer's faith.— 
Rom. 14:1; 1 Cor. 14:24,25. 

It is advisable that the leader be a good reader, and 
that he begin at the beginning of Volume I. He should 
pause at the end of each sentence, if necessary, to give full 
opportunity for questions or remarks; and at the close of 
each paragraph a general discussion of its contents should 
be encouraged, together with an examination of texts cited 
therein, and any other texts that appertain to the subject. 
His object should be to draw out expressions from all, and 
to see that each person present understands the subject 
thoroughly. An entire session might profitably be spent 
sometimes upon one or two pages, or sometimes on one or 
two paragraphs. Each one of the Circle should have in 
hand some translation of the Bible or a "Dawn." 

At the close of each chapter each one of the Circle 
should endeavor to give his own brief review of its subject, 
to see how clearly he has grasped it, and to impress it upon 
himself the more deeply. Having in view that all are 
preparing themselves to impart the truth to others, each 
should be encouraged to attempt a statement of the subject 
discussed, in his own words, but preferably in the order 
set forth in "DAWN." 

In considering this method of Bible study note how 
much of interest and profitable conference could be drawn 
from the first chapter of Vol. I. The first paragraph calls our 
attention to and applies Psalm 30:5:— "Weeping may endure 
for a night, but joy cometh in the morning." How 
many suggestions this will call up to each child of God 
present! (1) The long, dark night of the reign of Sin 
and Death each could contrast with the longer glorious 
day, just dawning, in which Righteousness and Life shall 
reign through Christ's great work. (2) The cause of the 
Night, the withdrawal of divine favor because of disobedience, 
could be contrasted with the cause of the Morning— 
"We were reconciled to God by the death of his Son." 
(3) The cause of the weeping and pain, in the Night,— the 
curse or righteous sentence— "dying thou shalt die," could 
be contrasted with the cause of joy and rejoicing in the 
Morning,— "Thy dead men shall live," when "times of 
refreshing shall come— times of restitution of all things 
which God hath spoken." (Acts 3:19-21.) Each should 
be encouraged to tell what he knows experimentally about 
the dark night of sin's control, and also his appreciation 
of the rays of light from the Sun of Righteousness now 
shining, and of the glorious prospects which are thus revealed 
to his eye of faith. 



The second paragraph is built upon Isaiah 55:8,9; 
and it has much food for thought and profitable converse. 

R1868 : page 219 

These two paragraphs might well fill the time of one session; 
and if the Circle be a large one it might require two sessions 
to fully digest them. 

The third, fourth and fifth paragraphs consider what 
should be our object as truth-seekers, what we should seek, 
and what God promises we shall find— John 16:13 and 
other references coming to mind. Then the sixth paragraph 
considers the proper methods for Bible study, and 
refers to Eph. 4: 11-16; besides which many other references 
will occur to the Circle. Paragraphs eight and nine 
contrast proper and improper methods of study, and call up 
an entirely new set of interesting scriptures. These paragraphs 
—third to ninth— would give a grand and helpful 
Bible and plan study for a second session of the Circle. 

The next seven paragraphs, 10 to 16 inclusive, treat 
of the present religious condition of the world, and would 
make a wonderful third lesson if rightly used. A TOWER 
article on the same subject (Feb. '90, page 3) might also be 
introduced here with profit. How many interesting questions 
and suggestions come to all minds, some correct and some 
incorrect, and how helpful each could be to the other in 
building one another up in the most holy faith; and on 
leaving for home, how many would appreciate more fully 
than ever the general darkness of the world and the value 
of the light and of open eyes to see it. And thus we might 
progress, every lesson being full of instruction and of correct 
applications of Scripture. The Circles will be all 
the more interesting if there be present some "believers" 
not long in "this way." It would be well to tell your 
Christian friends, who show even a little interest in the truth 
about the Circle, and invite them to attend from the first. But 
should new inquirers come in after the Circle has advanced 
some distance, it will not be necessary to go back for their 
benefit, for they can at home read up to the present with 
such additional brief explanations as the leader may deem 
advisable. 

But some one will say, At that rate we would be 
fully a year in going through the first volume of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, and the three volumes would require three 
years! All the better, we answer: if we are furnished with 
spiritual refreshment for years, it is far better than if only 
for a day: it is not a case of business rush to "get through 
with it" that is our aim, but spiritual refreshment in the 
study of God's Word, that we may see clearly for ourselves 
and be able to give to him that asketh us a reason 
for the hope that is in us. At the close of the series 
you would have had under particular, critical examination 
hundreds of the most noteworthy texts of Scripture 
—words of the Lord's inspired mouthpieces, brought 
forward in their appropriate places to illuminate the various 
subjects which constitute the burden of divine revelation— 



the divine plan, spanning ages. Surely, if the Bible required 
nearly two thousand years for its preparation, we 
should give it reverent study, and not merely a casual 
glance and thought. Besides, when you would have gone 
through the subject thus thoroughly, you would doubtless be 
so proficient that you could answer promptly any question 
respecting it and be prepared to quote the Scriptures fully 
in support of your statements. Not only do all need such 
thorough study to prepare them "for the work of the ministry," 
but each needs such study for his own protection 
from the perils which will increase more and more during 
this "evil day." 

The method suggested is not merely a reading of the 
DAWNS; for that each could do as well at his home and alone. 
Our proposition is for a general study of God's great plan of 
salvation— a comprehensive study of theology— the use of 
the DAWNS merely steering the minds of all into the same 
Scriptural channels and assisting in rightly dividing the 
Word of Truth. There are no scriptures which cannot be 
brought into these studies; for all scriptures are directly or 
indirectly related to God's plan. The design includes a 
study of the whole Bible in the fullest sense, and the 
cooperation of all in bringing forward every text and 
thought which could throw light upon the subjects 
considered. 

Knowing the "downwardness" with which all our race 
is afflicted, we should, whenever we come together, guard 
ourselves and each other by resolving that no communications 
shall proceed out of our mouths except such as would 
serve to edify one another, and to build one another up 
in the most holy faith. This would bar out "gossip" and 

R1869 : page 219 

idle talking, and insure our thinking and talking of "whatsoever 
things are just and true and pure and of good report." 
If each comes to the meeting praying for the Lord's blessing 
upon himself and on the others of the Lord's body, 
near and far, it will be found helpful. And may grace, 
mercy and peace from God our Father, and from our Lord 
Jesus Christ, be with us all who thus seek, more and 
more, the way, the truth and the life. 



R1869 : page 219 

ISRAEL RENEWING THE COVENANT. 

-SEPT. 22.-JOSH. 24:14-25.- 

Golden Text.— "The Lord our God will we serve, 
and his voice will we obey."— Josh. 24:24. 

ISRAEL became God's people by solemn covenant (See 
Exod. 19:5-8), and on several occasions that covenant 



was renewed that succeeding generations might not 
forget the obligations thereby resting upon them. The instance 
before us was one of these occasions, and a very 
appropriate one— after their settlement in the land of promise 
and when Joshua their leader, being very old, must of 
necessity soon be taken from them by death. Joshua, 
therefore, remembering the command of Moses to thus 
remind the people of their covenant obligations (Deut. 27), 
made this the occasion for solemn exhortation, warning and 
counsel, as well as for leading the people to a renewal of 
their vows and a purging of themselves from every semblance 
of idolatry, which his address shows still lingered in 
some degree among them. 

The counsel of Joshua was reverently received, the 
covenant was renewed, and the nation purged itself from 
idolatry, and in consequence was prospered and blessed. 
But why, we may reasonably inquire, should we be interested 
now in seemingly trivial matters of history of a date 
so remote? Why so minutely consider the experience and 
doings of that nation more than others of the ancient 
peoples? Or why are they so minutely given by the sacred 
writers? 

Their importance to us lies in the fact that in the experiences 
of that consecrated people were foreshadowed those 
of God's consecrated people of this Gospel age; and in 
God's dealings with them we can read his judgment of us 
under similar circumstances, we, the Gospel church, being 
the antitypes of fleshly Israel, the spiritual Israel of God- 
nominally, as in the type, including all the professed members 
of the church, but actually only those who are truly 
the Lord's— "Israelites indeed," Christians indeed. 

In the nation of Israel (nominal Israel) we observe a 

R1869 : page 220 

constant tendency to idolatry, while a faithful few ("Israelites 

indeed") always resisted this tendency, and, with fixed 

purpose of heart, worshipped the Lord in the beauty of 

holiness and endeavored to influence others to similar faithfulness. 

But their forefathers prior to Abraham were idolaters; 

the nations all about them were idolaters; and idolatrous 

worship, unlike the worship of the true God, imposed no 

restraints upon the downward tendencies of the fallen 

nature, but, on the contrary, cultivated and pandered to its 

depravity. Nor did it require faith in the unseen, but 

presented to the senses tangible objects of worship with 

rites and ceremonies suited to the carnal nature. Hence 

the continual gravitation of the nation toward idolatry, notwithstanding 

the wonderful power and goodness of God 

manifested on their behalf. Joshua, after calling attention 

to the marvels of divine providence which their wonderful 

history furnished, urged upon the people a prompt and firm 

decision, saying, "Choose ye this day whom ye will 

serve," etc. 

Joshua also gave them distinctly to understand that in 
choosing to serve the Lord it must be whole hearted and 



sincere service, a full and complete turning to the Lord, 
and the putting away of all rivals. This exhortation was 
coupled with warnings of the Lord's indignation and wrath 
if they should wickedly ignore or violate their covenant 
and turn to idolatry. "And the people said unto Joshua, 
The Lord our God will we serve, and his voice will we obey." 

Happy indeed was it for Israel that such was their 
decision; and happy would it be for all God's consecrated 
people, if, with fixedness of purpose, they would pay their 
vows unto the Most High. In his dealings with typical 
Israel we see that our God is a jealous God and that he 
desires whole-hearted devotion to himself. If we permit 
any rival to occupy the mind and heart that was solemnly 
consecrated to him alone, then we are unfaithful to him 
and wickedly despising our covenant. Let the language of 
every consecrated heart be, "The Lord our God will we 
serve, and his voice will we obey." 

"If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange gods, 
then he will turn and do you hurt and consume you, after 
that he hath done you good." The fact that the Lord has 
richly blessed us in the past while we were in the way 
with him is no guarantee that he will continue his favor 
with us after we have forsaken him. On the contrary, his 
positive declaration is that he will withdraw his favor from 
all such. In addition to the above the prophet Ezekiel 
says, "When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness 
and commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block 
before him, he shall die." And Paul adds ["because they 
received not the love of the truth, that they might be 
saved"], "God shall send them strong delusions, that they 
should believe a lie: that they all might be condemned 
who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 
-Ezek. 3:20;2Thes. 2:11,12. See also 
Heb. 6:4-8; 10:26-31. 

We should observe specially in Heb. 10:29 the reference 
to a sorer punishment to be visited upon the covenant-despisers 
of this age than that visited upon the same class 
in the Jewish age, because of the higher privileges and advantages 
received here and despised. The death penalty 
there was a hasty visitation of the original Adamic penalty, 
but the death penalty here upon the wilful covenant-despisers 
is the second death from which there is no escape. 

page 220 

REVIEW SEPT. 29. 

Golden Text— "There hath not failed one word of all his good 
promises which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant."— 
1 Kings 8:56. 

Thus King Solomon testified to the grace of God 
manifested to fleshly Israel. His good promises never 
failed; and to the praise of his goodness we also can bear 
the same blessed testimony. And when his wonderful plan 
blossoms out in glorious completeness, the universal testimony 



will be, There hath not failed one word of all his 
good promises; for they are all yea and amen in Christ 
Jesus, the mediator of the New Covenant, as Moses was of 
the Law Covenant. 



R1869 : page 220 

THE TIMES OF THE JUDGES. 

-OCT. 6. -JUDGES 2:1-12,16.- 

Golden Text.— "The Lord raised up judges 
which delivered them."— Judges 2:16. 

NO special comment is needed on the simple narrative 
of this lesson, except to call attention to the 
Lord's providential care over his people, notwithstanding 
their waywardness and many backslidings. 

It should be noted that the object in raising up judges 
was a gracious and beneficent one: it was to deliver and 
bless the people, not to condemn and punish them, though 
the latter idea of judgment is too often the only thought 
gathered from it by many minds. The term judgment applies 
to the whole process of trial and the administration of justice. 

In this view of the office of a judge how precious is 
the promise that our blessed Lord Jesus cometh to judge 
the world in righteousness. His judgment will be the greatest 
blessing the world could possibly have. Though it will 
come in wrath and indignation against all unrighteousness; 
though it will lay judgment to the line and righteousness 
to the plummet; though it will rudely sweep away every 
refuge of lies and expose all the hidden things of darkness; 
though his iron rod will dash the nations to pieces 
as a potter's vessel; and though he will suddenly bring 
down every high thing that exalteth itself (Isa. 13:5-9; 
28:17; 1 Cor. 4:5; Psa. 2:9; Isa. 2:11), nevertheless 
his judgment will be for the world's deliverance; for he 
wounds to heal. And when mankind has been thoroughly 
submitted to the leveling process of the great "time of 
trouble," and has been humbled and made teachable by it, 
then the same wise Judge will turn to bless— to heal the 
broken hearted, to deliver the captives of sin and death, 
to speak peace unto the nations, to make wars to cease to 
the ends of the earth, to give beauty for ashes, the oil of 
joy for mourning and the garment of praise for the spirit 
of heaviness, and to wipe away all tears from off all faces. 
-Isa. 19:22; 61:1-3; Zech. 9:10; Psa. 46:9; Isa. 25:8; 
Rev. 21:4. 

In this view of the day of judgment, notwithstanding 
the commotion that shall attend it, but realizing that the 
great Judge of all the earth comes to bring forth judgment 
to victory, to establish truth and righteousness on a firm 
and enduring footing, and to punish all that oppose that 
blessed work, we understand the joy of the Prophet-Psalmist, 



when, looking forward to this glorious time, he exclaimed, Let 
the heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad; let the fields 
be joyful; let the sea roar and the floods clap their hands; 
and let the hills be joyful together before the Lord: for he 
cometh to judge the world, and the people with equity.— 
Psalms 98:7-9. 

So let our hearts rejoice and our tongues be glad; and 
let the blessed secret be known among the saints, that the 
Lord is now present, and that we are living in the days of 
the Son of man; and let our joyful hearts and voices bid 
him a royal welcome; for indeed he hath put a new song 
into our mouths. 



page 221 

VOL. XVI. OCTOBER 1, 1895. No. 19. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 222 

Views from the Tower 223 

The Typical Red Heifer 225 

Pittsburg Prophetic Conference 227 

Your Safety in the Coming Trouble 229 

Bible Study: The Triumph of Gideon 23 1 

Bible Study: Ruth's Choice 231 

Encouraging Letters 232 

page 222 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1871 : page 222 

WE RENEW our thanks to the dear friends who send us news 
clippings from all over the world. We have but little time for general 
reading, yet feel the necessity of being thoroughly informed. Of course 
but few of the items are even referred to in the TOWER; but many others, 
nevertheless, are very useful and highly appreciated. We much 
prefer clippings to whole papers; but please give name and date of 
paper from which clipped. 



DAWN VOL. II. IN SWEDISH AND IN DANO-NORWEGIAN. 

These volumes are now ready. Orders sent in now will be filled in 
rotation as received. 

Although the cost of these foreign translations is much greater than 
the English, because the demand is less and the editions smaller, yet 



the price of MILLENNIAL DAWN in the German, Swedish and Dano-Norwegian 

languages will be uniform with the English. Some warm-hearted 

friends of the Truth, knowing that the English editions are 

sold at cost, and realizing that the foreign editions would cost nearly 

double, because smaller, volunteered to pay the difference through the 

Tract Fund, so that the foreigners, who often are less able to purchase, 

might have the benefit of the low prices of the English. Their donation 

amounts to four hundred and twenty dollars on each foreign 

volume. 



R1870 : page 223 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



BOTH the United Presbyterian and the Lutheran 
young people are organizing after the manner of 
the Epworth Leaguers. The latter are styled the Luther 
League. About 100,000 are already enrolled. Their 
motto is— "Non-Synodical, Strictly Conservative, and 
Thoroughly Lutheran." 

It is almost as difficult for sectarians to get free from 
their denominational bondages as for a leopard to change 
his spots. The Christian Endeavor movement was the 
purest and freest, and at least took the name of Christ. 
But all efforts to make either "worldings" or Christian 
"babes" into Christian free-men by means of organization 
and rules must always prove futile. The only Christian 
freemen are those who are no longer "babes tossed about 
by every wind of doctrine," but who, feeding first as 
babes upon the sincere milk of the Word, have grown thereby 
in grace and knowledge and love, and who by use of the 
strong meat of God's Word have had their senses exercised 
and have become strong freemen in Christ— free from 
the world and its spirit, and free from self; reckonedly dead 
to all such influences, and alive to God and his will, and in 
bondage only to God's will through him who bought them 
with his own precious blood. And we have the Lord's 
assurance that this class, being selected during this Gospel 
age, will in all be but a "little flock." 



The usual triennial conclave of the Protestant Episcopal 
Church of the United States will open October 2 in 
Minneapolis. 

It was at a similar Convention of this same religious 
body that the proposition for a Protestant Union or Confederacy 
was first extended to other Protestant denominations. 
This proposition is still under consideration, 
especially by the Presbyterian Assembly. 

The coming Convention will attract more than ordinary 
attention, for it proposes a number of important steps 



in connection with its organization. (1) It is proposed 
that the triennial Conventions shall be superseded by 
General Synods, which shall meet triennially. (2) It 
proposes to have two divisions or "houses" hereafter— a 
House of Bishops and a House of Delegates— similar to the 
two houses of Congress and of Parliament. (3) It is proposed 
to elect one of the Bishops to be their chief or President, 
who shall be known as "Primus"— which signifies, 
one who is first. The Scottish Episcopal Church has 
long had such an officer, who presides, and is otherwise 
privileged. 

This movement is quite significant in connection with 
the Protestant confederacy which the Scriptures clearly indicate 
will take place. (See our issue for Dec. 1881— now 
out of print.) It will make ready for the "Image" to 
"speak" promptly as soon as it receives the "life" of 
Apostolic succession and supposed "authority."— 
Rev. 13:15. 



Sept. 20 was the twenty-fifth anniversary of the fall of 
Papacy's temporal power. Roman Catholics everywhere 
are being urged to pray for the restoration of temporal 
sovereignty. A statement is going the rounds of the press 
to the effect that, in view of the bankrupt condition of the 
Italian treasury, the plan of proposing to purchase the freedom 
of Rome and some surrounding territory for the 
Papacy for $1,000,000,000 is being seriously considered. 

On Scriptural grounds we doubt the success of this 
project. Our expectation is that the present government 
of Rome will continue in some form or degree until utter 
collapse and anarchy shall put an end to all government, 
political and religious, in the great time of trouble which 

R1870 : page 224 

prepares for the better conditions symbolically called the 
"new heavens and new earth." 



Professor Treitschke, lecturing recently before the 
Berlin University, said: 

"Reverence, called by Goethe the ultimate object of 
all moral education, is vanishing most alarmingly in the new 
generation. They respect nothing, neither God, nor the 
barriers which nature has set up between the sexes, nor 
patriotism, which by them is made to give way to the mercenary 
desires of a race bent on enjoyment only. Education, 
extended to all, becomes more and more shallow. The deep 
thought of the ancients is despised, and only that which 
serves the purposes of the near future finds favor. Every 
one talks about everything, guided by the newspapers and 
encyclopedias, consequently the creative power of intellect 
becomes rare. Science, once tempted to be too profound, 



now loses itself in platitudes; only a few noble giants of 
original thought continue to stand out among the underwood 
of mere gatherers of notes. Taste has degenerated, 
the love of truth has given way to a morbid love of actualities. 
Hence a wax figure often gains more applause than a 
work of art. The people lead an empty life, which they 
seek to fill out by killing time in giving undue attention to 
sport and betting. When we think of the manner in which 
the heroes of public games and of the circus are overrated, 
we are filled with loathing." 

Thus we see that the trend is the same in the monarchies 
of Europe as in this Republic. By inspiration the great 
Apostle Paul gave a still clearer and truer picture of nominal 
Christendom, saying:— 

"In the last days perilous times shall come. For men 
shall be lovers of their own selves [selfish], covetous, boasters, 
proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, 
unholy, without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, 
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, 
traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than 
lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying 
the power thereof: from such turn away."— 2 Tim. 3:1-5. 



"A curious mode of worship was introduced by the 
Salvation Army at Detroit recently. A lecture was delivered 
by two "captains," on the analysis and dissection of 
the devil's body, the parts being pride, whiskey, etc., immediately 
after which the lights were suddenly extinguished, 
and the form of his Satanic Majesty was brought out, made of 
paper, and colored to suggest the analytic description. Red 
lights were thrown upon the stage to represent the fire of 
hell, and horns, hoofs and tail were terrible in appearance. 
A red bonnet decorated with roses represented pride, while 
cards and liquor indicated ruin and destruction. The 
effigy was then set on fire, amid shrieks and yells which reminded 
the beholders of Milton's Pandemonium." 

Alas! how many of the "babes in Christ" are ignorant 
of Satan's devices; and do not see that the great 
Adversary might even help along such a sham battle against 
himself, if thereby he could fasten the more firmly upon 
the consciences of the people the errors [doctrines of devils] 
which are keeping them from real love and worship toward 
God. The Lord's prescription for holiness— "Sanctify 
them through thy truth, thy Word is truth"— is far better, 
more successful, than this and all other unscriptural methods. 
This is the Chinese method of serving God by using fireworks 
to scare off the devil. But Satan is too subtle to 
be thus dealt with. 



A New York journal reports that at a meeting of the 
S.S. Missionary Association of the Presbyterian Church 
held in Detroit not long since "The Presbyterian Board 



of Publication was severely scored for the alleged antiquated 
and attenuated tracts that it sends out. A committee was 
appointed to draw up resolutions asking the Board for a 
higher grade of tracts." 

A Sister suggests that "possibly the live and good-sized 
Old Theology Tracts going all over the world from the 
WATCH TOWER office have something to do with this discontent. 
Ordinary tracts are so stupid that intelligent 

R1871 : page 224 

people feel offended if handed one. The O.T. Tracts are 
always crisp and fresh because full of the spirit of the Truth 
—index fingers pointing and referring constantly and truly 
to the Word of God." 

Many are finding this sort of "Silent Evangelism" a 
blessing to themselves and to others and orders are coming 
for "more tracts" from every quarter of the world. For 
instance, since our last issue we have sent tracts and DAWNS 
to the following foreign countries: viz., England; Scotland; 
Denmark; Germany; Sweden; Jamaica, West Indies; 
Cape Colony, S. Africa; New South Wales, Australia; 
and Colombia, Central America. The reading matter 
sent out amounted to five hundred and twenty-five copies 
of MILLENNIAL DAWN besides over ten hundred thousand 
pages of Old Theology Tracts. 

Our readers who are of German extraction will be 
pleased to learn that a Sister in the Lord, a representative 
of the TOWER TRACT SOCIETY in Berlin, Germany, 
reports favorably respecting a new method adopted lately 
to gain the attention of consecrated Germans. A Berlin 
journal has recently given her a most excellent notice of 
MILLENNIAL DAWN, and she is finding quite a number willing 
to hear. She now has seventy-five copies of DAWN 
loaned in Berlin. 

Next week a Brother starts for Sweden, and in about a 
month two others will start for Switzerland, all seeking to 
carry to their native lands the gospel of "a ransom for all." 
The tract and colporteur work all over the United States 
progresses valiantly. 



A strong movement is on foot amongst Methodists seeking 
"lay -representation at the Annual Conferences." A 
circular has been issued from Baltimore, Md., claiming to 
voice the sentiments of 2,500,000 Methodists who demand 
this reform. The ministers do not favor it, desiring to keep 
the power in their own hands. An additional reform urged 
is that the laymen should have a voice in the election of 
Presiding Elders; and that the latter be given equal powers 
with Bishops. 

R1871 : page 225 

This is part of the general tendency toward equal 



rights and privileges. As it increases, the M.E. Bishops 
will wish that they could put forward the claim of "divine 
authority through Apostolic succession," as is claimed by 
Episcopalians and Roman and Greek Catholics. This will 
tend to draw them toward a general Protestant Confederacy 
possessed of the ability to make the claims and exercise 
the Apostolic authority coveted. 



A Baptist division of the Boy's Brigade went "into 
camp" at May's Landing near Philadelphia during September. 
Some boys of the town "raided them for fun," 
and the young Baptists who had put on carnal armor were 
"forced to defend themselves" with their bayonets, and 
murder was narrowly averted. Warfare for the Lord according 
to unauthorized methods is, and always will be, dangerous. 
"All they that take to the sword shall perish by 
the sword." 



At the Presbyterian Ministers' Association meeting, in 
Philadelphia, Sept. 16, it was decided not to permit the 
discussion of the question: "Is the Presbyterian Church 
firmly established in the Confession of Faith, and, if not, 
whither is she drifting?" They all knew that she is not 
firmly established upon it, and that she is drifting into four 
factions— (1) The "higher criticism" or infidelity party; 

(2) the form-of-godliness-social-club-no-doctrine party; 

(3) the well-intentioned-but-superstitious party, ever learning 
but never able to come to a knowledge of the truth, 
because they are looking backward to the dim lights of 
human tradition; (4) the children of the light and of the 

day, who, looking in the direction of the sun of righteousness, 

are beginning to get rays of the Millennial dawning; 

and who are compelled to "come out of her" because, 

with present light, they can no longer stay where their presence 

means the misrepresentation of God's Word and 

character as well as their own stultification. The ministers, 

therefore, very wisely, concluded that they needed no information 

on the subject; and that the opening of their 

mouths on the subject would hasten the dissolution already 

in progress. But the sooner it comes the better for the 

fourth class mentioned. 



R1871 : page 225 

THE TYPICAL RED HEIFER. 

-NUMBERS 19.- 

A BROTHER not very long in the truth sends us a 
little tract bearing the title, "The Red Heifer 



Type of Sanctification, by J. H. G.," and inquires what 
we think of it. 

We reply: The application is quite incorrect; but 
the tract itself is not likely either to benefit or injure any 
one. The danger of injury would chiefly be that as an 
entering wedge it might lead to more serious errors; and 
in a general way of course even the most insignificant error 
may hide some truth and thus prove an open switch for 
Satan to use in side-tracking us, should our hearts ever get 
out of harmony with the Lord and his plan. 

The writer of the little tract falls into the very common 
mistake of failing to note that the Jewish code respecting 
sacrifices divided them (1) into sacrifices for two 
distinct classes,— the Levites (the High priest's household), 
and all Israel (the general congregation excepting the 
Levites); and (2) into sacrifices of two distinct times; viz., 
those of the Day of Atonement, and those of the year 
following the Day of Atonement. This is the key to the 
understanding of the types of Leviticus, and without it no 
one can obtain clear or consistent views. 

The High Priest and under Priests (consecrated to 
sacrifice) represent Christ and the Church, the royal priesthood. 
The Levites (consecrated to service, not to sacrifice) 
represent believers in this Gospel Age— the household 
of faith. 

The Day of Atonement, in which the sacrifices for all 
sins were made (the bullock and the goat for sin-offerings, 
together with their accompanying burnt offerings), represented 
this Gospel Age, beginning with the great and all 
important sacrifice of Christ, and finished with the "filling 
up of that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ" 
by the royal priesthood, the members of his body. (Col. 1:24.) 
At the close of this Great Day of Atonement 
(the Gospel Age) the Great High Priest (head and body) 
will come forth and bless the people who desire to be God's 
people (represented by all Israel except the tribe of Levi), 
and the effect will be to lift them from the dust and grant 
them forgiveness and restitution. 

The sacrifices and offerings of the people after the Day 
of Atonement, and based upon its work, represent penances 
for shortcomings after being cleansed by the great 
Atonement, and thank offerings, pledges, vows, etc., which 
the world will offer during the Millennium or "times of 
restitution." 

The Red Heifer was not only not one of the Day of 
Atonement (or Gospel age) sacrifices, but it should not be 
counted a "sacrifice" at all; for only those animals were 
sacrifices of which a portion was placed upon God's altar. 
The High Priest killed all the sacrifices of the Atonement 
Day; but Aaron, the High Priest then, had nothing to do 
with the killing and burning of the Red Heifer. All 
sacrifices were killed in the "court of the Tabernacle," 

R1872 : page 225 

but the Red Heifer was killed outside the camp. The priests 



killed the sacrifices, but they did not kill the Red Heifer. 

We thus prove most positively that the Red Heifer represented 

neither Christ nor his Church, the "better sacrifices" 

R1872: page 226 

of this Gospel age. And as the time for the righteous 
to suffer "without the camp" will end with the close of 
the Gospel age, we cannot apply the killing and burning 
of the Red Heifer as a type of anything that will occur 
in the Millennium. What then did that heifer represent? 

It represented a class of people who died ignominiously; 
for "outside the camp" is used to represent ignominy, 
worldly disapproval or detestation. (Heb. 13:13.) The 
ancient worthies, whose faithfulness unto death outside the 
camp is recorded in Heb. 11:32-38, was just such a class 
as the one we are seeking,— represented in the Red Heifer 
burned without the camp, whose ashes served to purify 
those contaminated or unclean through association with 
death. 

It represented a class of people not of the Gospel 
Church, but who in God's sight were justified, and by faith, 
as is represented by the fact that the heifer was without 
blemish and completely red— the color which represents 
the blood of Christ. All this well represents the worthies 
of Heb. 1 1:32-38. By faith they looked forward to the 
atonement for sin which God had promised; they caught 
a glimpse of Christ's day and were glad; they "endured 
as seeing him who is invisible," and "pleased God" 
(Heb. 11:5,27,39), and hence must have been justified, 
even though (the sin-offering not yet having been made) 
they could not be received into the liberties of sons of 
God.-Gal. 4:4-7; Heb. 3:5,6. 

In that it never wore a yoke it represented a class of 
free men, just such as are mentioned in Heb. 1 1 ; for although 
some of those were born under the Law, and some 
before it, yet since all are mentioned together as equally 
approved in God's sight, and since we know that "by the 
deeds of the Law no flesh shall be justified in God's sight," 
therefore we are bound to conclude that all these were 
reckoned as free from the bondage of the Law, and accepted 
by faith with Abraham, under the Abrahamic covenant, 
and not as under the "yoke" of the Law, which condemned 
all who ever attempted justification under it- 
Gal. 5:1; Acts 15:10. 

The priest did not kill the Red Heifer: one of the 
under-priests merely sprinkled some of its blood toward 
the Tabernacle door: thus typically showing that the lives 
and deaths of the class represented pointed toward the 
Tabernacle, its door [Christ] and the atoning sacrifices 
to come. "They drank of the spiritual Rock [Christ] 
which followed them," and their lives given (their blood) 
pointed toward Him. 

The "worthies" of Heb. 11, although equally as 
faithful as the "overcomers" of the Gospel age, could not 
be counted as sharers in the sufferings of Christ and joint-heirs 



of his glory. The great Creator has chosen to prepare 
some vessels to more honor and some to less honor; 
and some that resist the moulding and shaping influences 
of the great Potter will be neither, but will be vessels for 
destruction, unfit for his service in any capacity. (2 Tim. 2:20; 
Rom. 9:21,22.) The vessels for less honor were 
selected first, "until John" the baptizer, who was one of 
the chief of the ancient worthies, the house of servants; 
and yet the least one in the house of sons, the vessels unto 
greatest honor, is greater than he.— Matt. 11:11. 

Christ Jesus our Lord was the first, the Head, the 
Leader of his elect Church, his body, which must follow 
his footsteps of suffering to glory, before others can be 
blessed. After the great antitypical Day of Atonement is 
ended, the sufferings of Christ finished, and the glorious 
reign begun, then the faithful worthies of the past shall be 
blessed, "God having foreseen some better things for us, that 
they without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

The sin offering of Christ has laid up a great store 
of grace, merit, not only for his Church, but for all the 
families of the earth; and it will be the work of the Royal 
Priesthood to dispense that grace to those of earth's families 
who, when they come to a clear knowledge of the 
truth, obediently apply for forgiveness and help. 

The faithfulness of the ancient worthies, even unto 
death, could not take away sin, and could not be presented 
before God as a sin offering, nor as a sacrifice at 
all, the altar [Christ] not having yet been set up. (Matt. 23:19.) 
But the faithfulness of the ancient worthies did 
yield some results (represented in the ashes of the Red 
Heifer)— it yielded a store of valuable experiences to them, 
by means of which those beautiful graces of character were 
produced which also adorn "the sons of God," who have 
now received the spirit of adoption. The Lord thus 
wrought in them the blessed fruits of holiness, though they 
could not be recognized as "sons," nor made partakers 
of the divine nature, nor joint-heirs with Christ, because 
not called to be vessels of the highest honor. They have 
thus "laid up in store" (1 Tim. 6:19), as the result 
of their fiery experiences (represented in the ashes of 
the burned heifer), characters precious in God's sight, 
which he intends by and by to use for the blessing of the 
world, after the Day of Atonement is ended. This is represented 
in the ashes of the heifer carefully gathered into 
a clean place for use in the purifying of the people who 
become defiled after having been cleansed with the atonement 
of the "better sacrifices" of the Atonement Day. 

When the spiritual Kingdom has been set up, when 
the First Resurrection has taken place at the end of the 
Gospel age, then these "worthies" of the past will be 
blessed (Heb. 11:40,35), and enjoy a "better resurrection" 
than the world in general, in that theirs will be an instantaneous 
raising up from death to human perfection and life 
everlasting; while others of the world, even if obedient, 
must come up slowly to perfection, step by step. Then, 
too, as perfect men they will be the superiors and natural 



leaders of the world, and, according to promise, Christ will 
make them chiefs or "princes in all the earth." (Psa. 45:16.) 
They will be the seen representatives (Luke 13:28) 
of God's Kingdom, while Christ and the Church, the 
real spiritual rulers, will be unseen.— 1 Tim. 6:16; Heb. 1:3; 
1 John 3:2. 

R1872: page 227 

Then, like the ashes of the heifer laid up in a clean 
place, the results of the painful experiences of the "worthies" 
will be a store of blessing, instruction, and help to these 
"Princes." And each pardoned one who would be 
cleansed perfectly must not only cleanse himself with water 
(truth) but must also have applied to him the instructions 
of these "Princes;" represented by the ashes of the heifer 
in water applied with "hyssop," which represented "purging" 
or cleansing. -Ex. 12:22; Lev. 14:4,49; Psa. 51:7; 
Heb. 9:19. 

The cleansing was from all death-defilements— dead 
bodies, graves or the bones of the dead,— thus indicating 
that the agency through which men shall be fully cleansed 
from death and its degradation, lifted up in restitution, 
will be this work, of these whom the Lord for this purpose, 
shall "make princes in all the earth." 



R1872: page 227 

PITTSBURG PROPHETIC CONFERENCE. 



THE announcement has been very generally made that 
there will be a Prophetic Conference at Pittsburg in 
October; and quite a number of TOWER readers are 
inquiring what part the Editor will take in the Conference. 
We answer that we have nothing to do with it; and as an 
explanation lay before our readers an article on the subject 
by the Editor published in a Pittsburg paper July 25, last. 

Mr. Editor:— With others of your readers I have 
been interested in the announcement of a prophetic 
conference, soon to be held in our city. I cogitate upon 
the projects as follows: 

That the Scriptures teach that our Redeemer will 
"come again" at the close of this Gospel Age cannot be 
disputed. That he comes to inaugurate a reign of righteousness 
in which the saints of the present age will be the 
kings and priests (rulers and instructors) to bless and lift 
up out of ignorance and sin and death whosoever wills of 
the at present "groaning creation," (Rom. 8:19-22; Rev. 20:6) 
should not be disputed by any who have studied the 
Bible and who have intelligently united in the Lord's 
prayer, "Thy Kingdom come; thy will be done on earth as 
it is done in heaven." 



This being the case, all Christian people should be 
interested in "conference" on the subject; in order that 
nothing that God has declared by the mouth of his holy 
prophets, bearing upon this subject, should be overlooked. 
(Acts 3:19-21.) And such a "conference" could scarcely 
fail to have the Lord's blessing and to bring clearer views 
of the subject to all concerned. 

But, sir, all who know the history of these "Prophetic 
Conferences," held from time to time in the past, know 
very well that no real conference is proposed. The true 
idea of conference is discussion, examination, consultation; 
but if the proposed "conference" shall resemble those in 
which some of the same gentlemen took part in the past, 
there will be no opportunity for conference; every utterance 
will be shaped and trimmed beforehand, by a committee 
so as to prevent conference. For instance, at the New 
York Prophetic Conference some years ago, when Mr. Charles 
MacKay, of Scotland, an invited and announced speaker, 
was asked to present his MS. to the critical committee, it 

R1873 : page 227 

was feared he would be hindered from speaking because he 
had no MS. prepared, not being used to "cut and dried" 
conferences in Scotland. He explained that he usually 
spoke extemporaneously, but would confine himself strictly 
to the Bible testimony; and he was then permitted to be 
the one exception to the rule. 

But, mark you, sir, my objection is not to the character 
of the meeting, as it is proposed, but merely to its misleading 
name; for "those who pay the piper have the right to 
choose the music." If, therefore the present program be 
maintained, I beg to suggest that the promoters would reflect 
much more credit upon themselves as straightforward, candid 
men, by calling their meeting a "Pre-millennialist 
Convention," which would be a truth-telling name, whereas 
"Prophetic Conference" is misleading. But lest it 
be said that I am prejudging the coming conference, 
which may be held upon different lines, we note the 
fact that it has already been announced that "fools" 
and "cranks" are not connected with the movement. 
This clearly implies that they have already fixed their 
standard and decided who are the wise and who the 
foolish. Perhaps they forget, however, that much of the 
wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, and that in 
their day our Lord and his prophets and apostles were all 
accounted "fools" and "cranks;" and that the same 
worldly estimate will continue to the end of this age. (See 
1 Cor. 1:18; 2:14; 3:18; 4:10,13,14; Acts 17:18.) 
I very much fear that if Jesus and Paul and Peter were to 
attempt to join this "conference," they would be hustled 
out as "cranks." Yet, to those who have ears, "The 
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy," and there 
can be no understanding of the prophets without it. 

I object to the word "prophetic," as well as to the 
word "conference," as inappropriately used. Those who will 



attend the meeting will not only find that it will be a conference 
at which there will be no conference, no discussion, 
no hearing of "the other side," but they will find the very 
prophecies mentioned by St. Peter (Acts 3:19-21) almost 
ignored. Why? Because, forsooth, some of God's people 
who denominate themselves "Second Adventists" have 
made themselves foolish in the sight of the world by 
defective interpretations of the prophecies. Agreeing with 
"Second Adventists" respecting the manner of Christ's 
second coming (the writer differs widely, and he believes 
Scripturally, from both), they want to mark themselves out 
as entirely separate from them respecting the interpreting 
of prophetic times and seasons; and they therefore are 
obliged to pass by the prophecies which abound with figures, 
periods, etc.— especially Daniel's. But why then use the 
word prophetic? 

In one of your issues I notice that the views of the 
conference are already fixed in several respects which I 
consider erroneous. I therefore criticize them, briefly, 
and thus afford the coming "conference" an opportunity 
to examine its faith afresh, in the light of the Scriptures 
which I shall cite. 

They do not pretend to fix the time of the Lord's 
second coming. They hold that of that event no man 
knows the date nor will any ever know beforehand. They 
feel positive of this because of the Lord's statement in St. 

R1873 : page 228 

Mark 13:32. But they overlook the fact that if our Lord 
meant to tell us that no man would ever know he did not 
so state himself. And since he included himself and the angels, 
it would equally imply that neither he nor the angels would 
ever know, which would be an absurdity; for our Lord 
could not come a second time without knowing it some 
time previously. The time was unknown then and was to 
so continue until God's due time for making it known; for 
"the Lord God doeth nothing but he revealeth it to his 
servants the prophets." And this is all clearly stated and 
explained in Daniel 12:9,10. 

If the times and seasons of prophecy give them no 
light, why do they surmise that the event is nigh? Is it not 
with them a guess in the dark? If they have not trimmed 
their lamps, and gotten more light on the subject than had 
those who have vaguely looked and hoped for the Lord for 
eighteen centuries, why do they think the great event near? 
(Matt. 25:1-13.) Do they not see that the repeated injunction, 
"Watch!" implies that the "wise virgins" did 
not know, but were to watch in order that in due time 
they might know? Wherein would be the necessity of watching 
for an event that would be known to them no sooner 
nor more surely than to others? Does not the command, 
"Watch!" imply that at the proper time the watchers will 
be rewarded by a knowledge which the unwatching will 
nothave?-l Thes. 5:1-3,4-6. 

These Christian friends have a fixed belief respecting 



the manner of Christ's second coming, which we believe 

it would advantage them to refix more in harmony 

with reason and Scripture. They believe that he will come 

literally, but by that they mean that they expect him 

again in the flesh. Do they forget that when he "was 

made flesh" at his first advent it meant the laying aside 

of the superior glory and honor of the spirit nature, a 

humbling of himself to "the form of a servant;" and that, 

thus, he who was "rich" as a spirit being, became "poor" 

when he became "the man" Christ Jesus? How can they 

think of his body as being marred and yet being of transcendent 

beauty? How can they expect to see those scars for 

all eternity and yet expect that things of the present time 

will no more be remembered? How can they suppose that 

the Lord has the same wounded body without supposing 

that the saints also in their resurrection will have deformed 

and sin-scarred bodies, such as they have at present? 

Surely they admit that Christ finished the work for which 
it was necessary for him to take man's nature; viz., "for the 
suffering of death," that he might give his flesh "for the 
life of the world." (John 6:51.) How can they think he 
is still flesh and will come a second time as a flesh-being? 
Surely they will admit that "him hath God highly exalted" 
again. (Phil. 2:8,9.) Surely they will admit that he was 
"put to death in the flesh but quickened (made alive) in 
spirit." Do they not remember, also, that "flesh and 
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God"? How then 
can they expect a flesh and blood Christ to be the great 
King and to set up the great Kingdom promised? 

Do they not remember that one apostle explains 
that "it doth not yet appear what we shall be," but that 
"when he shall appear we shall be like him, and see him as 
he is?"— not he like us, that we might see him as he was.— 
1 John 3:2. 

Do they not remember that another apostle declares 
that the church must be "changed" by resurrection power, 
from animal bodies to spiritual bodies, in order that she 
may be united to the Lord in the Kingdom which flesh 
and blood cannot inherit?- 1 Cor. 15:44,49-53. 

Do they not remember that after his resurrection our 
Lord not only showed the apostles that he was alive again, 
but proved to them that he was no longer "the man Christ 
Jesus who gave himself a ransom," but the King of Glory 
—a spirit being. He proved this by showing them that he 
was no longer limited to human conditions. He came into 
the room where they were met, while the doors were 
shut. He vanished from their sight when the interview 
was ended. Indeed, they saw but little of him during the 
forty days after his resurrection, and the world saw him not 
at all. And during his interviews with his disciples he 
showed himself in various forms or bodies, just as he did 
before he became man, when as a spirit being he appeared 
to Abraham in human form but without being of human 
nature.— Gen. 18:1-8. 

But they tell us that their belief that Christ's coming 
will be in the flesh is based upon the facts recorded in Acts 1:9,1 1; 



especially the declaration, "This same Jesus, 

which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in 

like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." 

We inquire, Is there in this anything difficult? or that 
would demand that all of the foregoing Scripture teachings 
respecting our Lord as a spirit being should be cast aside, 
ignored? I think not. I suggest that this passage when 
rightly understood, is in full accord with the others. It is 
the manner of our Lord's coming again that is to resemble 
the manner of his going away. Was the manner of his going 
quiet, unaccompanied by outward display, unknown to the 
world, and known and recognized only by his chosen? Yes. 
Then surely in "like manner," and not in a different 
manner, should his chosen look for him to come again. 
Quietly, unknown to the world, known only to those who 
"watch," he will come again. 

A mistake of these friends has been to infer that 
"manner" means flesh, and they have failed to notice the 
real "manner" of his going— quietly, unobserved of the 
world. Our Lord had a body of flesh when the disciples 
beheld him taken up into heaven, but the flesh was no 
longer he, as before his resurrection, but merely a 
form, like his clothing, that represented (but veiled) his 
real, glorious, spiritual body, which St. Paul saw afterward, 
at the cost of his sight- 1 Cor. 15:5-8; 9:1; Acts 9:3-18. 

The fact that our Lord manifested himself in a body 
of flesh after his resurrection, before his ascension, by no 
means proves that he will similarly manifest himself in a 
fleshly form at his second advent; for "manner" and condition 
are wholly different things. I believe from other 
Scriptures that instead of his appearing in the flesh, his 
saints when "changed" to spirit beings will "see him as 
he is," as St. Paul saw him "before the time;" but with the 

R1874: page 228 

powers of their "changed" conditions they will not suffer 
from the sight of the Lord's glory, but will be with him 
and behold and share his glory. 

We would like, too, that these gentlemen, when they 
meet, should not fail to notice the peculiar Greek word 
parousia— rendered "coming" in connection with our 
Lord's second advent, the signification of which is presence. 
Notice that Matt. 24:37 contains the word, declaring: "As 
it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be in the presence of 
the son of man." In the time of the Lord's second presence 
the world will proceed as usual— eating, drinking, 
planting, building, etc., and know not of his presence and 
the approaching trouble, as in Noah's day they knew not 
of the coming flood. Compare also Luke 17:26. Our 
friends err also in their interpretation of Zech. 14:4, "His 
feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives." The 
passage does not refer to the literal feet of Christ at all, 
but symbolically to the feet of his father, Jehovah, as will 

R1874: page 229 



be clearly seen by reference to the preceding verse, if 
the English reader will remember wherever the word "Lord" 
occurs in the Old Testament in small capital letters, the 
original (Hebrew) is Jehovah— exclusively the Father's 
name. 

A very large proportion of Christian people are post-millennialists 
(believers that Christ will not come until the 
church shall have introduced and finished the Millennium). 
Nevertheless they see that eighteen centuries have done but 
little even in the most civilized parts, toward bringing 
about the condition in which God's will shall be done on 
earth as (perfectly as) it is done in heaven; and they see 
that even now the nominal conversions in heathen lands 
are not five per cent of the births, while in the most civilized 
lands the really sanctified are few. Many of these 
would be prepared to look for the Lord's coming and 
kingdom as the only tangible hope for the groaning creation: 
but they are repelled by such pre-millennialists, as 
propose this "Prophetic Conference," who claim that 
Christ will come again in the flesh marred and wounded, 
but shining, and that with his saints, also in the flesh, with 
their deformed features shining, he will set up a fleshly 
kingdom, an earthly court, after the order of kings, emperors 
and popes of the present time, but more magnificent and 
beneficent. 

If, therefore, the coming meeting could be a real conference, 
and if the conferees could come to see that Christ 
at his second advent, and his associated saints, will be no 
longer flesh and blood, but spirit beings, whose majesty 
will be completely hidden from mortal view, but whose 
power and authority will be everywhere in evidence (as 
Satan, "the prince of this world," a spirit being, is present, 
and invisible, but nevertheless powerful, working in 
and through, the "children of disobedience"), it 
would do much to convert thousands to pre-millennial 
views; for thousands are too consistent and too spiritually 
minded to suppose that God, having begun in the spirit, 
will perfect his plan on such a plane of the flesh. 

I would be glad to see these brethren make their proposed 
meeting a genuine prophetic conference; and, if 
they will confer thereupon, we will cheerfully and freely 
supply them the evidences, chapter and verse, that demonstrate 
that the Lord has come upon them "as a thief," 
and that, not watching aright, they "knew not" that the 
day of the Lord's spiritual presence (parousia) began in 
the autumn of A.D. 1874, as is abundantly attested by the 
prophets and corroborated by the "clouds" of trouble in 
which he first reveals himself to the world in judgments; 
to be followed by his revelation as the "Sun of Righteousness," 
to heal and bless all who will accept his grace. 

To me the Scriptures clearly demonstrate that the 
great antitypical Jubilee began with our Lord's presence in 
1874, and that the little period of forty years between then 
and 1915 is in Scripture called the "day of vengeance" in 
which God will overturn all present institutions, financial, 



social and religious (the smiting time of Daniel 2:44,45), 
preparatory to the inauguration of the Kingdom of Righteousness 
symbolised by the divided Mount of Olives (the two 
parts of God's kingdom), upon which symbolically Jehovah's 
feet shall rest, when he shall make the place of his 
feet (the earth, his footstool) glorious.— Isa. 60:13. 
C. T. RUSSELL. 



R1874 : page 229 

YOUR SAFETY IN THE COMING TROUBLE. 



"The sinners in Zion are afraid; fearfulness hath surprised the hypocrites. 

Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us 

shall dwell with everlasting burnings?" 

"He that walketh righteously, and speaketh uprightly; he that despiseth 

the gain of oppressions, that shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, 

that stoppeth his ears from hearing of blood, and shutteth his 

eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on high; his place of 

defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread shall 

be given him, his waters shall be sure."— Isa. 33:14-16. 

THE fear here spoken of by the prophet is the fear 

that is now beginning to be experienced throughout 

the lengths and breadths of nominal Zion— Christendom 

(Christ's kingdom), so called. The Prophet, as he 

frequently did (e.g., Isa. 55:3-9), took the standpoint of 

the future,— of our day,— and thus speaks for the Lord of 

the work he is now about to do— "Now will I rise, saith 

the Lord: now will I be exalted; now will I lift up myself. 

[The appointed time to overthrow the present order 

of things and to establish the Kingdom of God having 

come.] Ye [the same class referred to above— the sinners in 

Zion. See also verse 1] shall conceive chaff; ye shall 

bring forth stubble [Such will be the result of the great efforts 

to draw numbers into the membership of nominal 

Zion— the efforts to stamp all the world who will submit to 

it with the name Christian, as manifested in the recent 

movements toward so-called Christian Union, which would 

not only baptize the ignorant infants and count them as 

born into the Church, and recognize all the adherents of 

Apostate Christianity, but seeks also to gain by compromises 

and by flattery the adherents of Judaism, who totally 

repudiate Christ, as well as the blinded millions of heathenism 

that bow to idols of wood and stone and know not 

God nor his dear Son, our Lord and Redeemer]— Ye shall 

conceive chaff: ye shall bring forth stubble: your breath 

[your false doctrines of belief and policy] as fire shall devour 

you [Your unprincipled policy which would thus sell 

the Lord and the truth for gain— in numbers and prestige 

and power before the world— shall lead to dire results— to 

fearful trouble and destruction]. And the people [there assembled 



and compacted in a false Christian, or as some 
suggest, religious union.— See also Isa. 8:9-13] shall be as 
the burnings of lime [self-consumed; the very nature of 
an organization of such heterogeneous elements must of 
necessity be self-destructive, the process also being a painful 
one]; as thorns [Yes, it will be a union of thorns; each will 
be a thorn in the flesh to the other] cut up [made ready] 
shall they be burned in the fire." 

Observe, it is "the sinners in Zion," not the humble 
sincere people of God, that are afraid; and fearfulness 
hath surprised the hypocrites. To the former class, as in 
the end of the Jewish age also, belong those wilfully blind 

R1874 : page 230 

leaders in Zion and all their wilfully blind followers, who 
refuse to see the truth when it is testified to them and who 
love and prefer the error and devote their energies to bolstering 
up and reinforcing the systems of error with which 
their temporal interests, social and financial, seem to be 
identified. And in doing this, ostensibly to promote the 
interests of the Redeemer's Kingdom, but really in opposition 
to its establishment, their course is surely hypocritical, 
as the Prophet declares. 

While the great theologians, whose leisure and learning 
have afforded them special facilities for coming to a 
knowledge of the truth, have wasted their talents in 
building up and supporting with their influence great 
systems of error, and while it has been and still is 
their great ambition to draw into these systems great numbers, 
according to the Prophet, they have been only preparing 
stubble for the fire of this evil day. And already, 
as the Prophet declares, "fearfulness hath surprised the 
hypocrites." Does it seem surprising to some that the 
Prophet should so irreverently handle some of the reverend 
gentlemen of to-day who so wisely (?) descant upon the 
credibility and authority of the sacred Scriptures, and 
who, while condemning them, with a great show of 
learning and eloquence, offer in their stead the miserable 
substitute of their own false reasonings utterly regardless 
of the divine revelation? For the beautiful record 
of man's creation in the image of his Maker they substitute 
the ape origin, or, going back of that, they find him in the 
protoplasm. For the account of his fall and redemption 
they substitute the theory of his evolution by what they 
call a natural process, from lower to higher conditions. 
And for the clearly defined destiny of man revealed in the 
Scriptures they substitute the vain and idle speculation of 
endless progression. 

R1875 : page 230 

While all of the leading or clerical class in nominal 
Zion have not yet fallen into this snare, the great ones 
have, and their ideas are fast taking possession of the theological 
seminaries, and their public teachings from the 



pulpit, the religious press and the professor's chair are fast 

moulding the thought of all "Christendom." And it is 

from this source, and as a result of the "fears" of this 

very class, whose learning and positions of influence enable 

them to see, as people in the humbler walks of life have 

been less able to see, the trend of events toward disaster 

and ruin— the great time of trouble foretold. And instead 

of using their powerful influence for truth and righteousness, 

which would of course necessitate the repudiation of 

their own past erroneous teachings, and humbly endeavoring 

to lead the people back to the old paths pointed out by 

the Lord and the apostles, in their pride of heart and consequent 

blindness they are leading them further into the 

labyrinths of error; and, according to the Word of the Lord 

(Luke 6:39), both leaders and people shall fall into the ditch. 

But while the most intelligent and influential, who are 
thus misusing their talents and betraying their trusts as 
stewards of the Lord's goods, as did their prototypes in 
the Jewish age (Matt. 15:7-9,14), are the greatest sinners 
in Zion, those also who blindly follow their leading become 
partakers of their sin (Rev. 18:4) and share the same penalty 
—both together "fall into the ditch" and, as "stubble," 
are prepared for the fire. 

While in their fear of the fiery trouble which they now 
see coming upon the earth, they anxiously soliloquize (for 
they hesitate to express their fears openly)— "Who among us 
shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall 
dwell with the everlasting burnings [the consuming burnings, 
the trouble threatening to last until the whole present 
order of things is consumed]?" 

If these inquiries were made of the Lord, and with a disposition 
of heart to obey his voice, the fearful calamities 
now, alas! soon to be experienced, would be averted; but 
such is not the case. These are mere soliloquies, the underbreath 
expressions of their fears, the only result of which 
is the leaning still more to their own understandings, the 
compromise of truth and righteousness and a determination 
to band together for mutual protection and the resistance 
of the righteous judgments of God. As to the results of 
such a union, see Isa. 8:9,10; 28:17,18. 

But hear the word of the Lord, ye who have no part 
nor lot with the workers of iniquity, and who would inquire 
of him upon what conditions any may stand in this evil 
day; for thus saith the Lord, "He that walketh righteously 
and speaketh uprightly, he that despiseth the gain of oppressions, 
that shaketh his hands from the holding of bribes, 
that stoppeth his ears from the hearing of blood, and shutteth 
his eyes from seeing evil: he shall dwell on high; his 
place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread 
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure." And if ye 
know these things, happy are ye if ye do them. 

In these days when iniquity abounds and the love of 
the many who profess the name of Christ waxes cold, only 
those who have the stamina of character can fulfil these 
conditions. Those who reverence God more than men, 
however great may be their pretensions to wisdom, piety 



and learning; who rest their faith implicitly upon the inspired 

testimony of the Apostles and Prophets; and who 

exercise their own God-given right of private judgment 

and so prove all things by an appeal, not to human philosophies 

and idle speculations, but "to the law and the 

testimony" (Isa. 8:20), and hold fast to that which is 

good— those only can fulfil these conditions. 

To walk righteously means to walk contrary to the 
course of this present evil world. It means to take the 
unpopular side of the questions of the day in nearly every 
case, and thus to be misunderstood and misrepresented and 
have our names cast out as evil; in a word, it means to suffer 
for righteousness' sake. 

To speak uprightly is to go a step further than to walk 
righteously: it implies not only personal effort to withstand 
evil and error in their effects upon one's own character, but 

R1875 : page 231 

also the fortitude to withstand error with bold and fearless 
presentations of the truth, regardless of the cost of such 
faithfulness, which we are assured not only by the Word of 
God, but by observation and experience as well, will be 
persecution in some or possibly in many forms. Such a 
course of righteousness in "this present evil world," when 
the powers of darkness are in the ascendency, inevitably 
leads to social ostracism and hatred, in proportion to the 
zeal for God that is manifested, and persecution in some 
form is sure to follow. But those of the class here described 
cannot be bribed by any of these considerations. If one has 
been a clergyman and his eyes have been opened to the truth, 
he cannot be bribed by any considerations of salary or 
prestige or fame to stifle his convictions— "he shaketh his 
hands from the holding of bribes." 

If he be a merchant or mechanic, and the multitudes 
say, Come, join our fraternity and band together with us 
to conserve our interests or to fight for our rights, he replies, 
No, "They that are of a froward heart are abomination 
to the Lord, but such as are upright in their way are 
his delight. Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall 
not be unpunished." (Prov. 11:20,21) Let the rich 
consider the interests of the poor and needy, lest they fall 
under the fearful condemnation of the oppressor (James 5:1-5); 
and let the poor commit their cause unto the 
Lord, who has pledged himself on behalf of all those that 
trust in him. 

To all thus minded, who unflinchingly stand for 
truth and righteousness in this evil day, is the blessed promise 
of God— "He shall dwell on high [above the fears, 
the unrest and the distress which will overwhelm the world]; 
his place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks [the 
Lord, the Rock of ages, the Most High shall be his hiding 
place]; bread shall be given him, his waters shall be sure 
[he will be sustained with the bread of life and refreshed 
with the water of life both spiritually and physically]. 
Blessed are all they that put their trust in the Lord, for they 



shall never be confounded. 

R1875 : page 231 

THE TRIUMPH OF GIDEON. 

-OCT. 13.-JUDGES 7:13-23.- 

Golden Text— "Though a host should encamp 
against me, my heart shall not fear."— Psa. 27:3. 

THE selection of Gideon's army was an illustration 
of the Lord's method in the selection of a "peculiar 
people" who shall share with him the honors of victory in 
the conquest of sin and all its defiling host. 

R1876 : page 231 

At the sound of the trumpet thirty-two thousand were 
gathered together unto Gideon to fight against the hosts of 
Midian. (Verse 3.) But the Lord said to Gideon that there 
were too many, and that all were not of the kind desired. 
Then the Lord commanded Gideon to prove them. From 
the human standpoint the thirty-two thousand of Israel had 
no show of conquering the hundred and thirty-five thousand 
of their enemies (Judges 8:10); but from the standpoint 
of faith in God, who called them to this service, 
victory was certain, though none could foresee in what way 
it should be brought about. 

The Lord had in mind a glorious victory, but it was 
to be achieved by his might and power alone. The honor 
due to the human instruments who were privileged to share 
in it was not to be in their skill and strength in battle, 
but in their faith in God and their zeal in obeying his orders, 
as an evidence of the strength of their confidence in God. 

Accordingly, the first test of faith applied was permission 
for all the fearful to return home. This reduced the 
army to ten thousand. The next test was a test of zeal. 
When led down to the brook to drink, all but three hundred 
halted very leisurely and knelt down to drink, which 
required the loosening of their armor and unfastening of 
their swords. But three hundred did not stop to do this, 
but hastily scooped up a little water and lapped it from their 
hands. This zeal, inspired by a living faith in God, was 
just the element of character for which the Lord was looking; 
and these three hundred "peculiar people," full of 
faith and active zeal, were the only ones acceptable to God 
and privileged to share the honors of delivering Israel from 
a mighty host of oppressors. 

Just so the Lord Jehovah contemplates the conquest 
of the world for Christ (Zech. 14:3); and Christ, like 
Gideon, is called of God to lead a "little flock" of "called 
and faithful and chosen" ones (Rev. 17:14) forth to the 
conquest of the hosts of sin. 



All that have been called during the entire Gospel age 
have been but a few in comparison with the opposing forces 
of the world. The call was first to a justifying faith in 
Christ. Then the privilege was offered to these to present 
themselves as living sacrifices to God (Rom. 12:1), and 
thus to go forward to the battle. But that was more than 
the weak faith of the multitudes could endure; and thousands 
therefore returned, shunning the hardships of the 
way, and faithless as to the Lord's ability to grant them 
the victory. 

But still quite a multitude made the full consecration; 
and, buckling on the armor of God, they pressed forward. 
Of these the hardships of the way are continually 
thinning the ranks. Many grow weary in well-doing, and 
zeal abates, and love grows cold, and faith declines, and 
they fail to push on to the end. Beloved, let us not be of 
those who draw back, or of those who faint by the way; 
for glorious will be the victory of faith and zeal. Blessed 
is he that shall endure unto the end. Such shall indeed be 
"a peculiar people, zealous of good works." 



R1875 : page 231 

RUTH'S CHOICE. 

-OCT. 20. -RUTH 1:14-22.- 

Golden Text— "Thy people shall be my 
people, and thy God my God."— Ruth 1:16. 

MANIFESTLY the chief object in the brief narrative 
of Ruth and Naomi was to preserve an 
authentic record of a link in the chain of our Lord's 
human ancestry. Though a Gentile by birth, Ruth was a 
sincere Jewish proselyte, incorporated into the commonwealth 
of Israel, and as such she was recognized of God as 
one of his chosen people. And not only so, but she was 
also honored with a place in the line of our Lord's human 
ancestry, being the great-grandmother of David. The 
same was true of Rahab, also a Jewish proselyte, who became 
the mother of Boaz, the great-grandfather of David. 
The story of Ruth and Naomi is an interesting one 

R1875 : page 232 

as an item of Jewish history. It has its lights and also 
its shadows; for the characters were but samples of our 
fallen humanity coming gradually under the influence of 
divine grace. All that was noble in them therefore calls 
forth our admiration and esteem, while the blemishes are to 
be deplored. 

Naomi and her husband, Elimelech, pressed by hard 
times and a threatening famine, decided to leave the land 
of Israel and the people of God, and try their fortunes 



among the Gentiles in the land of Moab. In doing so they 
were leaving the special privileges of association with God's 
people, and failing also to contribute their part toward their 
comfort and encouragement and godly counsel in the time 
of general distress. They were also exposing themselves 
and their children to the unhallowed influences of an idolatrous 
people. This was the part they chose merely for 
temporal advantage, rather than to share the hardships at 
home and trust in the Lord to supply their needs. 

The result of this wrong course was only trouble. 
Elimelech died there, and Naomi was left alone with her 
two sons to raise. By and by the two sons married heathen 
wives who knew not the God of Israel. Then they also 
died; and Naomi, bereft of all but her two daughters-in-law, 
feeling that the hand of the Lord was against her in that 
she was thus sorely chastened, decided to retrace her steps 
to the land of her nativity, and again to cast in her lot 
with the Lord's people. 

When she had thus, by sad experience, learned the 
needed lesson and determined again to submit herself to 
the Lord's leading, the favor of God began to return 
to her. She found a great comfort and blessing in the 
manifested love and devotion of Ruth, her daughter-in-law, 
and in her conversion to the Jewish faith. "And Ruth 
said, 'Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following 
after thee: for whither thou goest I will go; and where 
thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people 
and thy God my God. Where thou diest I will die, and 
there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and more 
also, if aught but death part thee and me.'" 

That this was not a mere impulse on the part of Ruth 
is also manifest from her subsequent course of faithfulness 
to her mother-in-law; and Naomi's appreciation and devotion 
to her interests were just as manifest. Evidently 
though Naomi and her husband had erred in judgment and 
had been faint-hearted they were still loyal to God and let 
their light shine in the land of Moab, and both the 
daughters-in-law had been influenced by it, while Ruth was 
fully converted to God. 

Their kindly reception by the people of Bethlehem 
and the sympathy and kindness shown them were other 
great blessings. And finally the marriage of Ruth to Boaz, 
a man of character, wealth and influence, furnished a happy 
home to the desolate women and Ruth was honored of God 
in the line of our Lord's ancestry. 

The advice of Naomi to Ruth concerning Boaz was 
not, however, of unalloyed wisdom. Such a course today 
would brand any woman as a loose, if not a disreputable, 
character. And that Boaz feared such reproach is also 
clear from his request of Chap. 3:14. In advising such a 
course Naomi again betrayed the weakness of her trust in 
God. But God in kindness had mercy on her weakness; and, 
their hearts being free from evil, God overruled all for good. 



page 232 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR BROTHER:-Enclosed you will find check to be 
placed to the credit of the Church of Boston. We are all 
out of "Do You Know" tracts. There is a great interest 
among the brethren here to spread the glad tidings, and we 
find use for lots of printed matter. We generally meet the 
people coming out of meetings. 

Enclosed find clipping. How true it is that these 
"powers" shall be rolled together as a scroll. (Isa. 34:4.) 
Our hearts should be continually at the throne of grace, 
knowing just where we stand; and God grant it may be 
our privilege to help with our dear Head to bring all things 
to a condition of peace. 

Yours in Christ, A. SIMPSON. 



R1875 : page 232 

MY DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-Though 

never have we met (and perhaps never shall we) in this life, 
yet for the last eight or nine years my spirit has been oft 
refreshed from yours. At the first reading of The Plan of 
the Ages I was interested, impressed, converted. Before 
that my soul had been wandering and searching and longing 
for the pure waters, in a wilderness of theologies, 
theories, philosophies and fictions— groping after the "unknown 
God." 

You have known something of the development of 
my thought in the later years by kindly exchanging your 
publications for mine— The Grand Army Advocate; and 
though it is a secular paper, yet never has a number left me 
without bearing a word for the King. Meekly and humbly, 
I trust, have these gone forth from my hand, and the purpose 
has been to stir up thought and direct the seeing eye 
toward the "old paths;" how far successfully I do not 
know— God knoweth. 

And now I am full of thankfulness and praise to our 
Father for the new light which in these last times hath been 
shed abroad eminently through your ministry. The truth 
which makes and keeps you free has graciously gone forth 
in freedom to many a searching soul, and its work, mayhap, 
is only yet commencing. 

I have just read your last Old Theology Quarterly. 
Its compact scope and perfect impartiality are marvelous. 
I can wish that every thoughtful mind might read it. Of 
course, however, conviction of truth comes only through 
the ministration of the spirit of truth; and ears must be 
opened or they cannot hear. 

We have here, under the faithful teachings of Brother 
Page, a little band. The dear Lord is in our midst when 



only two or three meet together; but generally there are 
more, and I am sure that enlargement of thought and research 
in Scriptural matters are rapidly opening up the 
gates that the King of glory may come in. 

And now, dear Brother and Sister, that the cry goes 
loudly up to you, "Watchman, what of the night?" may 
the Lord God of Hosts sustain you and keep you faithful 
unto the end. 

Sincerely yours in Christ, J. F. BISHOP. 



page 233 

VOL. XVI. OCTOBER 15, 1895. No. 20. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items; Letters of Withdrawal 234 

Views from the Tower 235 

The Hope of Immortality 237 

What is the Soul? 240 

Bible Study: The Child Samuel 243 

Bible Study: Samuel the Judge 244 

page 234 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



IF YOU wish for extra copies of this issue send for them at once. 
Five cents each; fifty cents a dozen. 

R1883 : page 234 

LETTERS OF WITHDRAWAL FROM BABYLON. 

Frequently those who leave Babylon get no opportunity to communicate 



to their Church brethren the cause of their withdrawal; because 

the officers of many churches in their zeal for the prosperity of 

their denomination (we regret to say it) seem to forget that honesty is 

an important element of Christian character, and either smother the matter 

of the withdrawal and permit the impression that the brother or 

sister who has withdrawn is still a member, but no longer faithful to his 

church engagements, or else hasten to spread a false report of his belief 

(as much by insinuation, tone of voice and manner, as by words) in 

order to forever break his or her influence. To thus bear false witness 

against God's faithful children is mistakenly considered a service to God, 

—it is really against the Lord's cause and for the upholding of sectarianism, 

lest the influence should open the eyes of others of the Lord's 

sheep and they too escape from the bondage of human traditions, into 

the light and liberty of the truth. 

To meet such emergencies we have prepared, for those who may 
desire them, Letters of Withdrawal, which express about what would 
be your sentiments and merely require the signature of the user and the 
date. These might be sent by mail, to each member of the church from 
which you withdraw, as well as to the minister; for you joined the 
church membership and not merely the minister. We suggest that 
with the letter you enclose copies of tracts Nos. 1,21 and 27 in a Missionary 
Envelope. All this, unsealed, will require but one cent postage, 
each. We will supply the tracts free and the letters (envelopes included) 
for two cents each, or free to those too poor to purchase. The 
printing is in type-writer characters. Printing these in quantities permits 
this low price. 



R1876 : page 235 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE attack upon and killing of Christian missionaries 

in the interior of China, by the sect known as 

"Vegetarians," continues to attract attention. Six of the 

rioting Chinese are reported sentenced and decapitated; 

but the general opinion is that Chinese antipathy to missionaries 

continues and is fostered by the magistrates. Five 

English gunboats are said to be advancing up the river leading 

to the scene of the disturbance. However, neither 

England nor any other nation is anxious for a Chinese war, 

especially an interior war, where China's 300,000,000 population 

would be difficult to handle. 

All intelligent people know that "the opening of 
China to the gospel" was advocated by many who were 
much more interested in opening China to European commerce, 
and who knew that the success of the former would 
mean the success of the latter. Now that the doors of 
trade are wide open and only the mission work is attacked, 
the question of the real value of missions amongst the nations 
which have a civilization and religion of their own is 
being much discussed;— especially in view of the fact that 
the representatives of these religions, Buddhism, Brahminism 



and Confucianism, were invited to and warmly welcomed 

at the World's Parliament of Religions in 1893.* Of 

course, the friends of missions defend their usefulness; 

as for instance, Ex-Secretary Foster who, at the Mass Missionary 

Meeting in Minneapolis, Oct. 5, declared that 

"Practically the whole world is open to the missionary," 

and that "The various Mission Boards are better 

equipped than ever for doing effective work." "The various 

schools and colleges established in heathen lands can 

turn out all the native workers that the liberality of the 

churches at home can support, and the great need of 

the mission cause to-day is not so much men as money, to 

carry to success the Christianization of the world." 

As the other side of the question has been examined 
but little, we quote two paragraphs from a very moderate 
article entitled "Civilization," in The Spectator (London, 
Eng.), a very conservative journal, as follows:— 

CIVILIZATION. 



"It is difficult to exaggerate the importance of the subject 
which Mr. Flinders Petrie brought before the British 
Association last week in his paper on "Civilization," and 
continued in a speech on Tuesday. Western Europe is expending 
a great part of its surplus strength, intellectual and 
physical, in the effort to re-civilize the dark world, Asiatic 
and African; and Mr. Petrie, who has watched the experiment 
for years from the inside, believes that its object and 
its methods are alike mistaken. There would be little 
gained, he thinks, if it succeeded, for the inferior civilizations 
are developments as natural, and as fitted for those 
among whom they arise, as the higher, and it cannot succeed 
by the means it has adopted. It is impossible to 



*See our issue of Nov., '93. 

R1877 : page 235 

supersede rapidly a low civilization by a high one, because 

the indispensable pressure so affects the brain that it either 

destroys the race subjected to it, or positively lowers instead 

of raising its intellectual capacity. Savages perish 

under the burden of European education; while the semi-civilized 

races when taught to read and write— i.e., we 

presume, taught the European curriculum— become positive 

fools. The Arabs of Egypt, for example, become comparatively 

idiots. The strength which was in them is overtasked, 

and they lose most of the efficiencies they originally 

possessed. That is a very serious indictment of Europe, 

and its methods of improving the races it has conquered or 

intends to conquer, and as the question concerns the whole 

future of the world, and as Mr. Flinders Petrie is a man 



whose opinion on such a subject deservedly carries weight, 
it is worth while to consider for a moment how far his decision 
appears to be justified by the facts. 

R1877 : page 236 

"There can be no question of a great mass of evidence 
in Mr. Flinders Petrie's favor. European civilization has 
undoubtedly killed out or is killing out the Polynesian races, 
one of which, at least, was possessed originally of remarkable 
intellectual as well as physical powers. It has failed to 
impress, though it has not killed out, the wild Indian of 
America, who, in several places where he was partially 
civilized, has in his horror of the process recoiled to barbarism, 
while it must be considered, on the whole, to have 
lowered rather than raised the civilization of the partially 
civilized races of America, such as the Mexican, and more 
especially the Indian of Peru. It has lowered, Mr. Petrie 
affirms, the settled Arab of the Egyptian Delta, while close 
observers doubt whether it has made the Hindoo, the Turk, 
or the Chinese either an abler or a better man. The 
Frenchified Pasha is a great deal worse than the old Turk, 
the educated Chinaman is not better than the Chinaman 
proper, while the cultured Bengalee has lost many beneficial 
restraints and gained nothing except a power of expressing 
European ideas upon which he does not seem disposed to 
act. To attribute the failure to reading and writing is, of 
course, a mere fashion of speech, Asiatics not being made 
feeble by knowledge of their own literatures; but it is true that 
Asiatics learned in the knowledge of Europe are often mere 
"blotting papers of civilization,"— persons who derive 
from Europe nothing but certain inkstains, which leave 
them rather more rotten than before. Moreover, it is true 
that originality seems to die away in the races brought into 
violent contact with a superior civilization, that their 
very arts decline, till they cannot even repeat their own 
artistic triumphs, and that they appear incapable of producing 
fresh literature of any mark. This has been acknowledged 
by many among themselves with deep sadness, 
and has so impressed experienced observers among the 
superior race, that many of them have doubted if the 
whole experiment is not a waste of force; and others have 
discussed plans for carrying on the native philosophies to a 
higher point, instead of superseding them. It must be 
added that what Europe rather foolishly considers the 
machinery of civilization— the railway and telegraph and 
sanitation— appears to have no effect whatever in raising 
the people compelled to adopt it, they all remaining barbarians, 
as in South Africa, or semi-civilized, as in Spanish 
America and the provinces of India." 

The fact is that all thinking people, friends and foes 
of missionary effort alike, begin to realize that if God's 
Kingdom will not come nor his will be done on earth, until 
present missionary methods shall convert all or even a 
majority of the heathen into saints, either the standard of 
saintship must be lowered so as to take into Christ's fold 



all except the positively black sheep (including with what 
Bishop Foster calls "the ring-streaked and speckled" masses 
of Christendom all the similar masses in heathendom), 
or else there is no hope of God's will ever being done on 
earth as in heaven. 

Seeing this, and not seeing that it is God's Kingdom 
that is to bless and enlighten the world— "all the families 
of the earth"— the worldly wise are disposed to say, We 
must have set our estimates of saving faith and practice too 
high. These people of China and India are Christianized 
(by that they mean civilized, for with many the word Christ 
has degenerated to mean civil or polite) as well as we: only 
heirs is civilization of a different type from ours, taught by 
different Masters. But the pupils of these different Masters 
need not oppose each other and seek to convert each other. 
All are right. All are heathen. All are children of the 
one Heavenly Father, by whatever names he may be known 
(or unknown?) to them. And with this class of worldly-wise 
thinkers stands an ever increasing number of worldly-wise 
Reverend gentlemen and Doctors of Divinity, as was 
shown at the World's Parliament of Religions. 

Others refuse to lower the standard of faith and holiness 
and try to hope, against all the evidences of their 
senses, that they will speedily "capture the world for 
Christ." 

Still others, with greater enlightenment, realize that 
the hope for the world lies not in the hands of mortal men, 
but in the power of God, as it will be manifested at our 
Lord's second advent in the setting up of the Kingdom 
of God. 

But the readers of ZION'S WATCH TOWER and MILLENNIAL 
DAWN, still further enlightened by the Lord's 
Word, see that all the preaching done, or designed and 
commanded to be done, during this Gospel age was, so far 
as the world is concerned in the present age, only for a 
witness, a testimony, unto them; its special object being 
the perfecting of the Church, the "little flock" to whom 
(with their Head and Bridegroom) God has promised to 
give the Kingdom, the dominion under the whole heavens, 
through which all the families of the earth shall be blessed. 
-Gal. 3:8,16,17,29; Gen. 28:14. 

We see, too, that the time for this work of witnessing 
is nearly ended; and that by the Lord's command the work 
in this time, the "end" or "harvest" of this age, is reaping, 
rather than sowing,— making ready a prepared people 
already justified and called, rather than preparing a people 
to receive the high calling, which we understand has ceased, 
so far as the unjustified and heathen world is concerned. 

From the vantage ground mentioned by the Apostle 
when he said, "Ye, brethren, are not in darkness that that 
day should overtake you as a thief" (1 Thes. 5:4), by 
the Prophet when he said, "None of the wicked shall 
understand, but the wise [amongst the holy,— the "wise 
virgins"] shall understand" (Dan. 12:10), and by our 
Lord when he said, "Blessed are those servants whom their 
Lord when he cometh [arrives] shall find watching" 



(Luke 12:37)— from this vantage standpoint we see that 
all the heathen are graciously provided for in God's great 
plan of the ages. We see that our dear Redeemer bought 
"the whole world" as well as the Church with his precious 
blood; and that this gracious fact is the center and 
essence of the gospel and must sooner or later be testified 
to all (1 Tim. 2:6) with full opportunity for all to benefit 
by it and lay hold on eternal life. And we see that the 
Gospel age just closing, in which the dim light of faith has 
been a light to the path of only the few who have been made 
free from the blinding influences of the god of this world 
(2 Cor. 4:4) is part of the world's dark night of groaning 

R1877 : page 237 

and weeping (Rom. 8:22; Psa. 30:5), and is about to 
give place to the Millennial morning of joy, when the Sun 
of Righteousness shall arise with "healing [restitution- 
Acts 3:19-21] in his beams. "-Mai. 4:2. 

But this harvest message is going to heathen lands also; 
it goes, however, to the missionaries and others already 
"called" and "accepted," to ripen them, and separate 
them from the "tares," and get them into the Lord's 
"barn." Yes, the message is being carried by willing 
messengers, and is gathering together [to the Lord, and into 
oneness of faith,— not into a new denomination] the 
elect, from one end of heaven [the nominal church system] 
to the other. -Matt. 24:31. 

From our position, therefore, we can rejoice at every 
effort to advance the world's intelligence and civilization, 
and every missionary and reform movement; even while 
we know from our Lord's Word that they will all fail to accomplish 
what their chief patrons are hoping and striving 
for; such results being obtainable only through the channel 
of God's appointment, for which his Church has long 
prayed,— "Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done on earth 
as it is done in heaven." 



R1877 : page 237 

THE HOPE OF IMMORTALITY. 



If a man die shall he live again? All the days of my 
appointed time will I wait till my change come.— Job 14:14. 

THERE is a longing hope within men that death does 
not end all existence. There is an undefined hope 
that, somehow and somewhere, the life now begun will have 
a continuation. In some this hope turns to fear. Realizing 
their unworthiness of a future of pleasure, many fear a 
future of woe; and the more they dread it, for themselves 
and others, the more they believe in it. 



This undefined hope of a future life and its counterpart, 
fear, doubtless had their origin in the Lord's condemnation 
of the serpent after Adam's fall into sin and death, that 

R1878 : page 237 

the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's head. This 
was no doubt understood to mean that at least a portion of 
the Adamic family would finally triumph over Satan and over 
death, into which he had inveigled them. No doubt God 
encouraged such a hope, even though but vaguely, speaking 
to and through Noah, and through Enoch who prophesied, 
"Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his 
saints." But the gospel, the good tidings of a salvation 
from death to be offered to all mankind in God's due time, 
seems to have been first clearly stated to Abraham. The 
Apostle declares: "The gospel was preached before to 
Abraham,— saying, In thy seed shall all the families of the 
earth be blessed.'" This at least was the basis of the Jewish 
hope of a resurrection; for since many of the families 
of the earth were dead and dying, the promised blessing 
implied a future life. And when Israel was scattered among 
the nations at the time of the Babylonian captivity, they 
undoubtedly carried fragments of their hopes and promises 
everywhere they went. 

Sure it is, that whether it came as a result of an admixture 
of Jewish thought, or because hope is an element 
of man's nature, or both, the whole world believes 
in a future life, and almost all believe that it will be everlasting. 
But such hopes are not proofs of the doctrine; 
and the Old Testament promises, made to the Jews, are too 
vague to constitute a groundwork for a clear faith, much 
less for a "dogmatic theology," on this subject. 

It is not until we find, in the New Testament, the clear, 
positive statements of our Lord, and afterwards the equally 
clear statements of the apostles, on this momentous subject 
of Everlasting Life that we begin to exchange our vague 
hopes for positive convictions. In their words we not only 
have positive statements, to the effect that the possibilities 
of a future life have been provided for all, but the philosophy 
of the fact and how it is to be attained and maintained 
are set forth there as nowhere else. 

Many have not noticed these points, and hence are 
"weak in the faith." Let us see what this philosophy is, 
and be more assured than ever that future life, everlasting 
life, is by our great and wise Creator's provision made a 
possibility for every member of the human family. 

Beginning at the foundation of this New Testament 
assurance of Life Everlasting, we find to our astonishment 
that it first of all assures us that we have nothing ourselves 
which would give us any hope of everlasting life;— that 
the life of our race was forfeited by the disobedience of 
our father Adam; that although he was created perfect and 
was adapted to live forever, his sin not only brought to him 
the wages of sin— death— but that his children were born 
in a dying condition, inheritors of the dying influences. 



God's law, like himself, is perfect, and so was his creature 
(Adam) before he sinned; for of God it is written, "His 
work is perfect." And God through his law approves 
only that which is perfect, and condemns to destruction 
everything imperfect. Hence the race of Adam, "born 
in sin and shapen in iniquity," has no hope of everlasting 
life except upon the conditions held out in the New Testament 
and called the gospel,— the good tidings that a way 
back from the fall, to perfection to divine favor and to 
everlasting life, has been opened up through Christ for all 
of Adam's family who will avail themselves of it. 

The key note of this hope of reconciliation to God, 
and thus to a fresh hope of life everlasting, is laid in the 
statements (1) that "Christ died for our sins" and (2) 
that he "rose again for our justification;" for "the man 
Christ Jesus gave himself a ransom [a corresponding price] 
for all." Adam and his race, which when he sinned was 
yet in him and shared his sentence naturally, have been 

R1878 : page 238 

"redeemed [bought] by the precious blood [death] of 
Christ." 

But although the Lord's provision is abundant for all, 
it is not applicable to any except on certain conditions; 
namely, (1) that they accept Christ as their Redeemer; 
and (2) that they strive to avoid sin and to thenceforth live 
in harmony with God and righteousness. Hence we are 
told that "Eternal Life is the gift of God through Jesus 
Christ our Lord." (Rom. 6:23.) The following Scripture 
statements are very clear on this subject:— 

"He that hath the Son hath life [a right or privilege 
or grant of life as God's gift]; but he that hath not the 
Son shall not see [perfect] life." 

None can obtain everlasting life except from Christ 
the Redeemer and appointed Life-giver; and the truth 
which brings to us the privilege of manifesting faith and 
obedience, and thus "laying hold on eternal life," is called 
the "water of life" and the "bread of life."— John 4:14; 
6:40,54. 

This everlasting life will be granted only to those who, 
when they learn of it and the terms upon which it will be 
granted as a gift, seek for it, by living according to the 
spirit of holiness. They shall reap it as a gift-reward.— 
Rom. 6:23; Gal. 6:8. 

To gain this everlasting life we must become the Lord's 
"sheep" and follow the voice, the instructions of the 
Shepherd.-John 10:26-28; 17:2,3. 

The gift of Everlasting Life will not be forced upon 
any. On the contrary, it must be desired and sought and 
laid hold upon by all who would gain it— 1 Tim. 6:12,19. 

It is thus a hope, rather than the real life, that God 
gives us now: the hope that, because God has provided a 
way by which he can be just and yet the justifier of all truly 
believing and accepting Christ, we may ultimately attain it. 

By God's grace our Lord Jesus not only bought 



us by the sacrifice of his life for ours, but he became our 
great High Priest, and as such he is now "the author [source] 
of eternal salvation to all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:9.) 
"And this is the promise which he hath promised us, even 
eternal life."— 1 John 2:25. 

"And this is the record, that God hath given to us 
eternal life [now by faith and hope, and by and by actually, 
"when he who is our life shall appear"], and this life is in 
his Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and he that 
hath not the Son of God hath not life."— 1 John 5:11,12. 

This everlasting life, made free to Adam and all his 
race, by our Creator through our Redeemer, but intended 
for, and promised to, only the faithful and obedient, and 
which at present is only given to these as a hope, will be 
given to the faithful actually in the "resurrection." 

It will be noticed that the explicit promises of God's 
Word differ widely from the worldly philosophies on this 
subject. They claim that man must have a future everlasting 
life because he hopes for it, or in some cases fears it. 
But hopes and fears are not reasonable grounds for belief 
on any subject. Neither is the claim that there is something 
in man which must live on and on forever,— when no 
such part of the human organism is known or can be 
proved or located. 

But the Scriptural view of the subject is open to no 
such objections: it is reasonable throughout to consider 
our existence or life as therein presented— as a "gift of 
God," and not an inalienable possession of our own. 
Furthermore, it avoids a great and serious difficulty to 
which the idea of the heathen philosophies is open; for 
when the heathen philosopher states that man cannot perish, 
that he must live forever, that eternal life is not a gift of 
God, as the Bible declares, but a natural quality possessed 
by every man, he claims too much. Such a philosophy 
not only gives everlasting existence to those who would 
use it well, and to whom it would be a blessing, but to 
others also, who would not use it well, and to whom it 
would be a curse. The Scripture teaching, on the contrary, 
as we have already shown, declares that this great and inestimably 
precious gift will be given only to those who believe 
and obey the Redeemer and Life-giver. Others, to 
whom it would be an injury, not only do not possess it now, 
but can never get it. "The wages of sin is death; but 
the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our 
Lord." The wicked (all who, after coming to a clear 
knowledge of the truth, wilfully disobey it) shall be cut off 
from among God's people, in the second death. They 
"shall be as though they had not been." "They shall utterly 
perish." "Everlasting destruction" shall be their doom— a 
destruction which will last forever, from which there will be 
no recovery, no resurrection.— Psa. 37:9; Job 10:19; 
Psa. 37:20; 2 Thes. 1:9. 

God's gift of life eternal is precious to all his people, 
and a firm grasp of it by the hand of faith is quite essential 
to a well-balanced and consistent life. Only those who 
have "laid hold on eternal life," by acceptance of Christ 



and consecration to his service, are able to properly and 
profitably combat the tempests of life now raging. 

A DISTINCTION AND A DIFFERENCE. 



But now, having examined the hope of Immortality 
from the ordinary understanding of that word (everlasting 
life) and having found that everlasting life is God's provision 
for those of Adam's race who will accept it "in due 
time" under the terms of the New Covenant, we are prepared 
to go a step farther and to point out that Everlasting 
Life and Immortality are not synonymous terms, as people 
in general suppose. The word "immortal" means more than 
power to live everlastingly; and, according to the Scriptures, 
millions may have everlasting life, but only a very 
limited "little flock" will be made immortal. 

Immortality is an element or quality of the divine 
nature, but not of human or angelic or of any other nature 

R1879 : page 238 

than the divine. And it is because Christ and his "little 
flock," his "bride," are to be partakers of the divine 

R1879 : page 239 

nature that they will be exceptions to all other creatures 
either in heaven or on earth.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

The word Immortal signifies not mortal— death-proof, 
indestructible, imperishable. Any being whose existence 
is dependent in any manner upon another or upon conditions, 
such as food, light, air, etc., is not immortal. 
This quality inheres in Jehovah God alone, as it is written, 
—"The Father hath life in himself" (John 5:26); i.e., 
his existence is not a derived one, nor a sustained one. He 
"only hath immortality" (1 Tim. 6:16) as an innate or 
original quality of being. These scriptures being decisive 
authority on the subject, we may know beyond peradventure 
that men, angels, archangels or even the Son of God 
before and during the time he "was made flesh and dwelt 
among us" were not immortal— all were mortal. 

But the word "mortal" does not signify dying, but 
merely die-able— possessing life dependent upon God for 
its continuance. For instance, angels not being immortal 
are mortal and could die, could be destroyed by God if 
they became rebels against his wise, just and loving government. 
In Him [in his providence] they live and move 
and have their being. Indeed, of Satan who was such an 
angel of light, and who did become a rebel, it is distinctly 
declared that in due time he will be destroyed. (Heb. 2:14.) 
This not only proves that Satan is mortal, but it proves 
that angelic nature is a mortal nature— one which could be 
destroyed by its Creator. As for man, he is "a little lower 
than the angels" (Psa. 8:5), and consequently mortal 



also, as is abundantly attested by the fact that our race has 
been dying for six thousand years and that even the saints 
in Christ are exhorted to seek for immortality.— Rom. 2:7. 

So then, Adam did not become mortal by reason of 
sin, but was created mortal— by nature he was subject or 
liable to the death penalty. Had he been created immortal 
nothing could have destroyed him; for, as we have 
seen, immortality is a state or condition not subject to death, 
but death-proof. 

What then was Adam's condition before he sinned? 
and in what way did the curse affect him?— What life had 
he to lose if he was created mortal? 

We answer, that his condition in life was similar to that 
of the angels: he had life in full measure— lasting life — 
which he might have retained forever by remaining obedient 
to God. But because he was not death-proof, because 
he did not have "life in himself," but was dependent 
upon conditions of divine pleasure and favor for its continuance, 
therefore God's threat, that if he disobeyed he 
should die, meant something. Had he not been mortal 
God's sentence would have been an empty threat. But he 
did die. 

Jehovah God, "who only hath immortality" of himself, 
or "life in himself" innately, and of whom are all 
things, having created various orders of beings, angelic 
and human, in his own moral and rational likeness, but 
mortal and not of his divine nature, has declared that he 
designs a new creation,— an order of beings not only 
morally and rationally in his resemblance, but in "the 
express image" of his person and partakers of his own 
divine nature— a prominent constituent or element of 
which is immortality.— 2 Pet. 1:4. 

With amazement we inquire, Upon whom shall this 
high honor and distinction be conferred?— Upon angels, 
or cherubim, or seraphim? No; but upon his Son— his 
specially first-born and only begotten Son, that he who 
was always his obedient Son should in all things have the 
preeminence. But before he could be so highly honored 
he must be tested, proved "worthy" of so great a distinction 
and so high an exaltation "above his fellows." This 
test was in view when the sentence of death was pronounced 
upon Adam and all his children in his loins: it 
was that he, Christ, should lay down his life as a ransom 
price for the life of Adam and all who lost life in his transgression. 
And he was equal to the test and gained the 
prize of "the divine nature," "life in himself," 
"immortality." 

Consider him, who, for the joy set before him, endured 
the cross, despising the shame, and is now in consequence 
set down at the right hand [place of favor] of the 
throne of God. He was rich, but for our sakes he became 
poor. Inasmuch as the man and race to be redeemed were 
human, it was needful that he become human so as to give 
the ransom or corresponding price. He therefore humbled 
himself and took the bondman's form; and after he found 
himself in fashion a man, he humbled himself even unto 



death— even unto the most ignominious form of death— the 
death of the cross. "Wherefore God hath highly exalted 
him [to the promised divine nature at his resurrection], 
and given him a name that is above every name [Jehovah's 
excepted- 1 Cor. 15:27].-Heb. 12:3,2; 2 Cor. 8:9; 
Phil. 2:8,9. 

"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, 
and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and 
glory, and blessing."— Rev. 5:9-12. 

But more, the opulence of divine favor does not stop 
with the exaltation of one, but has arranged that Christ 
Jesus, as the Captain, shall lead a company of sons of God 
to glory, honor and immortality (Heb. 2:10; Rom. 2:7), 
each of whom, however, must be a spiritual "copy" 
or likeness of the "first begotten." And as a grand lesson 
of the divine sovereignty, and as a sublime contradiction 
to all evolution theories, God elected to call to this place 
of honor (as "the bride, the Lamb's wife and joint heir" 
—Rev. 21:2,9; Rom. 8:17), not the angels and cherubs, 
but some from among the sinners redeemed by the precious 
blood of the Lamb. God elected the number to be thus 
exalted (Rev. 7:4), and predestinated what must be their 
characteristics if they would make their calling and election 
sure, to a place in that company to be so highly honored; 
and all the rest is left to Christ, who worketh now 
as the Father worketh hitherto.— John 5:17. 

R1879 : page 240 

The present age, the Gospel age, from Pentecost to 
the present time, is the time for the selection of this elect 
class, variously termed "the Church," "the body of 
Christ," "the royal priesthood," "the seed of Abraham" 
(Gal. 3:29), etc.; and the permission still of evil is for the 
purpose of developing these "members of the body of 
Christ" and to furnish them the opportunity of sacrificing 
their all in the service of him who bought them with his 
precious blood; and thus of developing in their hearts his 
spiritual likeness, that when, at the end of the age, they 
are presented by their Lord and Redeemer before the 
Father, he may see in them "the image of his Son."— 
Rom. 8:29. 

As the reward of glory, honor and immortality, and 
all the features of the divine nature, were not conferred 
upon the "First-begotten" until he had finished his course 
by completing his sacrifice and obedience in death, so with 
the Church, his "bride,"— counted as one and treated 
collectively. As our Lord, the First-born and Captain, 
"entered into his glory" at his resurrection; as he there 
became partaker of the divine nature fully by being "born 
of the spirit;" as he there was highly exalted to the throne 
and highest favor ("right hand") of God, so he has promised 
that his Church, his "bride," shall in her resurrection 
be changed by resurrection power from human nature to 
the glory, honor and immortality of the divine nature. 

And so it is written respecting "the resurrection" of 



the Church: "It is sown in corruption; it is raised in 
incorruption [immortality]. It is sown in dishonor, it is 
raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in 
power. It is sown a natural [animal] body, it is raised a 
spiritual body. "-1 Cor. 15:42-44. 

Although God's plan for the race of Adam is to extend 
to each member of it, during the Millennium, the offer of 
eternal life upon the terms of the New Covenant sealed for 
all with the precious blood of the Lamb, there is no suggestion 
anywhere that Immortality and the Divine Nature, 
will ever be offered or granted to any except the "elect" 
of the Gospel age— the "little flock," "the Bride, the 
Lamb's wife." For the others of Adam's race the offer 
will be "restitution" (Acts 3:19-21) to life and health 
and perfection of human nature— the same that Adam 
possessed as the earthly image of God before his fall from 
grace into sin and death. And when at the close of the 
age the willing ones shall have attained all that was lost in 
Adam and redeemed by Christ,— then all, armed with 
complete knowledge and experience, and hence fully able 
to stand the test, will be tested severely (as was Adam), 
but individually; and only those found in fullest heart-sympathy, 
as well as in outward harmony with God and his 
righteous arrangements, will be permitted to live and go 
beyond the Millennium into the everlasting future. All 
others will be destroyed in the second death,— destroyed 
from among the people.— Acts 3:23. 

But although there shall be no more death, neither 
sighing nor crying, it will not be because the victors of the 
Millennial age will be crowned with Immortality, but because, 
having learned to judge between right and wrong and 
their effects, they shall have formed characters in full accord 
with God and righteousness; and because they shall 
have stood tests which will demonstrate that they would 
not wish to sin if the way were opened and no penalties 
attached. They will not have life in themselves, but will 
still be dependent upon God's provision of food, etc., for 
the sustenance of life. 

Seen in this Scriptural light the subject of immortality 
shines resplendently. It leaves the way clear for the general 
"gift of God, eternal life," to be extended to all whom 
the Redeemer shall find willing to accept it upon the only 
terms upon which it could be a blessing; and it leaves the 
unworthy subject to the just penalty which always has been 
enunciated by the great Judge of all, viz., 

"The wages of sin is death."— Rom. 6:23. 

"The soul that sinneth, it shall die."— Ezek. 18:4,20. 

"He that believeth not the Son shall not see life; 
but the wrath of God [the curse, death] abideth on him." 
—John 3:36. 

Thus, again, we find on this subject as on others, that 
the philosophy of the Word of God is deeper as well as 
clearer, and more rational by far, than the heathen systems 
and theories. Praise God for his Word of Truth and for 
hearts disposed to accept it as the revelation of the wisdom 
and power of God! 



page 240 
Let us consider, What is the Soul? and Can it die? 



R1880 : page 240 
WHAT IS THE SOUL? 



SOME one will possibly say, Ah! No one believes 

in the immortality of the body. Everybody 

knows that the body dies, that it needs resupply continually 

and that hence it cannot be immortal. But the Scriptures 

speak of souls. May it not be that the soul is indestructible? 

—that God having made a soul cannot destroy it? 

We reply that it stands to reason, unless there be clear 
evidence to the contrary, that whoever can create is able 
also to destroy that which he created; and that which 
can be destroyed is not immortal. Now notice that 
the Scriptures nowhere speak of the immortality of the 
soul as some people seem to suppose— neither in the translations 
nor in the original text. Take a Concordance 
and try to find the expression "immortal soul," and thus 
you can quickly convince yourself that no such expression 
is found in the Scriptures. On the contrary, they 
declare that "God is able to destroy both soul and body;" 
and again, "The soul that sinneth, it shall die." And in 

R1880 : page 241 

the previous article we saw that that which can die, which 
can be destroyed, is not immortal, is not proof against 
death, destruction. 

Then comes that much misunderstood word soul, and 
the inquiry is, What is the soul? 

The general idea of the soul is that it is an indefinable 
something in us (they know not what nor where), which is 
the real, intelligent being, while the body is merely its 
house or tool. A Methodist bishop once defined it as "a 
thing without interior or exterior, without body, shape or 
parts, of which you could put a million in a nutshell"— a 
very good definition of nothing, we should say! 

Further, the body is not the soul, as some affirm: 
this is proved by our Lord's statement that "God is able 
to destroy both soul and body." And now, in view of the 
foregoing, if our minds be freed from prejudice, we ought 
to be able to learn something on the subject by examining 
the inspired record of man's creation. Turning to Genesis 2:7, 
we read,— 

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the 
ground, and breathed [Heb. blew] into his nostrils the 
breath [Heb. wind] of life [Heb. "lives," plural— i.e., 



such as was common to all living animals]; and man became 
a living soul [i.e., a sentient being]." 

The body was formed first, but it was not a man. It 
had eyes, but saw nothing; ears, but heard nothing; a 
mouth, but spoke nothing; a tongue, but no taste; nostrils, 
but no sense of smell; a heart, but it pulsated not; blood, 
but it was cold, lifeless; lungs, but they moved not. It 
was not a man, but a corpse, an inanimate body. 

The second step in making man was to give vitality 
to the properly "formed" and in every way prepared 
body; and this is described by the words "blew into his 
nostrils the breath of life." When a healthy person has been 
drowned and animation is wholly suspended, resuscitation 
has, it is said, been effected by working the arms and thus 
the lungs as a bellows, and gradually establishing the breath 
in the nostrils. In Adam's case it of course required no 
labored effort on the part of the Creator to cause the perfect 
organism which he had made to breathe the life-giving 
oxygen of the atmosphere. 

As the vitalizing breath entered, the lungs expanded, 
the blood corpuscles were oxygenized and passed to the heart, 
whose valves in turn propelled it to every part of the body, 
awakening all the prepared, but hitherto dormant, nerves to 
sensation and energy. In an instant the energy reached the 
brain, and thought, perception, reasoning, looking, touching, 
smelling, feeling and tasting commenced. That which 
was a lifeless human organism has become a man, a sentient 
being: the "living soul" condition mentioned in the 
text had been reached. In other words, the term "living 
soul" means neither more nor less than the term "sentient 
being" or "being capable of sensation, perception." 
Moreover, even though Adam was perfect in his organism, 
it was necessary for him to sustain life by partaking of the 
fruits of the trees of life. And when he sinned, God drove 
him from the garden, "lest he put forth his hand, and take 
also of the tree [plural, trees or grove] of life, and eat, 
and live forever [i.e., by eating continuously]." (Gen. 3:22.) 
How the fogs and mysteries scatter before the 
light of truth which shines from God's Word! 

Now we can see why it is that the Scriptures speak of 
"souls" in connection with the lower animals. They, as 
well as man, are sentient beings or creatures of intelligence, 
only of lower orders. They, as well as man, can see, 
hear, feel, taste and smell; and each can reason up to the 
standard of his organism, though, none as abstrusely nor on as 
high a plane as man. We read (Gen. 1:30) "To you 
it shall be for meat, and to every beast of the earth, and 
to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creepeth 
upon the earth, wherein there is life [Heb. "nephesh 
chaiyah"— a living soul]. Again (Gen. 1:20) "Let the 
waters bring forth the moving creature that hath life [Heb. 
—a living soul]."— See marginal readings. 

The same lesson,— that the life principle is no different 
in mankind from what it is in all other creatures whose 
breath is taken through the nostrils, as distinguishing 
them from fish,— is taught in the account of the destruction 



wrought by the Deluge. (Gen. 6:17; 7:15,22.) This 
is in full accord with King Solomon's statement that man 
and beast have "all one breath" [Heb. ruach, spirit 
of life]— one kind of life; and that "as the one dieth, so 
dieth the other." (Eccl. 3:19.) When he asks (Eccl. 3:21), 
"Who knoweth the spirit of man that [it] goeth upward, 
and the spirit of the beast that [it] goeth downward 
to the earth?" he is controverting the heathen theory, 
which had begun to speculate even at that time, that man 
had some inherent thing or quality which would prevent 
his death, even when he seemed to die. The wise man 
challenges any proof, any knowledge to such effect. This 
challenge to others to produce proofs, or admit that they 
have no such knowledge, follows his statement of the 
subject in verses 19 and 20. The distinction between 
man and beast is not in the kind of breath or life, but 
in that man has a higher organism than other animals; 
possessing moral and intellectual powers and qualities in 
the image or likeness of those possessed by the Creator, 
who has a still higher organism, of spirit, not of flesh. 
And, as already shown, man's hope for a future life lies not 
in his inherent powers, but in his Creator's gracious provision 
which centered in the redemption of every soul of 
man from death, by the great Redeemer, and the consequent 
provision that whosoever will may have everlasting 
life by resurrection, subject to the terms of the New 
Covenant. 

Our Redeemer "poured out his soul [being] unto 
death," "he made his soul [being] an offering for sin" (Isa. 53:12,10); 
and it was the souls of Adam and his posterity 
that he thus bought with his precious blood— by making his 
soul (being) an offering for sin. Consequently it is the 
souls that are to be awakened, resurrected— not the bodies, 
which are buried and which go to dust. 

Here is another common error— many suppose that 
the bodies buried are to be restored atom for atom, but, on 
the contrary, the Apostle declares, "Thou sowest [in 
death] not that body which shall be." In the resurrection 
God will give to each person (to each soul or sentient 
being) such a body as he pleases.*— 1 Cor. 15:37,38. 

As the bringing together of an organism and the 
breath of life produced a sentient being or soul, so the 
dissolution of these, from any cause, puts an end to 
sentient being— stopping thoughts and feelings of every 
kind. The soul or sentient being ceases; the body returns 
to dust as it was; while the spirit or breath of life returns 
to God, who imparted it to Adam, and to his race through 
him. (Eccl. 12:7.) It returns to God in the sense that 
it is no longer amenable to human control, as in pro-creation, 
and can never be recovered except by divine power. 
Recognizing this fact, the Lord's instructed ones commit 
their hope of future life by resurrection to the Father and 
to Christ, his now exalted representative. (Luke 23:46; 



*Inquire for further reading matter on Resurrection, if interested. 

R1880 : page 242 

Acts 7:59.) So, then, if God had made no provision for 
man's ransom and for a resurrection, death would be the 
end of all hope for humanity.— 1 Cor. 15:14-18. 

But God has thus made provision for our re-living; 
and ever since he made known his gracious plan, those 
who speak and write intelligently upon the subject (for 
instance, the inspired Scripture writers) as if by common 
consent, speak of the unconscious interim between death 
and the resurrection morning as a "sleep." Indeed, the 
illustration is an excellent one; for the dead will be 
totally unconscious of the lapse of time, and the moment 
of awakening will seem to them like the next moment after 
the moment of their dissolution. For instance, we read 
that speaking of Lazarus' death our Lord said, "Our 
friend Lazarus sleepeth, I go that I may awake him out of 
sleep." Afterward, because the disciples were slow to 
comprehend, he said, "Lazarus is dead." (John 11:11.) 
Were the theory of consciousness in death correct, is it not 
remarkable that Lazarus gave no account of his experience 
during those four days? None will claim that he was in a 
"hell" of torment, for our Lord calls him his "friend;" 
and for the same reason if he had been in heavenly bliss 
our Lord would not have called him from it, for that would 
be an unfriendly act. But as our Lord expressed it, Lazarus 
slept, and he awakened him to life, to consciousness, to 
sentient being, and that as a favor greatly appreciated by 
Lazarus and his friends. 

R1881 : page 242 

The thought pervades the Scriptures, that we are 
now in the Night as compared with the Morning of the 
resurrection. "Weeping may endure for a night, but joy 
cometh in the morning."— Psa. 30:5. 

The Apostles also frequently used this appropriate, 
hopeful and peaceful figure of speech. For instance, Luke 
says of Stephen, the first martyr, "he fell asleep;" and in 
recording Paul's speech at Antioch he used the same expression, 
"David fell on sleep." (Acts 7:60; 13:36.) 
Peter uses the same expression, saying (2 Pet. 3:4), "the 
fathers fell asleep." And Paul used it time and again, as 
the following quotations show— 

"If her husband be dead [Greek, fall asleep]"— 
1 Cor. 7:39. 

"The greater part remain unto this present, but some 
are fallen asleep."— 1 Cor. 15:6. 

"If there be no resurrection,...then they also 
which are fallen asleep in Christ are perished."— 
ICor. 15:13-18. 

"Christ is risen from the dead and become the firstfruits 
of them that slept. "-1 Cor. 15:20. 

"Behold, I show you a mystery; we shall not all sleep." 



-1 Cor. 15:51. 

"I would not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning 
them that are asleep.— 1 Thes. 4:13. 

"Them that sleep in Jesus, will God bring [from the 
dead] with [by] him."-l Thes. 4:14. 

When the Kingdom, the resurrection time, comes, 
"we who are alive and remain unto the presence of the Lord 
shall not precede them that are asleep."— 1 Thes. 4:15. 

They "fell asleep" in peace, to await the Lord's day 
—the Day of Christ, the Millennial Day— fully persuaded 
that he [Christ] is able to keep that which they committed 
unto him against that day. (2 Tim. 1:12.) This same 
thought runs through the Old Testament as well— from the 
time that God first preached to Abraham the Gospel of a 
resurrection. The expression, "He slept with his fathers," 
is very common in the Old Testament. But Job puts the 
matter in very forcible language, saying, "Oh that thou 
wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest keep me 
secret until thy wrath be [over] past!" The present dying 
time is the time of God's wrath— the curse of death being upon 
all, because of the original transgression. However, in 
due time the curse will be lifted and a blessing will come 
through the Redeemer to all the families of the earth; and 
so Job continues, "All the days of my appointed time 
will I wait, until my change come; [then] thou shalt call 
(John 5:25) and I will answer thee; thou shalt have a 
desire unto the work of thine hands." (Job 14:14,15.) 
And we of the New Testament times read our Lord's response, 
"all that are in their graves shall hear the voice of 
the Son of God [calling them to awake and come to a 
full knowledge of God and to a full opportunity of everlasting 
life]. "-John 5:25,28. 

BODY, SOUL AND SPIRIT. 

That the terms body, soul and spirit are not identical 
and interchangeable as many assume is shown in the use of 
all three terms by the Apostle (1 Thes. 5:23), when he 
writes, "I pray God [that] your whole spirit, soul and 
body be preserved blameless, unto the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ." This prayer must be understood to apply 
to the Church as a whole— the elect church whose names 
are written in heaven. The true spirit has been preserved in 
the little flock. Its body is discernible today also, notwithstanding 
the multitudes of tares that would hide as well 
as choke it. And its soul, its activity, its intelligence, its 
sentient being, is in evidence everywhere, lifting up the 
standard for the people— the cross, the ransom. 

In no other way could we apply the Apostle's words; 
for, however much people may differ respecting the preservation 
of the individual spirits and souls of God's people, 
all will agree that their bodies have not been preserved, 
but have returned to dust, like those of others. 

"ALL LIVE UNTO HIM. "-LUKE 20:37,38. 



Our Lord in contradicting the Sadducees (who denied 
that there would be a resurrection or any future life) said 
that the resurrection (and hence a future life) was proved 
by the fact that God, in speaking to Moses, declared himself 
the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. Our Lord suggests 
that this of itself is a proof "that the dead are [to be] 
raised," because God would surely not refer thus to beings 
totally blotted out of existence. Our Lord then shows 
that God's plan for a resurrection is fixed, and that those 
whom men call "dead" "all live unto Him." God's 
Word, therefore, speaks of them as "asleep" and not as 
destroyed. In saying, "I am the God of Abraham," etc., 
he speaks not only of things past as still present, but also 
of things to come as if already come to pass.— Rom. 4:17. 

SOME QUESTIONS WITH INSPIRED ANSWERS. 

Question. Are the promises to the saints of the Gospel 
age heavenly or earthly promises? 

Answer. "As we have borne the image of the earthly, 
we shall also bear the image of the heavenly." We are 
"partakers of the heavenly calling."— 1 Cor. 15:49; 2 Tim. 4:18; 
Heb. 3:1; 6:4; Phil. 3:14; Eph. 2:6,7; 
2Thes. 1:11,12; 2 Tim. 1:9,10. 

Question. Will the elect Church, the "overcomers," 
the "saints," continue to be human beings, "of the 
earth earthy?" 

Answer. "God hath given unto us exceeding great 
and precious promises, that by these we might become 
partakers of the divine nature"— "new creatures."— 2 Pet. 1:4; 
2 Cor. 5:17; Rom. 8:17,18. 

R1881 : page 243 

Question. When will the full change (begun in us by 
a change of heart, called the begetting of the spirit) be 
completed?— When shall we be made like Christ our Lord? 

Answer. "We [saints] shall all be changed."... 
"The dead [saints] shall be raised incorruptible, and we 
shall be changed. In a moment, in a twinkling of an eye 
...this mortal shall put on immortality." "Sown a 
natural [animal] body, it is raised a spiritual body." "Thus 
is the [special] resurrection of the [special, elect] dead." 
-1 Cor. 15:50-53,42-44; Phil. 3:10. 

Question. Are full recompenses, either rewards or 
punishments, to be expected before the resurrection? 

Answer. "Thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection 
of the just. "-Luke 14:14; Rev. 11:18; Matt. 16:27. 

Question. What is the hope held out for all except 
the elect Church of the Gospel age? 

Answer. "The whole [human] creation groaneth 
and travaileth in pain together until now, waiting for the 
manifestation of the sons of God [the saints]." Then 
shall follow "times of restitution of all things which God 
hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since 
the world began," in which "all the families of the earth 



shall be blessed" through the elect "seed" of Abraham. 
-Rom. 8:22,19; Acts 3:19-21; Gal. 3:16,29. 

Question. Are the dead conscious or unconscious? 

Answer. "The dead know not anything."— Eccl. 9:5; 
Psa. 146:4; Isa. 38:18,19. 

Question. Have the departed saints been praising the 
Lord all along during the past ages? 

Answer. "The dead praise not the Lord."— Psa. 115:17; 
Eccl. 9:6; Psa. 6:5. 

Question. Did the prophets receive their reward at 
death, or was it reserved in God's plan to be given them at 
the beginning of the Millennium, the age of judgment? 

Answer. "The time of the dead, that they should be 
judged, and that thou shouldst GIVE REWARD unto thy servants 
the PROPHETS," is at the beginning of the sounding of 
the last trumpet, the seventh trumpet, at the end of the 
Gospel age-Rev. 11:15,18; Psa. 17:15. 

Question. Were the apostles promised translation to 
heaven at death? 

Answer. "As I said to the Jews, Whither I go ye cannot 
come; so now I say TO YOU [apostles]."— John 13:33. 

Question. Should the saints of the Gospel age, except 
such as are now living, expect to be crowned at death? 

Answer. "When the Chief Shepherd shall appear, 
ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away."— 
1 Pet. 5:4; 2 Tim. 4:8; 1 Pet. 1:4,5. 

Question. Did the Apostles expect glory at death, or 
at the second coming of Christ? 

Answer. "When Christ who is our life shall appear, 
then shall ye also appear with him in glory."— Col. 3:4; 
1 John 3:2. 

Question. Were the saints to "shine" in death? 

Answer. "Many of them that sleep in the dust of 
the earth shall awake, ...and they that be wise shall shine 
as the brightness of the firmament [as the sun]."— Dan. 12:2,3; 
Matt. 13:40-43. 

Question. Did our Lord promise to receive his saints 
at death or at his second coming? 

Answer. "I will come again and receive you unto 
myself."-John 14:3; Rom. 8:23. 

Question. Were the ancient worthies rewarded at death? 

Answer. "These all died in faith, not having received 
the promises;. ..that they without us should not 
be made perfect."-Heb. 11:13,39,40. 

Question. David was one of the holy prophets: 
Was he rewarded by being taken to heaven? 

Answer. "David is not ascended into the heavens." 
-Acts 2:34. 

Question. How many had gone to heaven up to the 
time of our Lord's ascension? 

Answer. "No man hath ascended up to heaven but 
he that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man." 

R1882 : page 243 

-John 3: 13. 



Question. Can he who created man destroy him? 
Can the soul be destroyed by its Creator? 

Answer. "Fear him who is able to destroy both soul 
and body in Gehenna* [the Second death]." "He spared 
not their souls from death." "The soul that sinneth, it 
shall die."-Matt. 10:28; Psa. 78:50; Ezek. 18:4,20; 
Psa. 22:29; Joshua 10:35; Isa. 38:17; Psa. 56:13; 
30:3; 119:175; Matt. 26:38; Isa. 53:10,12. 

Question. How great importance did the Apostle 
Paul attach to the doctrine of the resurrection? 

Answer. "If there be no resurrection of the dead, 
then is not Christ risen. ...Then they also which are fallen 
asleep in Christ are perished."— 1 Cor. 15:13-18. 

Question. Are the unjust now being tormented in 
some unknown hell? or do they always meet the full penalty 
of their unrighteousness in the present life? 

Answer. "The Lord knoweth how to. ..reserve 
the unjust unto the day of judgment [the Millennial day] 
to be punished."-2 Pet. 2:9; Job 21:30. 

Question. What will be the end of those who when 
tried are found incorrigible, wilfully wicked? 

Answer. They shall "go away into a cutting off 
from life," "be punished with everlasting destruction [a 
destruction which will never be terminated by a resurrection];" 
for still "The wages of sin is death," "the second 
death;" and still the gift of God, eternal life, is to be had 
only in Christ. "He that hath the Son hath life;" he that 
hath not the Son shall not receive that gift.— Rom. 6:23; 
Rev. 20:14,15; Matt. 25:46; 1 John 5:12; 2 Thes. 1:9. 



*Concerning the character of Gehenna, see TOWER, Feb. '93. 



R1882: page 243 

THE CHILD SAMUEL. 

-OCT. 27.-1 SAM. 3:1-13.- 

Golden Text— "Speak, Lord; for 
thy servant heareth."— 1 Sam. 3:9. 

IT HAS been truly said that the education of a child 
should begin a hundred years before it is born. Wholesome 
parental influences are potent agencies in the formation 
of character. Samuel was the son of godly parents, a 
child desired and requested of the Lord, the request being 
accompanied with a solemn covenant that, should it be 
granted, he should from earliest infancy be dedicated to the 
Lord. Thus he came into the world richly endowed with 
an inheritance which only godly parents can bestow,— with 
a mind tending toward God and righteousness. 
As soon as it was possible to do so, Hannah took her 



son to the temple and there left him to be trained and used 
in the Lord's service under the care of the high-priest Eli, 
who was a devoted servant of the Lord. That Samuel was 
prompt, obedient, teachable and easily led in the right way, 
because his heart was right and well-disposed, is manifest 
from his readiness to obey the supposed calls of Eli. 
Eli's mild disposition and gentle manners and his 

R1882 : page 244 

righteous life and teaching were all that were necessary in 

the way of human training and restraint to keep this well-disposed 

child in the way of righteousness from infancy up 

to manly vigor. Under his influence the child grew and 

waxed strong in a noble and righteous character, and was 

active and diligent in the service of the Lord. But it was 

not so with Eli's own family. His own sons were wayward, 

disobedient, unthankful, unholy and profligate. Eli sought 

to correct their waywardness by the same mild measures 

that were natural to him, but when these measures failed he 

did not further restrain them by the severer measures so 

necessary in their case; and so they continued to bring disgrace 

upon their father and upon the cause of God which 

he as high priest represented. 

This negligence was culpable, and it displeased the 
Lord. Hence the warning message to him through the 
child Samuel, as recorded in verses 11-13. 

It was hard for Eli to realize the displeasure of the 
Lord, the waywardness of his sons, and his own unfaithfulness 
and culpable negligence; but he received the reproof 
with becoming meekness and humility, saying: "It 
is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him good." And 
when the tidings came of the fulfilment of this prediction 
—the tidings of the defeat of Israel before the Philistines 
and the death of his two sons in the battle, it was a terrible 
blow; but not until he heard that the ark of the Lord 
was in the hands of the enemy did his deep sorrow overwhelm 
him, and he fell from off the seat backward and 
broke his neck, and died. (Chap. 4:18.) But notwithstanding 
his weakness, his heart was always loyal and true 
to God, and the cause of God was dear to him; and God 
who is merciful and gracious and slow to anger, though he 
thus severely punished Eli's negligence, will doubtless remember 
in mercy and forgiveness his servant in the day he 
judges the secrets of men by Jesus Christ.— Rom. 2:16. 

This incident brings forcibly to our attention the estimate 
which the Lord places on strength of character. 
After reasonable instruction in the ways of righteousness 
the Lord expects, and has a right to expect, strong characters. 
Wherefore the Apostle says, "Be strong in the 
Lord, and in the power of his might.... Quit you like 
men, be strong." (Eph. 6:10; 1 Cor. 16:13.) We should 
be strong in faith and strong in character: so shall we be 
pleasing and acceptable to God. If weakness and indecision 
be a natural failing with us, we are not excusable in 
failing to strive against it. Some of the noblest characters 



are those achieved through earnest striving against inherited 
weaknesses. God is also always ready to supplement our 
efforts with his strength, if we invoke his aid. 

One lesson to be drawn is respecting God's view of 
parental responsibility in training up children in the 
knowledge and reverence of the Lord. We here emphasize 
the fact that duty always begins at home, however far it 
may reach beyond it. It is the mistake of some, to be less 
zealous in preaching and exemplifying the gospel in their 
own families, than among those outside of them. Charity 
(love, care, benevolence) should begin at home, and should 
continue there. That field, more than any other, should 
be prayerfully and patiently worked, even though it be 
slower than others to yield fruit. 

Another good lesson is found in the Golden Text- 
Samuel's answer to the Lord: "Speak, Lord; for thy servant 
heareth." Too often the uninstructed or wrongly instructed 
"servant" wants to do all the talking, and to have 
the Lord hear him and perform his will. How few of 
God's children are quick to learn the lesson that God has a 
message to communicate to them through his Word by 
which their thoughts, words and deeds are to be directed. 

Let us never forget that the Bible is God's Word to 
us. And while prompt to acknowledge the channels and 
agencies honored by the Lord in bringing to our attention 
the things of his Word new and old, let us never forget 
that the Word itself is the final arbiter, and that if any 
teaching fails to harmonize with that Word it is because 
there is no light in it. (Isa. 8:20.) Then, as the 
Apostle says, we are to be not only hearers, but also doers, 
of the Lord's Word. (James 1:22.) And "He that 
hath my Word let him speak my word faithfully" (Jer. 23:28) 
—not uncertainly, doubtfully, but "If any man 
speak, let him speak as the oracles of God."— 1 Pet. 4:11. 



R1882 : page 244 

SAMUEL THE JUDGE. 

-NOV. 3.-1 SAM. 7:5-15.- 

Golden Text— "Hitherto hath the 
Lord helped us."— 1 Sam. 7:12. 

SAMUEL succeeded Eli as Judge in Israel, and was 
the last of the judges, the office of Judge being 
superseded by that of king. Chapter 12 contains his 
farewell address as judge, after he had anointed Saul to be 
king. But nevertheless it is written that "Samuel judged 
Israel all the days of his life." (Verse 15.) In a sense- 
in the estimation of the people— the office of judge was 
superseded by that of king, and Samuel's term of office 
ended with Saul's elevation to the throne. But in God's 
reckoning he was a judge over and above the king to the 



end of his life; and in this capacity, under God's direction, 
he anointed Saul as king, and later he anointed David to 
be Saul's successor. 

Prior to the events of this lesson Samuel had spent 
some years in endeavoring gradually to influence the public 
sentiment toward repentance and reformation; and finally 
he gathered them together at Mizpeh that there he might 
intercede with God on their behalf, and that they might 
there make a solemn confession of their sins to God and 
covenant afresh to walk in his ways. This solemn return 
of the nation to God was, in answer to the prayer of his 
faithful servant Samuel, followed by an immediate manifestation 

R1883 : page 244 

of the Lord's acceptance and favor toward them 
in delivering them from the yoke of the Philistines. 

In observing these remarkable providences on behalf 
of the nation of Israel, we should never lose sight of the 
fact that these special dealings with that nation were peculiar 
to them only; and that because they had come into covenant 
relationship with God. God's care and favor were 
over that nation only, of all the nations of the earth. 
Even their national penalties for sin were marks of the 
divine favor; for God wisely disciplined them for their 
good— to purge them from sin, to correct them and keep 
them near himself. And this divine favor was never taken 
from them until, as a nation, they rejected and crucified 
the Son of God. Since that time they have had no favor. 
Nor will God's favor return to them until, as Paul states, 
the fulness of the Gentiles shall have come into possession 
of the chief blessing, which time is now at hand. 

In the interim the special favor of God has been 
shown to the spiritual seed of Abraham, the faithful overcoming 
saints of the Gospel age. As God led and disciplined 
and delivered and cared for his ancient people, so 
now he bestows the same attentions upon his faithful church, 
both collectively and individually. And how often we are 
similarly impelled by a sense of his care and love to sing— 

"Here I'll raise my Ebenezer, hither by thy help I'm come!" 

We now are God's covenant people: let us be faithful 
followers; "for, as many as are led by the spirit of 
God, they are the Sons of God." 



page 245 

VOL. XVI. NOVEMBER 1, 1895. No. 21. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items: 246 

Views from the Tower 247 

Colporteuring in Great Britain 248 

Pressing Toward the Mark 249 

St. Paul's Tears 251 

Shoot Upward and Root Downward 252 

Poem: Let Your Light Shine Out! 252 

Bible Study: Saul Chosen King 252 

Bible Study: Saul Rejected 253 

Encouraging Letters 255 

page 246 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



TRACTS Nos. 4 and 18 are out of print; others are in good supply; 
order freely. 



THOSE who send in changes of address will oblige us by stating 
whether it is only a temporary change or a permanent one. 

R1886 : page 246 

THE RECALLED INTRODUCTORY LETTERS. 

Some of these have not yet been returned; please send them in 
promptly. In this connection we wish to correct the misapprehension 
of some by explaining that the Introductory Letters were not recalled 
because they were seen to be wrong. Quite the contrary: we considered 



them entirely right and Scriptural; but since certain opponents 

of the cause miscalled them Letters of Authorization, etc., in total disregard 

of the facts and the statements of said letters, and since some of 

the beginners might thus be stumbled by the misrepresentation, it was 

deemed best to recall them; for no principle was involved or surrendered. 

As stated at the time, the Tract Society will no longer thus introduce 

anyone. But this in no degree curtails either readers or Editor 

of the TOWER from giving a letter of introduction whenever they 

think such a course advisable. 



R1883 : page 247 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



WE called attention recently to the fact that Methodism 
is being considerably shaken internally. The 
people, or, as they term them, the "laity," are getting 
awake to the fact that they are being ruled by a clerical 
oligarchy, whose wire-pulling for place and power and 
title among themselves much resembles the methods of 
political parties; while the people, the Church en masse, 
have almost no voice in the councils of the church, but 
all the expenses to bear. 

The following extracts are from a prominent article 
which appeared recently in the Chicago Chronicle, and 
which has excited considerable comment. It is headed— 

"METHODISM AND REFORM." 



"The old polity that was established in the time of Asbury, 
and that has been trimmed a little here and there by 
the general conferences, is as ungainly as a seventeenth 
century dress. Reform is abroad in the air.... 

"The laymen are evidently waking up to the fact that 
as they are payers they ought to have more voice in the 
matter of church government. 

"At present their voice, what they have, is so limited 
that a consciousness of it produces nausea and disgust. 
They are beginning to clamor for a "magna charta," and 
as England's king was compelled to grant the people's request, 
so here the general conference of '96 in Cleveland 
will be obliged to heed and obey. They demand that the 
church members elect their own officers and that they be not 
the tool of the pastor and a self-perpetuating official board. 
They realize that every member is a stockholder, and ought 
to have his stock represented by vote. This encroachment 
will be fought bitterly by the 'big ones' and the bishops. 

"It is hard to yield power once possessed. The 
bishops do not claim unlimited power, but it amounts to 
the same thing, and is so exercised as to bring about the 



results obtained.... 

..."The present mode is for the bishop to 
appoint [elders]. What does he know of men, except hearsay, 
or uncertain popularity? And yet they do this, in 
consultation with a cabinet of presiding elders, who piously 
declare the bishop appoints them. 

"If he does do so, in opposition to his cabinet, he is 
tyrannical. Any misfit is attributed to the bishop, who is 
in a position to snap his finger at impotent rage. Methodist 
ministers are loyal, or they would not stand such 
ridiculous assumption of power. The laymen are taking 
pity on the poor minister whose position is by the grace of 
his lordship, the bishop, and his cabinet. The laymen demand 
a free, untrammeled use of speech and action. Another 
step and we elect our pastors. At present, contrary to all 
law, a few churches do elect their pastors. This is demanded 
for all the churches. Election or selection of all 
churches in regard to their pastors is a settled fact. It is 
coming, it must come, or the earth will open and swallow 
us up.... 

"The spoken and unspoken actions and utterances of 
the laity were to curb the power— in fact to stop the "band 
wagon" long enough to climb in and ride. They already 
demand representation in equal numbers to all deliberations 
and conferences of the church. Their hitherto 
loyalty and devotion to their church has made them spectators 
rather than participants. Now they plan participation 
or alienation. No longer presiding elders and preachers 
ruled and controlled by bishops, and the laity in turn ruled 
and controlled by preachers. 

"The bones of John Wesley must almost turn in their 
grave to see it. The old lumber wagon is doing good 
work, but a more modern vehicle is demanded. The greatest 
church in Protestantism has arisen, and will put on her 
beautiful garments. It looks revolutionary, but reform is 
always that. It is a strange fact that British Methodism, 
triumphant, is more American by far than the church in 
America.... 

"A good shaking up is necessary and it is coming. 
We are now weak, where to-morrow we will be strong. Let 
us pray for the day when we get down to a basis we can 
commend to the people— our church free from the shackles 
of an imperial ecclesiasticism." 

R1883 : page 248 

The Church of Christ has probably suffered more from 
pride and ambition for leadership than from any other one 
cause. The disciples were reproved time and again for 
disputing which should be considered greatest, until finally 
our Lord told them plainly that such a spirit of self-exaltation 
would be sure to keep all who possessed it out of the 
promised Kingdom. He said, also, "Ye know that the 
princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and 
they that are great exercise authority upon them. But it 
shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be great 



among you, let him be your minister; and whosoever will 
be chief among you, let him be your servant, even as the 
Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give his life a ransom for many."— 
Matt. 20:25-28. 

The highest position in Christ's Church was to be 
"servant," and he declared himself the chief servant or 
minister of the Church. And surely— if "all ye are 
brethren," then all the brethren should have an equal right 
to express their judgment of the Lord's will respecting the 
leadership of meetings, and all other matters related to 
the welfare of the Lord's cause. There should be no 
rulership, lordship or masteries amongst those whom the 
one Master, even Christ, has put upon a common level. 
The division of the Church in the dark ages into "clergy" 
and "laity" came not from the Lord and the Apostles, 

R1884 : page 248 

but from ambition, fostered by the great enemy, Satan. 

We trust that the brethren and sisters who rejoice in 
the present truth will be on guard against conditions which 
have done so much in the past to injure the Lord's cause, 
and which grow from almost imperceptible beginnings, until 
custom becomes a chain which perverts God's order and 
hinders the development of the talents of many of his 
children and permits one or two in the congregation to exercise 
lordship over God's heritage, without so much as 
recognizing the right of the Church to decide for themselves 
(under the guidance of the holy spirit) who are those who 
possess the qualifications for the service specified in God's 
Word. 

We urge upon all the brethren, in every place, possessed 
of zeal and qualifications for the service of God's flock, 
that they carefully avoid trenching upon the liberties 
wherewith the Lord has made free his people. We commend 
that modesty which in honor prefers one another, 
and seeks to help forward into active service every other 
one in proportion as he seems to have requisite talents; 
and which would refuse to lead even a small group except 
with the expressed desire that he do so, by at least a 
majority of those professing faith in the ransom and full 
consecration to the Lord's service. And this choice should 
not be perpetual: an opportunity to know the mind of 
God's people should be sought at least yearly, and oftener 
if there be reason to believe that a change would be desirable 
to the majority. Protect the liberties of the flock, because 
they are not yours but the liberties of Christ's cause. "One 
is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren." 



R1884: page 248 

COLPORTEURING IN GREAT BRITAIN. 



HERETOFORE this has not been successful to any 
considerable extent; but the friends of the 
truth will be glad to read the following interesting account 
of Brother Houston's two weeks' trip. It shows what can 
be done by the use of the right methods. We hope others 
will take courage and try it, if only for a week or two. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I was out a fortnight 
colporteuring, just as an experiment, and I liked it well. 
I got on splendidly. I took a return ticket to Edinburgh, 
with liberty to stop at every station. I took the 8 A.M. 
train to Helmsdale. At the first house I got an order for 
Vol. I. I called at every house up one side of the street 
and down the other, also hailing men who might be standing 
in little groups. I got orders for 35 volumes. Strange to 
say, the first order I took was cancelled, as well as some 
more, but in delivering I made some further sales, and so 
made up for all that were cancelled. 

I left Helmsdale next morning for Brora, where I 
sold and delivered about the same quantity. I had to stay 
here over the Sabbath. Was called upon by the Y.M.C.A. 
to take their meeting (a public one) on Sabbath 
night, and the Lord helped me to declare very fully the 
glorious gospel— with which they all seemed refreshed. A 
few of the leaders came with me to my lodging, to whom 
I declared more freely the truth of God. 

On Monday morning I left for Golspie, where I sold 
and delivered about 60 vols. About one-fourth of those 
who bought took all three volumes, which helped up the 
sales wonderfully. Golspie is one long street, very easy to 
work. I took the orders the one day and delivered them 
the next. Here my No. I books ran out, and not having 
any more I passed on to Inverness, as I did not wish to 
canvass towns near by until I would have the books to deliver. 
In this work above all works, I find it is true, that 
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with all thy 
might." 

I started again at Buckie and thoroughly canvassed 
every house. Buckie is a very dead sort of place, about 
half of the population being Roman Catholics; hence the 
spiritual and mental deadness. Got about three dozen 
orders. Next day I went to Cullen, a very bright little 
town, where I got about forty orders. 

I passed on to Aberdeen, where I knew a commercial 
gentleman to whom I had loaned Vol. I. At his house I 
met a few friends, one from London, a notable evolutionist. 
We entered into friendly debate and very soon got into the 
thick of all the great questions of the day. From the 
knowledge of the "Plan of the Ages," I was enabled not 
only to confute the wrong theories, but to point out the 
true, and introduce M.D., all of which helped to confirm 
my commercial friend and his wife in the truth. Left Aberdeen 
next morning for Edinburgh, saw the friends there. 
Passed on to Glasgow and saw a number of friends there. 



R1884 : page 249 

Left Glasgow again on Monday and came back to 
Edinburgh. Began with Brother Montgomery to try what 
could be done there. For the day we got ten orders. 
Brother Montgomery was well pleased; he sold fully more 
than I did, and this gave him confidence. He is to spend 
one day in the week canvassing systematically over Edinburgh. 
Mr. Ballingall, an excellent young man, is to help 
him. Although large towns are stiffer, one gets over the 
ground easily, and you come in contact with a number of 
precious souls in a very short space of time; and a tract 
or a word of truth might get in and do good eventually. 

Next day I left for Perth. Was very tired and done 
up, but called upon a number of booksellers to see if they 
had ever seen or heard of that book (pointing out No. I), 
but not one of them had ever heard of it. I had not 
much time, but got a few orders. From Perth I started for 
home, and found every thing getting on very well. My 
average during the trip was 30 volumes per day. 

Yours, seeking to serve our blessed master more fully 
than ever, C. N. HOUSTON. 



R1884: page 249 

PRESSING TOWARD THE MARK. 



"I press toward the mark for the prize of the 
high calling of God in Christ Jesus."— Phil. 3:14. 

THESE were the words of one of the most earnest and 
faithful runners for the prize of the high calling of 
the Gospel Church. The speaker was a man of faith, a man 
of understanding, a man of fixed and unwavering purpose 
and of dauntless courage— a wise man in the Scriptural 
sense, though a fool in the world's estimation. His course, 
as well as those of the other eleven apostles, we are assured 
was a successful one; for the Revelator in describing the 
heavenly Jerusalem says, "And the wall of the city had 
twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve 
apostles of the Lamb." (Rev. 21:14.) And at the end 
of his course, the Apostle, in the full assurance of faith, 
left us this triumphant testimony: "I have fought a good 
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: 
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me 
at that day." And then, ever mindful of the other members 
of the body still in the race, he added, "And not to 
me only, but unto all them that love his appearing."— 
2 Tim. 4:6-8. 

In reviewing the course of the successful runners of the 
past, there is much of encouragement and helpfulness to 



all those who are still endeavoring to make their calling 
and election sure; for even the Apostle Paul, strong and 
daring as he was, reminds us that he was a man of like 
passions with ourselves; that while still in the strife of the 
Christian warfare he counted not that he had already 
attained the mark for the prize, nor that he was already 
perfect. He tells us that he realized, as we all do, a law 
in his members warring against the law of his mind, and 
that he found it necessary to exert his will continually to 
keep the body under.-Acts 14:15; Phil. 3:12; Rom. 7:23; 
1 Cor. 9:27. 

If Paul and all the other apostles and beloved saints 
of the early church were men of like passions with ourselves, 
and similarly compassed with infirmities and adverse 
influences, besetments and allurements; and if they too 
were frequently assailed with temptations and trials which 
summoned all their fortitude to enable them to overcome, 
then, in their overcoming, we have the assurance that we 
also may overcome through the grace promised to us, as 
well as to them, if, like them, we avail ourselves of it. 

So assured was the Apostle of his own continuous 
faithfulness, and of that of the other apostles, and of his 
co-laborers, that he could say to the church, "You have us 
for examples."-Phil. 3:17; 2 Thes. 3:7-9; 1 Cor. 4:9. 

Noble examples they were— of faithfulness, of zeal, 
of patience, of endurance, and of true Christian fortitude 
and heroism. While many of those in more obscure positions 
in the church were doubtless as faithful in their 
spheres, the Apostle Paul, as a leader and pioneer of the 
faith among the Gentiles, comes very prominently to view. 
At the very beginning of his Christian course, the Lord 
said, "I will show him how great things he must suffer for 
my name's sake." (Acts 9:16.) Paul was not long in 
proving the truth of this prediction; but, instead of allowing 
the prospect of continual tribulation to depress him, 
he only rejoiced in the privilege thus afforded of testifying 
his love to the Lord. "And now," he says, "I go bound 

R1885 : page 249 

in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the things that 
shall befall me there, save that the holy Spirit witnesseth in 
every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me. 
But none of these things move me, neither count I my life 
dear unto myself, so that I may finish my course with joy, 
and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, 
to testify the gospel of the grace of God."— Acts 20:22-24. 

Hear the Apostle's testimony of his own experience— 
"In labors abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons 
frequent, in deaths oft. Of the Jews five times received I 
forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with rods, 
once was I stoned, thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and 
a day I have been in the deep; in journeyings often, in 
perils of waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own 
countrymen, in perils by the heathen, in perils in the city, 
in perils in the wilderness, in perils in the sea, in perils 



among false brethren; in weariness and painfulness, in 
watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in 
cold and nakedness. Beside those things that are without, 
that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the 
churches. Who is weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, 
and I burn not?"~2 Cor. 11:23-33. 

Through all these tribulations the Apostle pressed toward 
the mark for the prize of the high calling. The mark 
to be attained was holiness— that holiness which brings 

R1885 : page 250 

very thought into captivity to the will of God, the mind of 
Christ. (2 Cor. 10:5.) That was the grand ideal which 
Paul steadily pursued; and surely in his life he gave evidence 
of constant growth in grace. Under tests of great 
and ever-increasing severity his character developed into 
most graceful and beautiful proportions. The same is also 
manifest in the characters of the other apostles and saints, 
though their record has not come down to us as complete 
as that of the Apostle to the Gentiles. 

But it is specially important that we should observe 
how our beloved Brother Paul was enabled to run so steadily 
in a race so difficult. How was he able to steer so clear 
of the temptations and besetments to which he, as a man 
of like passions with us, was necessarily subject? His answer 
is— "Brethren, I count not myself to have apprehended: 
but this one thing I do, forgetting those things 
which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things 
which are before, I press toward the mark," etc. 

Here are four considerations which we do well to 
ponder most carefully:— 

First. The Apostle made a humble, sober estimate 
of his spiritual standing and strength. He did not feel 
puffed up at being a chosen vessel of the Lord to bear his 
name before the Gentiles. He did not consider himself 
the Great Apostle, nor vaunt himself in any way. And so 
far was he from boasting of his spiritual attainments, that 
he humbly reminded the church of the possibility of himself 
being a castaway, even after he had preached to others, 
unless he continued to stand fast in his integrity and to grow 
in grace. (1 Cor. 9:27.) And while he held up before 
them Christ as the power of God and the wisdom of God, 
and the model for their imitation, he humbly declared that 
he, with them, was striving to follow the pattern, Christ, 
while trusting alone in the merit of his sacrifice to make up 
his own shortcomings. Thus he was relieved of that 
greatest hindrance to spiritual development— self-satisfaction; 
for if any man considers that he has attained a satisfactory 
spiritual state, from that very moment he may date 
the beginning of his spiritual decline. No present attainments 
can be satisfactory to a sincere follower of Christ 
who studiously endeavors to copy the perfect pattern. It 
is only when we turn our eyes away from Christ that self-complacency 
can be exercised; for, in full view of the 
pattern, our shortcomings are ever manifest. And if in 



pride of heart we do lose sight of them ourselves, they 
only become the more manifest to others. Only in the 
realization of a continual growth into the likeness of 
Christ should the Christian find satisfaction. Like the 
Apostle, let him consider, not that he has already attained, 
neither that he is already perfect, but that he is still in the 
race and making progress towards the goal. And no doubt 
it was the considering of himself as not having attained 
perfection, and as still subject to frailty, that led the 
Apostle to seek the Lord's grace, that kept him always in 
a humble attitude of mind and that gave him compassion 
for the weaknesses and failings of others. It is those who 
become high-minded and self-sufficient that strain to pull 
out the mote from their brother's eye and forget the beam 
in their own. 

Secondly, we observe the Apostle's singleness of purpose 
—"This one thing I do." He did not try to do several 
things: if he had, he would surely have failed. He 
devoted his life to the one purpose to which he was called, 
and to that end dropped every other aim in life. He did 
it, too, in view of the fact that all through the present life 
his chosen course would bring certain loss, privation, toil, 
care, persecution and continual reproach. In this singleness 
of purpose he was relieved of many temptations to 
turn aside to enjoy some of the good things of this present 
life, or to pursue some of its illusive bubbles. 

Thirdly, we observe that he determined to forget the 
things behind. Had he allowed his mind to return again 
and again to con over the treasures of the past which he 
had given up; to reconsider how great the sacrifice which 
he had made in thus devoting himself to the cause of the 
despised and crucified One, he might have been tempted 
first to despondency, and later to return and seek to recover 
the things behind. On the other hand, he might have 
carried before him the picture of his persecutions of the 
Christians and his consenting to their martyrdom, wondering 
whether the Lord had forgiven him, and continually 
condemning himself for his blindness, thus forfeiting his 
peace of mind and interfering with his usefulness. But, 
having accepted forgiveness in Christ, he put that away 
also, though he frequently referred to the matter with contrition, 
and the thought seemed to influence his whole life 
so that he labored the more diligently to testify to his 
appreciation of the grace bestowed, and to be long-suffering 
with others as God had been with him. (1 Cor. 15:9,10; 
Phil. 3:6; Eph. 3:8; Gal. 1:13; 1 Tim. 1:12-16.) 
Wise indeed was he to forget the things behind! 

Fourthly, he reached forward to the things that were 
before,— his faith took hold of the promises of God with 
such tenacity that to him they were living realities, inspiring 
zeal and faithfulness. Upon the heavenly themes 
he allowed his mind to dwell, as he also advised others, 
saying, "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are 
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of 
good report; if there be any virtue and if there be any 



praise, think on these things." (Phil. 4:8.) This is the 
way he reached forward to the things before; and thus also 
we must gather our inspiration to holiness and our courage 
to endurance and preservering faithfulness, even unto 
death. The Christian's habit of thought has much indeed 
to do with his spiritual progress or retrogression, as it is 
also an index of his spiritual state, and good habits of 
thought need to be very carefully cultivated. 
By "habit of thought" we mean that normal 
condition to which the mind habitually returns in the 
moments of mental leisure. While engaged in the active 
duties of life we must of necessity bend our mental energies 

R1885 : page 251 

to the work in hand, for if we do any thing merely 
mechanically and without concentrating thought upon it, 
we cannot do it well: yet, even here, Christian principle, 
well established in the character, will unconsciously guide. 
But when the strain of labor and care are lifted for a time, 
the established habit of thought, like the needle to the pole, 
should quickly return to its rest in God. "Return unto 
thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt bountifully 
with thee." (Psa. 116:7.) Let not the mind thus temporarily 
released grovel and revel in earthly things, but let 
it return to its rest and refreshment in the contemplation 
of "whatsoever things are pure and lovely and of good report" 
—upon that beauty of holiness which is the mark 
or goal or end of our high calling, the attainment of which 
will be rewarded with the "prize"— glory, honor and 
immortality. As the poet has beautifully expressed it,— 

"Now let our thoughts on wings sublime 

Rise from the trivial cares of time, 

Draw back the parting veil, and see 

The glories of eternity." 
Let thoughts of God and Christ and the worthy saints 
of the past and present, of the heavenly inheritance, of 
the blessedness of our future work in cooperation with 
Christ, of the magnitude and benevolence of the divine 
plan, and of the glory and blessedness of our gathering 
together unto Christ when our work of the present life is 
finished, fill our minds and inspire our hearts. And to these 
contemplations let us also receive the additional comfort 
and blessedness of personal communion and fellowship 
with God through prayer and the study of the Word and 
the assembling of ourselves together for worship and praise. 

Fifthly, we note the Apostle's energetic zeal, which 
not only reached forward in contemplation of and desire for 
the beauty of holiness and the heavenly glory, but also 
earnestly pressed toward the mark for the prize. It is not 
enough that we consider and desire these things, we must 
also run for them, strive to attain them, and study and endeavor 

R1886 : page 251 

by the grace of God to so run as to obtain. In this 



connection we see a fresh beauty in the Apostle's admonition 
in another place— "strive [i.e., endeavor, labor] to 
enter into rest." The harder we work to accomplish the 
Lord's will in ourselves and that part of his work committed 
to us, the greater is our peace and true rest. Let 
all the faithful take courage, and also take instruction from 
the example and teaching of the faithful Apostle to us 
Gentiles, who himself ran so successfully to the end of his 
course; for the same grace is promised also unto us. 

There is one other thought suggested by the above 
words of the Apostle which we would do well to consider, 
and that is, that as his faithful and successful course was a 
worthy and safe example to the Church, so likewise should 
each disciple of Christ in turn consider that his example 
will have its influence upon others. Every Christian 
should strive to be a pattern worthy of imitation— a pattern 
of earnest, faithful endeavor to copy Christ in his 
daily life, and of active zeal in his service. Patterns of 
perfection, of the ultimate moral glory and beauty of holiness, 
we cannot expect to be in the present life. Such a 
pattern we have only in Christ our Lord. In no such sense 
did Paul ever say, Follow me, or Follow us; but he did 
say, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ." 
-1 Cor. 11:1. 

The Apostle was a grand example of earnest endeavor 
to attain perfection, but not of the ultimate perfection 
which was in Christ only; and it is his zeal and intense 
earnestness in striving to copy Christ and to accomplish his 
will that we should imitate. Let us mark all such worthy 
examples while we also "press toward the mark [of character] 
for [the attainment of] the prize of our high calling." 



R1886 : page 251 
ST. PAUL'S TEARS. 



NO reader of the Acts of the Apostles can have failed 

to notice the strong affection with which Paul 

inspired those who came to know him. We find it illustrated, 

for example, by their grief when called upon to 

part with him. When he bade farewell to the elders of the 

Ephesian Church "they all wept sore." (Acts 20:37.) On 

his leaving the Christians at Caesarea some time afterwards 

it is evident from his words in Acts 21:13 that some of 

them shed tears. And Paul himself records the tears of 

Timothy.— 2 Tim. 1:4. 

On these occasions it would seem that Paul himself retained 
his composure. No mention is made of his weeping 
like the friends whom he was leaving. And yet he has told 
us once and again of his being moved to express his feelings 
in this way. Thus he reminded the Ephesian elders, 
on the occasion already alluded to, that during his ministry 



among them he had served the Lord "with many tears." 
(Acts 20:19.) In his Second Epistle to the Corinthians he 
tells them that his first epistle to them, in which he had to 
rebuke them sharply for their carnality and toleration of 
gross evil in the Church, had been written "with many 
tears." (2 Cor. 2:4.) And amid the joy with which he 
wrote his Epistle to the Philippians the mention he made 
of those "whose end is destruction" caused him at once 
to give way to weeping.— Phil. 3:18,19. 

Thus we see that the tears of Paul's friends, however 
excusable or even laudable they may have been, were the 
expression of feelings far less noble than those which made 
him weep. Theirs were the tears of natural affection, 
mourning its own loss. His was the grief of an unselfish 
heart yearning over the salvation of others, and dreading 
lest they should be lost, or lamenting because the Christian 
profession of the Lord's people was marred and their Christian 
life hindered by their unholy walk. In this matter 
Paul resembled the Lord, whose tears were shed chiefly in 
sympathy on behalf of others (John 11:35; Luke 19:41), 
and who forbade others to weep for him. (Luke 23:28.) 
May he make us like himself in this also— strong to bear 
our own griefs and tender to feel the sorrows and sins of 
others.— Selected. 



R1886 : page 252 

SHOOT UPWARD AND ROOT DOWNWARD. 



LET me remind you all, ye faithful believers in Christ, 
that ye are compared to trees— trees of the Lord's 
right-hand planting. Seek to grow as the tree grows. Pray 
that this year ye may grow downward; that ye may know 
more of your own vileness, more of your own nothingness; 
and so be rooted to humility. Pray that your roots may 
penetrate below the mere topsoil of truth, into the great 
rocks which underlie the uppermost stratum; that ye may 
get a good hold of the doctrines of eternal love, of immutable 
faithfulness, of complete satisfaction, of union to Christ, 
of the eternal purpose of God, which he purposed in Christ 
Jesus before the world was. This will be a growth which 
will not add to your fame, which will not minister to your 
vanity, but it will be invaluable in the hour of storm; a 
growth, the value of which no heart can conceive when the 
hurricane is tearing up the hypocrite. As ye root downward, 
seek to grow upward. Send out the topshoot of your love 
towards heaven. As the trees send out their spring shoot 
and their midsummer shoot, and as you see upon the top 
of the fir that new green child of spring, the fresh shoot 
which lifts its hand towards the sun, so pant to have more 
love and greater desires after God, a nearer approach towards 
him in prayer, a sweeter spirit of adoption, a more 



intense and intimate fellowship with the Father and with his 

Son, Jesus Christ. This mounting upward will add to your 

beauty and to your delight. Then pray to grow on either 

side. Stretch out your branches; let the shadow of your 

holy influence extend as far as God has given you opportunities. 

But see to it also that ye grow in fruitfulness, for 

to increase the bough without adding to the fruit is to diminish 

the beauty of the tree. Labor this year by God's 

grace to bring forth more fruit unto him than ye have ever 

done. We would not be as the gleanings of the vintage 

when there is only here and there a cluster upon the uppermost 

bough, we would be as the Valley of Eschol, whose 

presses burst with new wine. 

This is to grow in grace; to root downward, to shoot 
upward, to extend your influences like far-reaching 
branches, and to bring forth fruit unto the Lord's 
glory.— C. H. Spurgeon. 



LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE OUT! 



Have you entered the race for the prize, brother, 

For the crown of Immortal Life? 
Are you pressing along the line, brother, 

Amid dangers, trials and strife? 

CHO.— Let your light shine out clear and bright, 
For you travel 'midst error and doubt; 
Of this dark world "ye are the light;" 
Christ has said let your light shine out. 

Does the pathway seem tedious and lone, brother, 
Are you weary, discouraged or faint? 

Courage! Christ is beside you to give, brother, 
Grace and comfort for ev'ry complaint. 

There are pilgrims who need cheering words, brother, 
Like our Lord, let us comfort and bless; 

Any where, any time, we may serve, brother, 
In this, find our own burdens made less. 

Time for winning the prize is but short, brother, 

Then so run that you surely obtain. 
Keep your eyes fixed on Jesus alone, brother, 

He will lead you, and make your way plain. 

Wondrous priv'lege is granted to us, brother, 
That of suffering with Jesus, our Head; 

As new creatures are we in God's sight, brother, 
To the world we are reckoned as dead. 

Then be vigilant, steadfast and true, brother; 
For the enemy "lieth in wait;" 



And put on the whole armor of God, brother, 
And for your feet make your paths straight. 
MRS. M. L. HERR. 



R1887 : page 252 

SAUL CHOSEN KING. 

--NOV. 10.— 1 SAM. 10:17-27.- 

Golden Text— "The Lord reigneth; 
let the earth rejoice."— Psa. 97:1. 

WHEN Samuel was well advanced in years he appointed 
his two sons as assistant judges in Beersheba; 
but their elevation to office proved detrimental to 
them in placing before them opportunities for dishonest 
gain. Instead of resisting this temptation, they yielded 
to it and "turned aside after lucre, and took bribes, and 
perverted judgment."— Chap. 8:3. 

Under these conditions, with Samuel growing old and 
his sons reckless, and with powerful and threatening 
enemies on their frontier, the outlook for the national 
safety and prosperity of Israel was not hopeful from a human 
standpoint of view. And from the human standpoint it 
was only prudent forethought, in view of existing circumstances, 
to make provision for future necessities according 

R1887 : page 253 

to their own best judgment. The men of Israel, the leading 
men of the nation, thus reasoned; and accordingly, with 
respect and deference, they came to Samuel, the divinely 
appointed judge, and laid their case before him, with the 
request that the form of national government be changed, 
and that a king be appointed over them like the other 
nations. Thus they seemed to think that in the eyes of 
the other nations they would seem more formidable and 
more like a well organized nation; and the appearance of 
a well organized and powerful central government would 
reflect creditably, they thought, upon them as a people, 
and would give them a standing among the nations of 
the earth. 

All this would have been very commendable human 
prudence, and might be considered sound judgment in any 
other nation than the nation of Israel; but in their case it 
was not. They were forgetting, or rather ignoring, the 
fact that the Lord was their king, and that all their affairs 
present and future were in his hands; that so long as they 
were faithful to their covenant with him they should have 
peace and prosperity, and that no evil should befall them and 
no enemy could overcome them unless God permitted it as 
a punishment for national sins, as the Lord himself declared, 
saying, "Shall there be evil in a city, and I have 



not done it?" "I make peace and create evil. I the 
Lord do all these things." (Amos 3:6; Isa. 45:7.) This 
was not true of any other nation. Consequently Israel 
would have suffered no lack of prosperity or safety had they 
closely adhered to the Lord's leading. They had a powerful, 
though invisible, king, before whom none of their enemies 
could stand, and their only right course was to be 
loyal and obedient subjects. And if they were apprehensive 
of trouble in the future it was their privilege to draw 
near God; and in putting away sin and closely following 
him and committing themselves to his care, they would 
have been safe in every condition. 

Their course in requesting a king gave evidence (1) of 
a lack of faith in the power and love and faithfulness of 
God, notwithstanding the marvels of divine providence 
toward them in the past; (2) of weariness in well-doing— 
of only a slack hold upon those principles of righteousness 
in conformity to which alone could they enjoy the favor 
and blessings of God; and (3) of a desire to appear great 
themselves in the eyes of the other nations. 

In this they incurred the divine displeasure; nevertheless 
the Lord granted their request, but at the same time 
foretold the evils that would accompany their choice 
(8:11-22), which evils were realized in varying measure 
until God removed the diadem from the head of Zedekiah, 
their last king. 

The conduct of Samuel in this instance was most 
noble and unselfish. There was not a trace of selfishness 
or resentment in it. Grieved in spirit he took the matter 
to the Lord, evidently with that singleness of purpose 
which desired only to know and do his will. Then, with 
that dignity and grace which marked a high and noble 
nature, he humbly resigned his office in favor of the new 
king, and, like a tender father, kindly counselled and encouraged 
them to be faithful to God, closing his address 
with these touching words, "As for me, God forbid that I 
should sin against the Lord in ceasing to pray for you, but 
I will teach you the good and the right way. Only fear 
the Lord and serve him in truth with all your heart; for 
consider how great things he hath done for you. But if ye 
still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your 
king."— Chap. 12. 

The choice of Saul was the Lord's choice of a king for 
Israel, the choice being indicated by lot. (10:19-22.) He 
was a God-fearing man of humble mind, of good ability 
and of noble bearing; and all Israel was well pleased with 
the choice. And Samuel, forgetful of himself and rejoicing 
to honor another, even one who was thenceforth to be 
his rival in the affections of the people, said to all the 
people, "See ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that 
there is none like him among all the people? And all 
the people shouted and said, God save the king."— 
Verse 24. 

Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom 
—laying down the principles and limitations of the 
kingly power (Deut. 17:14-20), thus instituting a limited 



monarchy. 

After his anointing and acceptance by the people as 
king, Saul returned to his home in Gibeah accompanied by 
a band of godly men as his supporters and aids; and there, 
in retirement, he had time to make ready for the subsequent 
duties of his office. When he was despised and 
spoken against by some who neither feared God nor regarded 
man, Saul showed his good sense by simply maintaining 
a dignified silence and reserve, which was a severer 
rebuke than contention or threat. 

The golden text for this lesson, while it has no reference 
to the Lord's reign over Israel, but to the establishment 
of God's Kingdom in the earth in the dawn of the 
Millennial day, and hence calls upon the whole earth to 
rejoice, has nevertheless a fitness as applied to Israel. The 
Lord did graciously and righteously reign over that people; 
and, to the extent that they were able to appreciate his 
righteousness and justice and his love and care, it was a 
cause of rejoicing to them. 



R1887 : page 253 

SAUL REJECTED. 

--NOV. 17.-1 Sam. 15:10-23.- 

Golden Text— "To obey is better 
than sacrifice."—! Sam. 15:22. 



THAT the Lord expected of both the nation of Israel 
and the individuals of the nation strong confiding 
faith in him and implicit obedience to his commands is 
very manifest from the fact that the lack of such faith and 
obedience so often brought upon them severe penalties. As 
a nation they were punished with wars and captivities and 
plagues; and as individuals they were often severely chastised, 
as in the case before us. And God had a perfect 
right to require implicit faith and obedience of a people 
upon whom he had bestowed so many of his blessings, 
and to whom he had manifested himself in such wonderful 
ways. 

The case of Saul was one of those cases where much had 
been given, and of whom, therefore, much was required. 
God had chosen him and called him out from a position of 
obscurity and made him king over his chosen people; he 
had given him favor with the people, surrounded him with 
good assistants and co-laborers, and the wise and faithful 

R1887 : page 254 

counsel of his servant and prophet Samuel; and he had 
established him in the kingdom and given him victory 
over his enemies. But notwithstanding all these manifestations 
of divine favor, Saul was disobedient and slow to 



trust the Lord. Chap. 13:2-15 records his failure to 
trust God, and his presumptuous act in assuming the role 
of the priest and himself offering sacrifices, contrary to 
God's law and to his agreement with Samuel. He feared 
the enemy when he should have trusted in God, and he 
sinned presumptuously when he should have waited patiently 
for the deliverance which God alone could give. 

For this rash, presumptuous and faithless act, which 
proved Saul unworthy thenceforth of the great honor 
which God had conferred upon him in making him king 
over his people, God determined to withdraw that special 
favor and to appoint another to reign in his stead, and so 
instructed Samuel. "And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast 
done foolishly; thou hast not kept the commandment of the 
Lord thy God, which he commanded thee: for now would 
the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever. 
But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath 
sought him a man after his own heart, and the Lord hath 
commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou 
hast not kept that which the Lord commanded thee."— 
13:13,14. 

Yet God did not take the kingdom from Saul at once. 
There was time left for repentance and reformation, which 
might have brought some mitigation of the penalty; and a 
measure of the divine favor still continued for his encouragement. 
But the season of grace was not improved, and 
by and by another test further proved Saul unworthy of 
his trust. On the southern borders of Palestine dwelt the 
Amalekites, a nomadic, warlike race, who roamed through 
the deserts between southern Judea and Egypt. They were 
a continual menace to the Israelites, often joining themselves 
to their other enemies and doing much damage. The 
iniquity of these enemies of the Lord's people now being 
full, God sent word to Saul by Samuel to destroy them utterly, 
to leave none of them alive, and also to destroy all 
their goods. 

This last feature of the command was hard for the 
acquisitive Israelites to obey, and, with Saul's permission, 

R1888 : page 254 

the best of the spoils were preserved, and Agag (their 
king) he saved alive. Then Saul sought to cover his 
sin with a lie; but the bleating of the sheep and the lowing 
of the oxen disclosed the truth, and the faithful 
prophet did not hesitate to inquire of the king, "What 
meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears, and 
the lowing of the oxen which I hear?" 

They meant that the king had disobeyed the command 
of the Lord, and the flimsy excuse that they were preserved 
for sacrifices unto the Lord was rejected as worthless. 
"And Samuel said, Hath the Lord as great delight in 
burnt offerings and sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the 
Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to 
hearken than the fat of rams. For rebellion is as the sin 
of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry." 



(Verses 22,23.) This is God's estimate of human wilfulness. 
It is like witchcraft in that it trusts to erring human 
judgment in preference to the infallible divine judgment; 
and it is like idolatry in that it adores and seeks to please 
self rather than God, who alone is worthy of supreme reverence, 
respect and obedience. 

Then Samuel delivered the Lord's message to the erring 
king, saying, "Stay, and I will tell thee what the Lord 
hath said to me this night." "And Samuel said, When 
thou wast little in thine own sight, wast thou not made the 
head of the tribes of Israel, and the Lord anointed thee 
king over Israel?" and now, "Because thou hast rejected the 
word of the Lord, he hath also rejected thee from being 
king." (Verses 16,17,23.) A few years previous to this 
a similar warning had been given, but Saul did not heed it 
nor repent, though the Lord was very slow to anger and 
plenteous in mercy. (Chap. 13:13,14.) And Samuel mourned 
for Saul: the young man that seemed so promising on the 
day of his inauguration had now departed from the right 
ways of the Lord; and Samuel grieved as a father over a 
wayward son.— Verse 35. 

But the Lord bade him arise and cease to mourn over 
Saul, seeing that he, the all-wise and holy One, who could 
not err, had rejected him from reigning over Israel. Then 
he directed him to David and told him to anoint him to 
reign in his stead.— Chap. 16:1. 

In the selection of both Saul and David we see that 
the Lord specially sought a meek and quiet spirit. Saul was 
at first little in his own eyes, and when the proposition was 
made to make him king, Saul answered, "Am not I a 
Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? and my 
family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? 
wherefore then speakest thou so to me?"— Chap. 9:21. 

That was just the spirit the Lord wanted to exalt, just 
the spirit that was fitted for his use; and had Saul maintained 
it throughout his course his reign would have been 
one of great prosperity; for behind his weakness was the 
might of Jehovah. The exaltation of Saul, alas! proved 
too great a temptation for him to pride, self-will and 
selfishness. He should have remembered ever to keep 
little in his own sight; for it is only the humble that God 
can exalt and use. 

The lessons of this narrative are important also to us. 
If much every way— of favor, of divine precept and promise 
and leading and instruction, and of special providences 
manifesting the divine favor and presence and blessing- 
was given to fleshly Israel, how much more is given to the 
Gospel church— the exceeding great and precious promises, 
the witness of the holy spirit with our spirits that we are 
sons and heirs of God and joint-heirs with Christ if so be 
that we suffer with him, the leading of the holy spirit, the 
instructions of the inspired Apostles, and the wonderful 
manifestations of divine favor and providence to the Church 
both collectively and individually! 

And if implicit faith and reliance upon God were 
expected of fleshly Israel in view of their knowledge of 



God, how much stronger is the ground for such expectation 

on the part of the Gospel Church! The Lord does, and 

has a right to, expect much— a large return of faith 

and confidence and love and obedience— from those 

to whom he has given so much of the wealth of his favor; 

and if we are doubting and disobedient and wayward still, 

notwithstanding all his grace, we surely will not be counted 

worthy to be entrusted with the crown and the Kingdom 

which the Lord has prepared for them that love him. But 

as the Lord appointed another to take the place of Saul, so 

he will appoint others to take the crown and the Kingdom 

from those of the Gospel Church who prove themselves unworthy 

of it. 

Beloved, "Be not faithless, but believing," and "Hold 
that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy crown." 

The lesson of meekness is also an important one. 
"When thou wast little in thine own sight," God could exalt 
thee and use thee. But beware that his goodness to thee 
harden not thy heart and incline thee to pride, ambition, 
self-righteousness or presumption. Mark the effects of 
these upon Saul, and beware; and by watchfulness and 

R1888 : page 255 

prayer strive to maintain a lowly mind, to think soberly, 

and to act wisely and prudently. Mark also the contrast 

of the effects of God's favor upon Samuel— the meek and 

quiet spirit, the beautiful self-forgetfulness and self-abandonment 

to the will of God, the noble heart that could even 

rejoice in the prosperity of a prominent rival, and that could 

lovingly and tenderly minister to the ungrateful and unappreciative. 

Such a character is one of the choicest 

flowers of earth. Such God appreciates and loves and seeks 

to cultivate by all the testings and trials of the present 

time (1 Pet. 5:10); and such he will exalt in due time 

("after that ye have suffered a while"). "Humble yourselves, 

therefore," beloved, "under the mighty hand 

of God." 



R1888 : page 255 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I have been closely studying 
all the points you make in the three volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and in ZION'S WATCH TOWER. 

Churchianity has been an abomination to me from 
childhood, and the Church of Rome a system I feared and 
hated. Fox's Book of Martyrs, with its illustrations of 
torture and persecution of the saints, roused all the indignation 
of my boy's heart. All my life my heart's best 
sympathies have been on the side of oppressed humanity, 



and I have turned neither to the right hand nor to the left 
for frowns or favors. In the abolition of slavery I took my 
part in Massachusetts, where I was born in 1835, and fought 
for it in the army. I was actively engaged with my dear 
old father in the temperance cause, and we struck hard 
blows, so much so that hanging in effigy and threats of all 
sorts, even to life, were common to us. 

Some prejudice against the church and professed 
Christians was early engrafted into my mind by certain 
events of my youth. For instance, I saw a good man, 
who protested against fellowshiping men as brethren in 
Christ who held their fellow men in bondage, knocked down 
by the deacons and dragged by the hair of his head out of 
church. My mother had hard work keeping me from 
throwing the hymn-book at the deacons. I asked her why 
he did not stand up and fight. She replied that he was a 
true Christian, and believed in non-resistance. To my 
active, belligerent mind this was a strange principle. 
Senator Sumner of Massachusetts was another professor of 
this principle; and I remember well, when he was struck 
down in the Senate Chamber, how ready I was to avenge 
the blow if opportunity had permitted. 

But life has brought its lessons, and I too have had to 
learn that physical force is not the most powerful weapon. 
In the Labor reforms energy, talent and money have all 
been spent for twenty-five years with no expectation of 
reward of any sort; for, unlike many others, place nor 
profit was not in it for me. However, as I see things now, 
I hold no vain regrets as to this matter; for I recognize in 
this whole matter God's own good pleasure to me personally, 
and world wide. No blow could have been struck, 
not even war, that would have caused such general worldwide 
distress and trouble as this act of all the kingdoms 
of demonetizing silver and thus taking away from the 
people the use of half their money. Money, the blood of 
commerce and the power of civilization, is thus made the 
instrument of helping on the day of trouble. 

Excuse so much of personal history this time. I have 
written it as an introduction so you may the better judge 
what you think will be for my betterment. 

Yes, I see much of God's more excellent way of 
blessing the world through Christ, and I have been talking 
it at the firesides of my neighbors and have been writing it 
to my old co-laborers and urging them to send for the 
DAWN, and some have written me they have done so. I 
only regret that I have not the means to purchase a lot to 
send to friends. I recognize how hard the change of base 
will be; for I am well known to all the labor leaders and was 
active in the last campaign, speaking in school houses and 
elsewhere, free and without price. I see no way to prevent 
my falling into the temptation except to give the same zeal 
and effort to the instruction of others in the signs of the 
times and telling the story of the Resurrection and the 
Life, the overthrow of all earthly systems of government 
and the establishment of the Kingdom of the Prince of 
Peace. 



I have received the envelopes and am pleased with 
them, also tract No. 21 and the bound volumes of DAWN 

R1889 : page 255 

for my wife, who is talking as she visits of the old light in 
its new form. 

I notice in a late TOWER your excellent wife is having 
parlor meetings. They are the very best kind of 
meetings. I find fireside talks with my neighbors very 
useful in pointing out the truth. 

Wishing you and the cause success, I remain, 
Yours truly, BENJ. W. GOODHUE. 

[We sympathize greatly with the noble souls who, in 
one way and another, are striving and spending time, talent 
and means in the various reform movements of our day. 
They have the right spirit and we should not be surprised 
to find God granting them knowledge proportionate to 
their zeal. 

To turn your zeal into the Lord's work and help to 
prepare yourself and others for a place in the Bride company 
which by and by, as God's Kingdom, will institute 
all the gracious reforms promised, is certainly the only 
proper course, as well as a great privilege. We are always 
glad to cooperate with all such soldiers of Christ.— EDITOR.] 



DEAR BROTHER:— I have several things to write about. 
First: We are getting along nicely and harmoniously in our 
Circle gatherings. We have two a week, one Friday evening 
for the study of the Word in the light of the DAWN, and 
one Sunday P.M. for prayer and praise, taking some phase 
of the Christian life as part of the exercises. I have never 
attended any other meetings where there was such a unity 
of desire and purpose on the part of all to know the truth. 

Second. It would seem as though when a little company 
comes out from the nominal church on account of 
the truth, they have to meet and reject all the errors going 
as never before. We have just passed through a trial of an 
error which most of us had never met before.... [This 
is usually Satan's method. Those who sleep in Zion need 
not be disturbed, but as soon as they awake and come out 
into the liberty of the truth he is after them with "signs 
and lying wonders, and all deceivableness of unrighteousness. 

R1889 : page 256 

The only safety is in obeying 1 John 5:18 
and Jude 21. -EDITOR.] 

Third. The Wisconsin M.E. Conference has just 
closed its session here. I will send you some notes showing 
the drift of that Church. Dr. Payne, of New York, 
the General Secretary of the Board of Education of the 
M.E. Church, among other things said, "I am not an 
Adventist, and do not believe in a second advent. We 



have had one advent, and that is enough." This was 
loudly applauded. He held up Dr. Parkhurst's doings as 
the only kind of work necessary in connection with education, 
education being the prime factor. I have condensed 
Bishop Foster's sermon, using his words principally. 
Text: "For I reckon that the sufferings of the present 
time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that 
shall be revealed in us." He said: 

"God is moving things along an ideal line and doing 
the best he can under the circumstances, has not reached 
the end and never can. He is trying to produce a race of 
beings which if they could be finished would be wonderful. 
In the first place he has created the great Universe, which 
includes our earth, and all of this is but a temporary affair, 
although it has taken millions and millions of years to do 
it, and it will be millions and millions of years before he 
can finish what is possible of his idea, for it is going to 
pass away as a scroll. The reason: After these millions of 
years of creation the earth had come into a condition in 
which he could use it for his idea; so he created man, and 
put him in a physical body on the earth for a time for a 
special purpose; i.e., that he might suffer a while in order 
to fit him for the next step in the process after he has left 
the body; that is, to go on from glory to glory forever in 
a constant upward progression." As the Bible says that at 
the resurrection we are to be like the Savior, what must we 
be at the end of millions of years! ! 

He said that no man has seen God at any time, neither 
can see him, neither can the angels; for God hath no body 
nor parts, and therefore cannot be seen; but the angels, 
living where he manifests his glory, can see that; and that 
we cannot see man: as he is a spirit we can see only the 
house he lives in while on the earth, and which he leaves 
when he dies; for man was not made to live on the earth. 
Consequently when he is through with the earth as a starting 
place for the race he is trying to produce, he will roll 
it up as a scroll. In closing he said we must have literary 
education, in order to form character; for our destinies are 
in our own hands and the place we shall occupy after 
death, whether in hell or heaven, depends on what characters 
we form here. We are all babes while on the earth, 
although some of us (Bishop Foster and the like) are a 
little precocious. 

I cannot see what use such men have for the Bible. 
He read 1 Cor. 15 for his morning lesson, though he has 
no use for the resurrection. He takes an indefinite number 
of millions of years for the creation, the Bible six definite 
periods of time; he says God is not a person, consequently 
no one can ever see him, the Bible says the Bride will; he 
says man is not a human but a spirit being, the Bible says 
the Word [our Lord] was made flesh and dwelt among us; 
he says we never will reach perfection, the Word says we are 
to be complete in Him; he says that he is working out an 
idea, while the Bible says God is working according to a 
definite and well arranged plan. 

Yours in the faith, A. A. GRAVES. 



DEAR BROTHER:-After so long a time, out of the 
abundance of my weakness and inability, I write of my 
success in the Master's vineyard. During ten month's work 
I have placed nearly fifteen hundred DAWNS to the Master's 
glory. I feel that I have done the best I knew. 

On beginning work in every town, I have prayed the 
Lord that I might be used of him to carry the glad tidings 
to those of his servants who are hungry for the truth. I have 
asked him that I might be able to find his true servants, 
and while talking that I might speak my words aright and 
in season, that I might show the spirit of the truth, giving 
none offence by my words. I am determined to lay aside 
every weight and besetting sin, and to labor with patience for 
the Master, until he in his own good time may remove all 
difficulties. In the meanwhile I trust that the fruit of my 
labor may continue in his favor, that it may be watered and 
nourished until the crown be won. The Lord's work is 
my all-absorbing theme, and I humbly ask a continuance 
of the favor until I may have laid down my life in his service. 

I can now more fully realize the blessing with which 
the Lord blesses those who enter his service. He has 
blessed me with a much plainer understanding of his Word 
and plan, and has shown me how to act my part, and given 
me a fuller appreciation of the joyful reward at the end. 

With gratitude and love, I remain, yours truly in the 
service of the Lord, E. L. BOOTH [Colporteur]. 



DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-What a privilege 
it is to work for our God! As we study his character 
and the character of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 
we cannot but worship and adore them, and seek daily to 
conform our characters more to theirs. We also want to 
express to you with the enclosed for the Tract Fund our 
love for the work and also for yourselves as humble servants 
in it. May the Lord daily guide and keep you in that 
attitude of meekness (toward Him) which shall be to the 
best interests of yourselves and the Church which you serve. 

The Lord has been very good to us ever since we consecrated, 
by his wonderful providences leading us in a way 
we did not know. Until this year we have come out a 
little behind in our finances; but now, though times are 
harder than ever, he seems to be willing, without our seeking, 
to trust us with a little more of "this world's goods;" 
so after paying our debts we are gladly putting the surplus 
into the work. 

Enclosed please find a letter from Miss Steel who is in 
the Sandwich Islands. It shows that she is reaping: even 
over there the sickle is being thrust in. We sent her the 
books requested and hope they are now doing their work. 

Yours in the love of Christ, C. C. & C. P. BELL. 



page 256 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-It is with praise and 
gratitude to our dear Lord that I am enabled to give you an 
account of the Lord's dealing with us here. 

Some fifteen months ago, while praying and waiting 
that the Lord would open a door for me to give out the 
joyful news contained in the Plan of the Ages, He opened 
a door through a Church of England service on the subject 
of Immortality. Two dear brethren were very much upset 
over it. But when I asked them to meet at my house, and 
we would see what said the Word of God, they came and we 
had a most interesting meeting. More came the next week, 
and the Lord opened their minds to the truth as it is in Jesus. 
My heart is full of joy that he is using me to give out the truth. 

We are scattering "hail" where we think it will be received 
by thoughtful people. We always remember you and 
the brethren at the throne of grace. 

Your brother in service for the King, H. ASHTON. 



page 257 

VOL. XVI. NOVEMBER 15, 1895. No. 22. 



CONTENTS. 



Notices— The Typical Red Heifer 258 

Decently and in Order 259 

Order in the Early Church 259 

The Occasion of Choosing Elders 261 

The Qualifications of Elders 262 

The Exercise of Liberty a Safeguard 

against Bondage 263 

Prerogatives of Christ, the Head 264 

The Oneness of the Body of Christ 267 

Bible Study: The Woe of Intemperance 268 

page 258 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 



MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



THE WITHDRAWAL LETTERS. 

THE "Withdrawal Letters," described in our issue of Oct. 15, we 
afterward concluded to issue as a number of the Old Theology Quarterly. 
Copies have been sent to all of you, and they can now be had 
upon the same terms as our other tracts. Money received for these 
letters, above the price of the envelopes, has been turned over to the 
Tract Fund. 

R1896 : page 258 

THE TYPICAL RED HEIFER. 

In our issue of Oct. 1, we examined this subject; but some of our 
readers will do well to give it a second or a third careful reading. 
When so doing keep the following points clearly in mind: 

R1897 : page 258 

(1) Only those sacrifices made by the High Priest, on the Day of 
Atonement, and killed inside the court, represented the "better sacrifices" 
for sins offered by Christ our great High Priest during this 

Gospel age— beginning with his sacrifice typified in "the bullock," and 
concluding with that of the Church which is his body, and which 
through his grace has fellowship in his sufferings— typified by "the 
Lord's goat." See Tabernacle Shadows of Better Sacrifices. 

(2) The other Sin Offerings, which, under the Law, followed the 
Day of Atonement, would properly represent the repentance and sorrow 
for sin by which, during the Millennium, the world of mankind will 
acknowledge and avail themselves of the merits of the Day of Atonement 
sacrifices. 

(3) Such "sacrifices" as were offered by Samuel and Elijah and 
Elisha and Abraham and David and Abel were of a different kind, not 
represented in the Law, and hence not typical. These offerers were 
not priests, and their offerings were not related to the typical "offerings 
for sin," which were "according to the Law," and offered "year by year 
continually." 

(4) The Red Heifer was not killed by the High Priest, who did 
all the offering of the Day of Atonement; nor did Eleazer the under 
priest kill it;— another, not of the priesthood, killed it. Hence this 
heifer does not represent or typify either the High Priest or the under 
priest, or any sacrifice of this Day of Atonement. In the article referred 
to we give our reasons for considering it a type of the sufferings 

of the ancient worthies of Heb. 1 1 . Very few of those ancient worthies 
in their personal experiences typified anything. Yet, since as a class, 
we find that they are to have a share in the work of restitution in the 
future, it is but reasonable to find that work typified in connection with 
the cleansings which typify the work of the Millennium. 



(5) The priest first sprinkled its blood toward the tabernacle; 
teaching thus that its death pointed to and was in accord with the 
sin-sacrifices 

of God's altar. He then cast into the burning of the heifer's 
carcass a sprig of hyssop, representing purging, cleansing; a sprig of 
cedar (evergreen), representing everlasting life; and a scarlet string, 
representing the blood of Christ, the price of our sins; thus teaching 
that the ignominy heaped upon those ancient worthies who were stoned, 
sawn asunder, etc., and of whom the world was not worthy, permitted 
the merit of the precious blood, the cleansing of the truth, and the gift 
of everlasting life to be accounted to them. 

(6) Possibly the Apostle Paul, one of the under priests of "the 

royal priesthood," was typified by Eleazer; for he it is that, by his testimony 
in Heb. 11, points out the harmony of their faith and sufferings 
(burning) with ours, and casts into it the hyssop, scarlet and cedar, by 
assuring us that they were purged, that Christ's blood made them 
acceptable and that they are sharers of the gift of everlasting life, 
although "they without us should not be made perfect."— Heb. 1 1:40. 

(7) The Apostle Paul, in Heb. 9:13, speaking of the typical 
cleansing, mentions the blood of both the bulls and goats (the Atonement 
Day sacrifices) and the sprinkling of the ashes of the red heifer 

with water, etc.; but, when applying the antitype, he stops with the 
blood of Christ, and makes no mention of the antitype of the ashes of 
the red heifer,— because it has nothing to do with our cleansing, but 
relates to the world's cleansing in the Millennium, as we have shown. 
Had the red heifer and its ashes been connected with the Gospel age 
cleansings, the Apostle surely would have shown the fact here; for he 
did not shun to declare the whole counsel of God then "meat in due 
season." Praise be to our Lord, who continues to provide "meat in 
due season" for the table of his household!— Luke 12:37. 



R1889 : page 259 
DECENTLY AND IN ORDER. 



"Let all things be done decently and 
in order. "—1 Corinthians 14:40. 

RECENTLY, by various circumstances among the 

companies of the saints, our attention has been 

drawn to the subject of order in the Church. As the numbers 

of those separated from "Babylon" by the sickle of 

harvest truth increase, and in small or larger groups assemble 

themselves together as the Lord directed (Heb. 10:25), 

we find new difficulties and see new dangers arising, particularly 

on account of the great activity of our ever-vigilant 

adversary. These have led us again to a very careful 

consideration of the subject in the light of the Scriptures. 

The apostles had much to say to the early Church concerning 
order in the assemblies of the saints; and apparently 

R1890 : page 259 



we have been rather negligent of this wise counsel, 
feeling it to be of rather minor importance, because the 
Church is so near the end of her course and the harvest is 
a time of separating. But it is safe to continue to heed 
very carefully "the things written aforetime for our admonition. 
Though the time is short to the end of our earthly 
pilgrimage, the issues in the battle with the principalities 
and powers of darkness become more and more critical, 
and the contest in every individual case is becoming more 
sharp and decisive. 

While it is true that harvest is a time for separating, 
it is also a time for gathering. Should the farmer be content 
to thresh out his grain and leave it scattered on the 
ground? No; he knows that unless he afterward gathers 
and stores it his labor will be lost: it will decay on the 
ground, or the birds will come and devour it. Now the 
Lord is a wise husbandman, and he indicates that both 
the separating and the gathering are parts of the harvest 
work, saying, "Come out of her, my people [separate 
yourselves from Babylon];" and again, "Gather my saints 
together unto me, those that have made a covenant with me 
by sacrifice." 

We, therefore, that are separated from Babylon are 
not to stand alone and separate from each other; but we 
are to gather together in Christian fellowship and communion 
around the table of the Lord— the harvest table, so richly 
and bountifully spread for us. "Wheresoever the carcass 
[the food] is, there will the eagles [the hungry and farsighted 
eagle class, who discern the food from afar off] 
be gathered together." (Matt. 24:27,28.) We are to assemble 
ourselves together and to strengthen the bonds of 
love and fellowship, and "so much the more as we see the 
day approaching." And in so doing it is a matter of 
special importance that we carefully consider what the 
Scriptures present as profitable for the various companies 
of the saints thus assembled. 

ORDER IN THE EARLY CHURCH. 



In the days of the early Church the printing press was 
not yet at the service of the truth, and even the manuscript 
copies of the Word of God were not in the hands of the 
people; nor had the masses the ability to read for themselves. 
The New Testament Scriptures, too, were only in 
process of construction. In course of time the Apostles' 
letters were exchanged among the congregations and copied 
for reconsideration and instruction. 

Their lack, however, of the things we now possess, 
was, according to their necessities, made up to them by the 
great Head of the Church in the various gifts— of tongues, 
of interpretation, of prophecy, etc., many of which have 
now passed away, as Paul declared they would (1 Cor. 13:8), 
being superseded by the richer blessings of later 



times— the complete and compact Word of God in the 
hands of the people, among whom education has become 
general; and all the wonderful helps to its understanding 
afforded by Concordances, Bible Dictionaries, etc., etc. 

In order that the meetings of the Church should be 
profitable in those early days an orderly arrangement of 
their affairs was enjoined by the apostles, and acted upon 
by the various companies of believers. Those who had 
the gifts of tongues, or interpretation of tongues, or prophecy, 
were not all to speak at once; the unlearned and 
illiterate women of those days (especially in Corinth— see 
our issue of July, '93, page 201) were not to interrupt and 
confuse the meetings, etc., etc. And the whole service 

R1890 : page 260 

was to be characterized becoming dignity, sobriety and 
solemnity; yet with the greatest simplicity, all, in an 
orderly way, from time to time, according to their several 
ability, taking part in the work of edifying and building 
up the body of Christ. Some had the ability to instruct 
the Church in sound doctrine; some had the gifts of 
tongues or of interpretation; some were able to exhort 
and encourage; and all were able to unite their hearts in 
prayer and to lift their voices in praise, in psalms and 
hymns and spiritual songs. (1 Cor. 14:15; Eph. 5:19; 
Col. 3:16.) And thus becoming acquainted with each 
other, they were able to bear one another's burdens, and 
together to advance in Christian growth and development, 
their means of edification being supplied by the Lord, and 
their orderly methods through the advice of the apostles. 
While this order in the exercises of their meetings was 
thus indicated, and was acted upon by the Church, there 
was also an order in the leadership and various duties of 
the Church. Thus, for instance, Paul and Barnabas, when 
they had gathered companies of believers in Lystra, Iconium 
and Antioch, "ordained them elders in every church;" and 
then, commending them to the Lord, they took their departure. 
(Acts 14:21-23.) Paul also commissioned Titus 
to go from city to city, and in every place to ordain 
(appoint) elders, whose duty it was to take the oversight of 
the Lord's flock in their vicinity, to feed them with the 
truth, to guard them against the wolves in sheep's clothing, 
and, in a general way, to act as their representatives. (Titus 1:5; 
Acts 14:23; 20:17,28; 1 Pet. 5:1,2; Acts 15:6,23-28.) 
The qualifications of these elders were also clearly 
set forth by the Apostle. -1 Tim. 3:1-13; Titus 1:5-11. 

ORDER NECESSARY TO-DAY. 



If this order was necessary to the spiritual prosperity 
of the early Church, and, because necessary, was so authoritatively 
enjoined and so universally adopted, so that there 
were no exceptions to the rule in any place, it is certainly a 



question worthy of consideration whether the same necessity 
does not exist among the companies of believers to-day. 

We believe that the same necessity for order and for 
the appointment of elders does exist to-day, and for the 
same good reasons that it existed then, which reasons are 
as follows:— 

(1) Because in the Church, as in a family, there are 
various degrees of spiritual development. Some are babes, 
and need the sincere milk of the Word, while others require 
the strong meat; and it is necessary therefore that some 
one "apt to teach" should be in a position to do so. 

There are also various temptations, trials, difficulties and 
dangers which all are not equally prepared to meet. Hence 
the necessity of wise and discreet overseers, men of some 
experience and ability, deeply interested in looking out for 
the spiritual welfare of all, and capable of instructing them 
in the truth. 

(2) Because now, as then amongst the early Church, 
there are wolves in sheep's clothing who would "privily 
bring in damnable heresies," against which the chosen 
elders should be able to defend the flock; and against 
which they should be able to arm them by leading them to 
a very thorough knowledge of the truth. Then, too, as 

the Apostle forewarned us, "Of your own selves shall men 
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after 
them;" and the faithful elders will be quick to discern and 
prompt to warn and defend the flock against all such influences. 
-Acts 20:28-30; Titus 1:10,11; 2 Pet. 2:1-3. 

(3) Because if no such arrangements and appointments 
had been made in the legitimate way indicated by the 

Apostles, some one will take the leadership and hold it indefinitely; 

and almost imperceptibly a whole company 

will find itself more or less in bondage to that one. Such 

cases have frequently arisen, and brethren have written to 

us for some suggestions as to how they might be released 

without offending or hurting the brother who had taken 

the leading position. 

This taking the leadership has really been a necessity 
in many cases, and has been undertaken generally with 
the purest of motives, and with good results up to a certain 
point; for instance, it sometimes happens on this wise: 
A brother full of love for the truth and of zeal for the 
Lord's cause gathers about him a few who receive the truth 
with gladness, and who desire and need further instruction, 
which he, being more advanced, is able to give; and together 
they grow in the knowledge of the truth, and through 
their united zeal the company increases, until finally it is 
deemed advisable to remove the meetings from private 
parlors to a hall. By this time some other brother in the 
company proves more capable for the larger and more public 
work, but all fear to suggest that the more capable 
brother take the lead, for fear of offending the one of less 
ability, though long recognized and still beloved. In some 
cases even a hint of such a thing manifests a little feeling 
of resentment, and it is plain that the brother has come to 
feel a sort of proprietorship in the company, and he feels 



and speaks of them as his people, etc., etc., instead of as 
the Lord's people. But this is not always the case, we are 
happy to say; for sometimes the grace of meekness continues 
to grow, and self is lost sight of in zeal for the 
Lord's work. 

Again it sometimes happens that some one who is the 
most lacking in the grace of humility, and therefore the 
least adapted to the situation, is forward to take it and 
anxious to hold it; and if he be not sound in the faith, 
the company is soon afflicted with speculations or false 
doctrine whereby many may be stumbled. 

(4) If no orderly arrangement exist in the Church, 
those who are most solicitous for her welfare, and anxious 
to spend and be spent in her service, may sometimes find 
themselves in a most embarrassing situation. Faithfulness 
to the truth often causes division. And some who dislike 
that faithfulness may strongly intimate that the services of 
the faithful are not desired, though such might not be the 
sentiment of all, nor even of the majority of the company. 
Such a one would therefore lack the support which a full 
expression would give, and must therefore fight the battle 
in defence of the flock almost single-handed and alone, or 
else leave them to the mercy of the adversary. 

The fact that things are running smoothly in any 
locality without any systematic order having been agreed 

R1891 : page 260 

upon, or the duties, rights and liberties of the congregation 
thought of, is no guarantee that they will always run 
so. Our ever vigilant adversary will be sure at some time 
to take advantage of every unguarded place or principle in 
the Church collectively, as well as in the individual members 
of it. Therefore as a Church, as well as in individual 
cases, we should 

"Leave no unguarded place, no weakness of the soul, [but] 
Take every virtue, every grace, and fortify the whole." 
The seasons of peace and rest are the times for preparing 
for the emergencies of storm and tempest, which, 
both collectively and individually, we must meet. That 
would be a very short-sighted captain and crew that would 
put out to sea in a vessel prepared only for fair weather. 

R1891 : page 261 

Wisdom counsels that no matter how fair the weather, how 
calm the sea and how balmy the breezes on starting, the 
arrangements for battling with the storms must all be on 
board— the provisions for life-boats, life-preservers, for 
battening down the hatches, etc., must all be on board. 
In these testing times especially, when Satan is most active 
and subtle in his opposition, we need to look well to all the 
precautionary provisions that the Lord, through the 
apostles, has counselled for our protection. 

THE APOSTOLIC COUNSEL COMMENDED. 



In view of all these contingencies we have no hesitation 
in commending to the Churches in every place, whether 
their numbers be large or small, the Apostolic counsel, 
that, in every company, elders be chosen from among their 
number to "feed" and "take the oversight" of the flock. 
And in accordance with the teaching of the Apostle (1 Cor. 12:28,29), 
that God hath set some in the Church to 
be special helpers, teachers, etc., and that all are not so 
qualified, we should expect that the Lord will provide 
some such in every company, and should therefore seek 
to find them there as in the early Churches. While 
brethren from outside congregations may help to start the 
work, and, by their occasional visits, be a fresh stimulant 
to them, each company should furnish its own elders and 
carry forward its own share of the Lord's work as the 
way may open before them. The special field of labor 
for each company is their own locality, as far as they 
can extend their influence; and fervent piety and burning 
zeal among them will not be fruitless. If but little wheat 
can be garnered, abundant testimony to the truth can at 
least be borne. This Gospel of the Kingdom is to be preached 
"for a witness," as well as for the gathering out of "a 
people for his name." Tract distribution, personal visits, 
personal letters and personal conversation (wise and discreet) 
—in the workshops and stores, on the streets, and by the 
firesides— and backed by noble and consistent Christian 
characters and kindly neighborly ministries, are all effective 
means in the interests of the truth, which fervent zeal will 
not overlook. In these various ways all can preach the 
gospel; for all the consecrated are anointed to preach, 
and they need no other authority to do so than that which 
the Lord gives in their anointing with his holy spirit. For 
this purpose our Lord and Head was anointed; and this 
same anointing extends to all the members of his body, the 
Church. -Isa. 61:1-3; Luke 4:16-21; 1 John 2:27. 

THE OCCASION OF CHOOSING ELDERS. 



We suggest that in the matter of choosing elders the 
mind of the Lord may best be determined through the 
agency of his consecrated people. Let the Church (i.e., 
those only who trust for salvation in the precious blood of 
the Redeemer, and who are fully consecrated to him) express 
their judgment of the Lord's will by vote; and if 
this be done periodically— say yearly— the liberties of the 
congregations will be conserved, and the elders will be 
spared much unnecessary embarrassment. If it still be 
deemed expedient, and so manifestly the Lord's will, there 
would be no barrier to the reelection of the same elders 
year by year; and if a change be deemed expedient, the 
change could then be made without any friction or unpleasant 



feelings on the part of any. 

A vote of the Church merely affords the opportunity 
to every justified and fully consecrated believer to express 
his convictions of the Lord's will in the matter— not his 
own will; for if he be fully the Lord's, he reckons his own 
will dead, and he realizes that he must act and speak as the 
Lord would have him do. This method secures to all equal 
rights and privileges. It was probably the method of Titus 
and others who looked after the matter in the early Church; 
for we cannot think they arbitrarily appointed the elders 
without any consultation with the people, who were of necessity 
better acquainted than they, comparative strangers, 
could be. This is also the method mentioned in Acts 6:3-5. 
Remember too that you are choosing servants 
(ministers) and not rulers or masters. This is very different 
from the methods in vogue in the various sects, 
many of which limit most of the privileges to a "clerical" 
class, who lord it over the people; and even in those things in 
which the congregations have a voice, the matter is not in 
the hands of God's fully consecrated, unfettered and spirit-led 
children, but in the hands of such only as have submitted 
to a sectarian bondage, respecting doctrines as well 
as order, not one-third of whom would claim to be fully consecrated 
to God. But in order to be sure that we have the mind 
of the Lord we should make sure that we recognize in the 
vote only such as profess to be justified through faith in the 
vicarious (substitutionary) sacrifice of Christ, and to be 
fully consecrated to him. It might be well, therefore, to 
identify this class before the vote is taken, either by asking 
such to raise their hands or to occupy seats in another part 
of the room. This would help some, too, by keeping 
prominently before the minds of all that faith and consecration 
without which none can hope to be of the Church 
triumphant; and the witnessing of this good confession 
always brings a blessing to the consecrated. 

True, one or a few might not be consistent with their 
profession, but the majority vote would undoubtedly be 
under the Lord's direction, and the expression of his will; 
and, in full faith, it should be so regarded. But it might 
still be urged by some that, notwithstanding their carefulness 
to have the vote of the Church only, the majority 
vote of the Church might still be in error, not expressing 
the mind of the Lord; and the case of the selection of 
Matthias by the eleven apostles to fill the place of Judas 
might be cited as an instance of such failure, together with 
the fact that the Lord simply ignored their choice and 
subsequently made his own choice of Paul. 

This, however, was not a selection by the Church 
under the direction of the holy spirit; for this was before 
Pentecost, the holy spirit had not yet been given (John 7:39), 
and the disciples were not yet recognized of 
God as the Church. Besides, none of the apostles were 
chosen in the same way as the elders of the various congregations, 
nor could they be: the Church, the body of 
Christ, was not yet in existence. Only the Head of the 
Church had yet been recognized, and he had not yet been 



glorified. All of the twelve were chosen directly by the 
Lord, and in due time qualified for their special service to 
the whole body. The appointing of "elders in every 
place" enjoined by the apostles is entirely separate and 
distinct from the appointment of the twelve apostles 
directly by the Lord, in which matter the Church had no 
voice whatever, and could have none. 

As to the number of elders to be chosen in each congregation: 
that might depend on the number of brethren in 
the company qualified for the service. If two or three seem 
capable, the service of the company alternating among 
them would serve to develop the talents of each, which 
might, as opportunity offers, be extended beyond the 
limits of your local group; and the company would also 

R1891 : page 262 

in this way be favored with the varied talents of all. Or 
there might be one or two whose qualifications might be 
recognized as preeminent, and such parts of the service 
might be accorded to them as they would be deemed best 
qualified for. 

The occasion of choosing elders should always be a 
solemn one. It is the Lord's business, and should be done 
with thoughtful consideration, as in his sight. The brother 
who acts as chairman of the meeting should endeavor to 
impress this upon all. If each one in the company seeks 
to know and do the will of God only, and, in harmony 
with his consecration, expresses what he believes to be the 
will of the Lord in the matter, then, on the strength of 
the promise, "The meek will he guide in judgment" 
(Psa. 25:9), the result of such deliberations should be 
accepted by all as the mind of the Lord, the holy spirit 
thus speaking through his consecrated people. Generally 
the result of such deliberations will be a unanimous 
agreement. 

THE QUALIFICATIONS OF ELDERS. 



In 1 Tim. 3:1-7 [See Diaglott] the Apostle describes 
the qualifications of an elder or overseer, and in verses 8 to 13 
the qualifications of an assistant elder are described. 
These verses should be read before the vote is taken, and 
the elder or elders for the chief service should be selected 
first, and then, if assistants are needed, they should be 
chosen later. Among these assistants might properly be 
some sisters; for some of the services can best be performed 
by females, especially visiting of the female sick. 
Many suppose that verse 1 1 above refers to these female 
assistants, as also Rom. 16:1; and it seems very evident 
that in the early Church many sisters did service. The 
choice or vote should be in full view of the qualifications 
mentioned according to the judgment by each of the 
will of the Lord. We quote,— 



"If a man desires an overseer's office [service], he 
desires a good work. [Any service we can render to the 

R1892 : page 262 

body of Christ is a blessed service.] An overseer, then, 

must be irreproachable [of good character], the husband 

of one wife [not necessarily a married man; for both the 

Lord and the Apostle recommend the celibate state as preferable 

(Matt. 19:12; 1 Cor. 7:32,33), but he must not 

have more than one wife, an injunction more pertinent in 

those days than at the present time], vigilant, sober, of 

good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach; not a 

wine drinker, no striker, but gentle; not quarrelsome, 

not a lover of money; presiding well over his own family, 

having his children in subjection with all dignity; (for if 

a man know not how to preside over his own family, how 

shall he take care of a congregation of God?" 

The idea is not, as the common version seems to suggest, 
that these servants of the Church are to rule the 
Church,— to legislate for it and hold it in subjection to their 
will,— but that, with loving interest, they should preside 
over it, looking out for its interests and affairs and counseling 
and assisting as faithful stewards of God. (See Emphatic 
Diaglott.) The Lord Jesus is the only Lord the 
Church needs; and no synods, or councils, or clergy, or 
elders are authorized to assume the prerogatives of the only 
Lord and Head. Brethren in the Church may advise and 
counsel; but in so doing they should endeavor always to 
speak, not their own opinions, but as the oracles of God. 
—"As every man hath received the gift, even so minister 
the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold 
grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the 
oracles of God; if any minister, let him do it as of the 
ability which God giveth: that God in all things may be 
glorified through Jesus Christ." (1 Pet. 4:10,11.) Their 
counsel should be of weight with the Church only as it is 
backed by the Word and spirit of the Lord, of which all 
are to judge individually. But when such counsel is 
founded on the Word of God, calling attention to its precepts 
and commandments, it should have the careful consideration 
of all, in the spirit of meekness. And if, in pride of 
heart, any despise such instruction, through disrespecting 
or lightly esteeming the human instrumentality which God 
has chosen for calling attention to it, the opposition is 
against the Lord and his way. 

It is for this reason that the Apostle urges that we 
"look diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God, 
lest any root of bitterness, springing up, trouble you, and 
thereby many be defiled" (Heb. 12:15); for the grace of 
God, the favor of God, in manifesting his will by making it 
plain from his Word, comes to the Church mainly through 
his chosen human instruments. And if any man, through 
strife or vain glory or from any other motive, seeks to unsettle 
the confidence of the Lord's flock, and to plant a root of 
bitterness in their hearts against such servants as the Lord has 



set for the presentation and defense of the truth, he thereby 
hinders the grace of God to them, and the result is almost 
certain to be the defiling of many. Any who pursue such 
a course are in the Lord's hands for judgment; and, 
whatever their professions, they will sooner or later 
be brought to naught, with all who follow their pernicious 
way. If brethren who are true to the Lord and to 
each other and the interests of the flock differ in their 
judgment of the Lord's will, they should differ in love, 
and should endeavor by prayer and careful study and by 
earnest endeavor to so purify their hearts from every disposition 
that would render them unworthy of the truth, to come 
speedily to the unity of the faith.— "Let us therefore, as 
many as be perfect [in heart, will], be thus minded: and 
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal 
even this unto you. Nevertheless, whereto we have already 
attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same 
thing. "-Phil. 3:15,16. 

"Not a novice [an inexperienced or untried person], 
lest, being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation 
of the devil [i.e., lest like Satan-Isa. 14:13,14; 
Phil. 2:5-9 Diaglott— he become ambitious to be some 
great one, thereby necessitating his abasement; for 'pride 
goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a 
fall']." 

"Moreover, he must have a good report [for honesty 
and general uprightness of character] of them which are 
without [the world], lest he fall into reproach [the reproach 
of hypocrisy] and the snare of the devil." 

"Assistants in like manner ought to be serious, not 
deceitful in speech, not being addicted to much wine, not 
eager for base gain, holding the secret of the faith with a 
pure conscience. But let these also be proved first; then 
serve, being unblameable. Even so must their wives be 
grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things. Let 
assistants be husbands of one wife, presiding well over 
their own families." 

In his letter to Titus Paul adds to these qualifications 
the following,— "Holding fast the faithful word, as he 
hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine, 
both to exhort and to convince the gainsayers; for there 
are many unruly and vain talkers and deceivers,... 
whose mouths must be stopped." How necessary to the 

R1892 : page 263 

prosperity of the flock are these qualifications in their 

chosen elders! Above all things they should choose those 

"sound in the faith," "holding fast the faithful Word," 

and avoid most carefully those who deal in human speculations 

and vain philosophies. This caution indicates also 

that the Church should know positively what its faith is, 

and be able to judge of the soundness of the faith of its 

elders. The faith once delivered to the saints ("That 

Christ died for our sins") must test every item of subsequent, 

advanced truth. And all fanciful speculations and 



philosophies should be disesteemed and discouraged as saith 
the Apostle. --1 Tim. 6:20. 

APOSTOLIC CHARGES TO THE ELDERS. 



Then, when the elders have been chosen and have accepted 
the service, the charges of Paul to Timothy (2 Tim. 3:16,17; 
4:1-5) and to Titus (2:1,7,8,11-15), and 
of Peter in his general epistle (1 Pet. 5:1-11), might be 
read to them in presence of the company, followed by 
prayer that God would add his blessing upon the chosen 
elders, and upon all the company as they shall cooperate 
together in the service of the Lord. 

These words of the Apostles are most solemnly impressive. 
Hear Paul:— "All scripture, divinely inspired, 
is indeed profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may 
be complete, thoroughly fitted for every good work." 

"I charge thee therefore [Timothy], before God, and 
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the living and the 
dead at his appearing and his Kingdom: Preach the word; 
be instant in season, out of season [when it suits your own 
convenience, and when it does not]; reprove, rebuke, exhort, 
with all long-suffering and doctrine; for the time will 
come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after 
their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having 
itching ears [for something new and strange— for human 
speculations and vain philosophies]. And they shall turn 
away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto 
fables. But watch thou in all things [against these evil influences 
and tendencies], endure afflictions [for they are 
sure to come to all who are faithful in the service: such 
are sure to incur the wrath of the adversary who will actively 
oppose them]; do the work of an evangelist, make 
full proof of thy ministry." 

To Titus he says, "But speak thou the things which 
become sound doctrine, ...in all things showing thyself 
a pattern of good works; in doctrine showing uncorruptness, 
gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, 
so that he who is of the opposition may be 
ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.... For 
the grace of God that bringeth salvation is manifested for 
all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly 
lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this 
present world; looking for that blessed hope and the glorious 
appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus 
Christ... These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke 
with all authority [the authority of God's Word, not 
his own]." 

Hear Peter also:— "The elders which are among you 
I exhort, who am also an elder and a witness of the sufferings 
of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall 
be revealed: Feed the flock of God which is among you, 
taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint [requiring 



urging], but willingly [willing to assume the labors and responsibilities 

of the service]; not for filthy lucre, but of a 

ready mind [which loves to serve the Lord, the sheep and 

the truth]. Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but 

being ensamples to the flock. And when the Chief Shepherd 

shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that 

fadeth not away. Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves 

unto the elder: yea, all of you be subject one to another, 

and be clothed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, 

and giveth grace to the humble." 

"Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty 
hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time; casting 
all your care upon him, for he careth for you. Be sober, 
be vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring 
lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour: whom 
resist, steadfast in the faith. ...The God of all grace 
who hath called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, 
after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, 
stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and 
dominion forever. Amen." 

THE EXERCISE OF LIBERTY A SAFEGUARD AGAINST 
BONDAGE. 



Some are so glad to be free from Babylon's bondage 
that they need caution against an opposite extreme— lack 
of order. Some so fear the enslavement of sectarian earthly 

R1893 : page 263 

organizations that they fear to use their individual liberty 
to designate which of their number they believe would be the 
Lord's choice for particular services. They thus risk the very 
bondage they wish to avoid. The tendency in all is like 
a pendulum to go to extremes; but the tendency of the 
Word and spirit of the truth is to "establish, strengthen, 
settle you." The spiritual interests of the Lord's flock in 
any place are matters too serious and important to be left 
to hap-hazard conditions which Satan is very sure to take 
advantage of some time. 

The fact that we have escaped from the bondage of 
Babylon, is no reason why we should discard all order and 
system in our affairs: the early Church might have had 
similar fears; for they had just escaped from the bondage 
of Judaism, and they were also instructed not to be entangled 
again with the yoke of bondage. (Gal. 5:1.) 
The yoke of bondage, however, was not the idea of system 
and order, but the bondage of the old Jewish faith— the 
Law-Covenant. From that they were to remain free; for 
Christ, by his sacrifice, had made them free. Evidently 
the systematic order enjoined upon the Churches and 
adopted by all was not considered a bondage; order was 
established and elders were appointed in every place; and 
the work of the Lord accordingly prospered. 



The principle of order and of recognizing elders duly 
appointed and qualified by the spirit of the Lord— not in 
so-called theological seminaries— and sustaining them in 
their work by the approval and cooperation of the company 
they serve is right, otherwise the Apostles were wrong in enjoining 
it upon the early Church; and the early Christians 
were wrong in not resisting the arrangement. But evidently 
the Apostles and the early Church were not wrong. 
The simple order and arrangement of their affairs proved 
a blessing; and the Lord himself established a precedent 
in acknowledging the arrangement, when, in his revelation 
to the seven churches of Asia, he addressed his messages 
through their representative elders, "angels," messengers 
or servants. -Rev. 2:1,8,12,18; 3:1,7,14. 

We have no controversy with the nominal churches on 
the subject of order, excepting in so far as they have over-reached 
the simplicity that is in Christ, and the order which 
he enjoined through his holy apostles, and have multiplied 
the forms of godliness to the extent that they have 

R1893 : page 264 

lost its power. We should not reject anything merely 
because the nominal churches have it, but we should reject 
all that is wrong, all that is out of harmony with the Word 
and spirit of God. Had we been guided by a mere blind 
antagonism to the various sects, we might have gone to the 
extreme of discarding some old and valuable truths which 
the nominal Christian systems still hold in a way, tho 
now with less and less tenacity. We might, for instance, 
have discarded the doctrines of the vicarious atonement, 
or of baptism, or the Lord's supper, merely because they 
hold them. But, taught by the Word of God, we have 
learned to hold fast that which is good; and among the 
good things is that of doing all that we do in the Lord's 
cause, as in everything else, "decently and in order;" 
but let it be the Scriptural order, and not the order of 
Babylon, which exalts a class of lords over God's heritage 
and ignores the true Head of the Church, which is the only 
rightful authority over it. Forget not that "One is your 
Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren; but he that 
would be greatest among you shall be your servant." 
"Let all things be done decently and in order," and with 
a view to the building up of the body of Christ.— 
1 Cor. 14:40,26. 

THE PREROGATIVES OF THE HEAD OF THE CHURCH. 



It is a mistake to presume that the true Church has no 
bounden responsibilities, that we are all free to do as we please 
—to forsake the assembling of the saints if we please, 
or to associate ourselves with others if we please, or to go 
here and there and gather a morsel of food from all tables, 
good, bad and indifferent. If we truly belong to Christ, 



the only liberty we enjoy is liberty from the bondage of 
sin and death and all the yokes that Satan would impose 
upon us. Our freedom consists in the fact that there is no 
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; we have 
passed from death unto life, and are no more the servants of 
the taskmaster Sin. The old things that pertained to that 
bondage have passed away, and all things have become new. 
This is the blessed liberty of the sons of God. It is realized 
now by faith, and in a measure actually; but by and 
by it will be fully realized when this mortal (blemished and 
imperfect through the fall) shall have put on immortality. 

But having been thus emancipated by Christ from the 
bondage of Sin, we have since come into covenant relations 
with him to do his will, which is also the will of our 
Heavenly Father, even as he also covenanted with God, 
saying, "Lo, I come to do thy will, O my God;" "I 
came not to do mine own will, but the will of him that 
sent me." So, as our Lord expressed it, we whom he made 
free from Satan's grievous yoke have taken upon us the 
yoke and burden of Christ— which is a joyous service. 
(Matt. 1 1:29,30.) This, then, is the extent of our liberty 
if we are true to our covenant; and also the extent of 
our bondage. Praise his dear name! we find the yoke of 
our Lord and Redeemer easy, and his burden light, because 
of his love to us and our love to him. 

The true Church, "whose names are written in heaven," 
is undoubtedly an organization, even in the present time, 
while it is subject to many vicissitudes— its membership 
constantly changing, etc; but it is a heavenly organization, 
not an earthly one. There are two senses in which 
the true Church of Christ may be considered: (1) The 
whole company of consecrated believers from the beginning 
of the Gospel age to its close constitute one body, one 
Church, not many; for the Lord established but one 
Church. And over that one Church he himself is the only 
"Lord" and "Head," the great "Chief Shepherd," and 
"Teacher," and the only authority. This is "the Church 
of the firstborn," whose names are "written in heaven" 
(Heb. 12:23); and those whose names continue there to 
the end of their course, and are not blotted out because of 
unfaithfulness (Rev. 3:5), will be admitted to full membership 
in the Church triumphant at the appearing and 
kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.— 2 Tim. 4:8; 
Titus 2:13; 1 Pet. 1:7; 5:4. 

The Lord himself keeps the Church books— the records 
of our names, and the individual accounts of each 
member: we have nothing to do with that. He enrolls 
all the truly consecrated believers, and no power on earth 
can pluck them out of his hand, or blot their names from 
the records in heaven. (John 10:28,29; Rom. 8:35-39; 
Rev. 3:5.) His unerring wisdom alone is sufficient for 
that, and for all the duties of the office of the Head. It 
is therefore most unbecoming and reprehensible in any 
member of the body of Christ to become heady— to assume 
the authority of the Head of the Church. And such a one, 
if not speedily recovered by the discipline of the Lord, 



he will eventually cut off and cast out as unworthy of any 
place in his body.— 2 Thes. 2:11. 

(2) Another sense in which the Church may be considered 
—which also is a Scriptural sense (Philemon 2; 
Rev. 2:1, etc.)— is that of counting a part as though it 
were the whole. Thus all the living saints may be spoken 
of as the Church of to-day. Or again, any number of the 
living Church assembled together in any place may properly 
be called the Church of that place (e.g., Philemon 2; 
Rev. 1:4; 2:1; 2 Cor. 11:28); for wherever even two 
or three are assembled, the Lord, the Head, has promised 
to be in their midst. (Matt. 18:20.) The general assembly 
will be when all the members are glorified with and 
united to the Head. 

If any inquire how we know the members of the true 
Church, we answer, We know them by their profession of 
faith in Christ, and by the spirit of Christ manifested in 
them. It is his truth, and his spirit, and his presence 
manifested among them, that impels them to assemble together, 
that unites their hearts in the bonds of Christian 
love and fellowship, that inspires them with the same hope, 
animates them with the same joy, and leads them to cooperate 
together in the work of the Lord. If it be asked, 
How shall we deal with one who walks disorderly in our midst 
since we cannot drop his name from a list of membership? 
we answer, We have very explicit directions on this 
point. Now, as in the early Church, there are various degrees 
of advancement among the members, and Paul says 
(1 Thes. 5:14), Some are feeble-minded, comfort them; 
some are weak, support them; but while patient toward 
all, warn the disorderly. Do not mistake the disorderly 
for the weak, and comfort them; but patiently, lovingly, 
warn the disorderly. But after you have faithfully warned 
such a one, if still he obeys not the truth, "note that man, 
and have no company with him that he may be ashamed. 
Yet count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a 
brother." Not until it becomes manifest that the Lord 
has cut him off, may we cease to feel a brother's interest 
in him. 

The Lord also gives explicit directions in cases where 
difficulties arise between brethren.— Matt. 18:15,17. 

The great Head of the Church also furnishes abundant 
means for the edification of his people— for their building 
up in the most holy faith and their development in Christian 
character. Then we have his constant supervision and 
leading throughout our earthly pilgrimage. He is our 

R1893 : page 265 

Head, we are his body; he is our Shepherd, we are his 
sheep; he is our Captain, we are his soldiers. Now we are 
the Church on probation, on trial; now we are the Church 
militant, in the midst of our warfare, hoping by and by to 
be approved as faithful soldiers and worthy to be admitted 
into full membership in the Church triumphant, in power 
and great glory. 



R1894 : page 265 

Thus we see how thoroughly the true Church of Christ 
is organized, under Christ, its Head, even in this probationary 
state, as we journey through the wilderness to our 
promised Canaan. We are all under the orders of our 
great Commander whom all must obey and follow who would 
reach the rest that remaineth for the people of God. Oh, no, 
we are not our own, and have absolutely no liberty to do our 
own will in any matter. All is subjected, even our very 
thoughts, to the will of God in Christ; and our membership 
in his Church is made dependent upon our faithfulness in recognizing 
this and in rendering cheerful, loving obedience. 
We cannot do as we please in any matter: we are strictly 
under law to Christ, whose holy spirit must rule our every 
deed and word and thought; and our constant effort must 
be thus to bring our every power and talent into subjection 
to him. 

In this blessed bondage to Christ, a bondage of love, 
there is the highest sense of liberty, as, one after another, 
the shackles of sin drop from us. The world and its ideas 
and vain ambitions, and follies, and pride, and its superstitions 
and fears cease longer to fetter us, and the windows 
of our minds and hearts are thrown wide open that the 
glorious light of divine grace may stream in, and our hearts 
rejoice and sing. 

THE APOSTOLIC ORDER THE LORD'S ORDER. 



Thus the great Head of the Church has marked out 
our course for us. He has said, "This is the way; walk 
ye in it." He has prescribed all the conditions and arrangements, 
etc., and it is our part to faithfully follow his directions. 
It is to him that the Apostle Paul ascribes the 
orderly arrangement of the affairs of the Church, saying:— 

"And He gave some apostles, and some prophets, 
and some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers; for 
the perfecting of the saints for the work of ministry, for 
the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the 
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of 
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature 
of the fulness of Christ." (Eph. 4:11-16.) Here, as in 
1 Cor. 12:12-20 the Apostle illustrates the relationship of 
the Church to each other and to the Lord by the parts of a 
human body: and he intimates that every member is to be 
nourished and exercised, that the body may be symmetrical, 
perfect. Again the same apostle tells us, "God hath set 
the members, every one of them, in the body, as it hath 
pleased him. [Each should seek to recognize the Lord's 
appointments in his own case, as well as in that of others: 
and each should endeavor to serve according to the 
Lord's recognized arrangement, only.]. ...For the 
body is not one member, but many.. ..And God hath 



set some in the Church; first apostles, secondarily prophets, 

thirdly teachers, etc., etc." We believe that the Lord has 

faithfully performed his part, all along during the age providing 

servants in his Church; but evidently his people 

have not always looked for those of his qualifying and appointing 

and undoubtedly they have missed considerable 

by this failure, and by accepting instead a self-appointed, 

self-exalted, self-instructed and self -perpetuated "clergy." 

There were but twelve apostles, and their inspired 
ministry has been to the whole Church, even to the end of 
the age. They had no successors, but the Lord has from 
time to time raised up teachers and pastors with varying 
degrees of ability, able in measure to instruct and care for 
the interests of the flock. 

The term "elder" seems to be applicable to any or all of 
these servants whom the Lord sets in his Church for its 
edification, some of them having a principal service while 
others are assistants. Thus the Apostles classed themselves 
as elders. (1 Pet. 5:1.) The term "elder" would signify an 
elder brother, not necessarily an elder in years, but matured 
in Christian character. Timothy and probably Titus were 
young. -1 Tim. 4:11,12; Titus 1:4; 2:15. 

If in any company one or more seem to have marked 
talent for the public presentation of the truth, such ability 
should be recognized by all, and all should cooperate in making 
use of it; and special meetings ought to be appointed 
to this end. Such meetings seem to have been rare in the 
early Church, as there were not many gifted speakers like 
Paul or Apollos or Peter. But such talents, when found, were 
used, and were of good service. So it should be among us. 
The talent for public speaking may be ordinary or extraordinary, 
and in either case edifying. The congregations 
should be the judges of that; and if no such talent be found 
public preaching services would best not be held, but instead, 
such other services as would edify more, and for 
which suitable talent is found in the company. 

THE OBJECTS TO BE SOUGHT IN THE ASSEMBLIES 
OF THE SAINTS. 



Note also the objects to be sought in the assemblies of 
the saints and the ministry of elders, etc. It was not 
merely social enjoyment, nor to go through a formal 
routine of service; but it was (1) "For the perfecting of 
the saints for the work of ministry." These assemblies 
were to be training-schools, in which all the saints might 
become the more fully equipped for the service ["ministry"] 
of the Lord— not only the glorious service of the 
future, but also the essential service of the Church in the 
present age, by which the bride is to make "herself ready" 
for the future service. To this end all the saints should 
be diligent students, and the instruction should be as 
systematic and orderly as possible, and with a view to 
thoroughness of development, rather than entertainment. 



We remember that Paul upbraided some who were not sufficiently 
advanced and established for their opportunities, 
saying, "When for the time [in which you have had these 
privileges] ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one 
teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles 
of God [the doctrine of Christ], and. ..have need of 
milk, and not of strong meat."— Heb. 5:12. 

(2) It was for the edifying of the body of Christ,— 
for the knitting of all together in the unity of the faith 
and of the spirit and in love and devotion to God, that 
as one body they might advance in the development 
of Christian character and grace and knowledge toward 
the stature of the fulness of Christ. 

In this view of the object of our assembling together 
we see that we have a most important work to accomplish. 
Let us therefore study to show ourselves workmen approved 
unto God, rightly dividing the Word of truth. It is also 
in this view of the subject that we have commended the 
plan of the "Dawn Circles for Bible Study" mentioned in 
our issue of Sept. 15, as an aid to thoroughness and system in 
our preparation for service, and as one of the means of 
grace; tho not the only one. 

R1894 : page 266 

We advise that one meeting each week be held for 
such purpose, either on the Lord's day, or on some evening 
during the week. If we really believe that the plan of 
the ages is the divine plan, the meat in season in this 
harvest time, and that its times and seasons are of divine 
appointment, then the value of thoroughness in the study 
of it, that we may be able to give a reason for the hope 
that is in us, cannot be overestimated. It is just what all 
need to arm them for the conflicts of this "evil day"— 
these "perilous times;" and for this purpose undoubtedly 
it was given us of God. In such meetings as these the 
stronger can be of great service to the weaker in assisting 
them to put on the whole armor of God and in showing how 
every scripture that may be brought forward fits into its 
proper niche in the divine plan, which is one grand, harmonious 
whole. These and all meetings should always be 
introduced and closed with worship and praise. 

We recommend also a mid-week meeting (devotional 
and social in character, not doctrinal), consisting of prayer, 
praise and testimony; the special object of these being the 
cultivation of the devotional spirit and of Christian fellowship, 
love and communion. Thus we may exhort one another 
and provoke one another to good works. A good 
feature in both of these meetings is the opportunities they 
offer for all to participate freely and to edify one another. 

ORDER IN THE ALLEGHENY CHURCH. 



It may be a matter of interest and profit to many to 



know of the order of the Church here in Allegheny. Of 
course, we have no list of membership, for we leave the 
keeping of the books entirely to the Lord: He knoweth 
all them that are his; and we recognize them by his spirit 
manifested in them. We have preaching, prayer and praise 
in the German language from 1.30 to 2.30 o'clock P.M., 
and in English at 3 P.M. every Lord's day, and a general 
Bible Study in the evening, beginning at 7.30 and preceded 
by a half hour's praise service. 

As we are too widely scattered for a general mid-week 
meeting, we have seven cottage meetings, in different parts 
of the two cities, on Wednesday evenings; and several 
"Dawn circles" are being started on Friday evenings. A 
number of competent brethren have been chosen by vote 
of the congregation to take charge of these meetings, and 
at the end of each quarter they exchange so as to give 
variety to the companies, and the better to acquaint the 
leaders with the spiritual condition of the whole church of 
this place. A few also go out occasionally to adjacent 
towns to extend a helping hand to other little groups. 
Our effort being to draw out and develop as much talent 
as possible in the Church, sometimes one or two names 
are dropped from the list at the end of the quarter and 
new ones supplied, and afterwards those names may be 
picked up again and voted into service. 

In addition to these leaders the company has appointed 
a number of sisters (ten in all), who cooperate 
with the brethren in visiting and general pastoral service. 
These sisters are specially chosen with a view to fitness and 

R1895 : page 266 

to opportunities of time, etc., for the service. Their work 
is chiefly among the sisters, while the brethren who lead 
the evening meetings look chiefly after the brethren. 

This, of course, does not interfere with the duty and 
privilege of all in caring one for another, but it insures a 
systematic care over all, which might otherwise be to some 
extent neglected, as all are not so situated as to have time, 
etc., at their command, and as our time is occupied in a 
variety of ways which make it impossible to properly attend 
to these pastoral duties without such aids. 

At the end of each quarter we meet together with 
these representative brethren and sisters and consult concerning 
the spiritual conditions and needs of the Church 
here. We are happy to say, also, that no note of discord 
or manifestation of strife or vain glory has ever been observed 
among these co-laborers. The work is undertaken 
and accomplished in the spirit of love and meekness, and 
the desire to do good, and is greatly blessed to the edification 
of the dear flock of this place. 

THE RELATIONSHIP OF CONGREGATIONS AND ELDERS. 



To those in position as elders in the Church the Lord 
says, "Be not ye called Rabbi [a great man, a master]; for 
one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren;" 
while to the congregation of his people he also says, "Call 
no man your father upon the earth; for one is your Father, 
which is in heaven. Neither be ye [any of you] called 
masters [i.e., neither give nor receive titles of any kind], 
for one is your Master, even Christ."— Matt. 23:9,10. 

No marks or badges of distinction or flattering homage 
of any kind may be tolerated in the body of Christ. No 
brother, however efficient or useful, should desire it or receive 
it from the church without protest and rebuke; and 
none should so far forget the admonition of the Lord as 
to bestow it. All ye are brethren— brethren of like passions 
and all subject to infirmities; and let each take heed 
that "no man put a stumbling block [to pride or vanity or 
any other evil thing], or any occasion to fall, in his brother's 
way." (Rom. 14:13) Many indeed have been the 
prominent ones in the Church who have been overcome 
by flatteries— undue praise, worshipful reverence— arising 
mainly from the unwarranted presumption on the part of 
the flock that the elder brethren who minister to them in 
spiritual things are beyond the reach of temptation or the 
possibility of stumbling. It is this lack of consideration 
of the Lord's command that often makes the position of 
a leading brother one of peculiar peril. It was flattery 
of the leaders of the Great Reformation that stayed the 
progress of that good work and caused many of them 
of understanding to fall from their steadfastness. (Dan. 1 1:34,35.) 
But let it not be so among us: let each 
strive to shield the other from temptation, and to edify 
and build up in every principle of righteousness and truth, 
and in soberness of mind and watchfulness against all the 
intoxicating influences of the spirit of the world. 

There is a vast difference, however, between a healthful, 
cordial brotherly love and sympathy and warm and 
grateful appreciation of faithful service, and that unwholesome 
sentimentalism which savors of the spirit of 
the world, and which is always as fickle as it is false. The 
manly Christian will always discountenance everything 
that savors of worshipful reverence and flattery; and when 
offered, will say, in manner if not in word, "See thou do 
it not; for I am thy fellow-servant.... Worship God" 
(Rev. 22:9); but the less mature will often court and 
receive flattery to their own injury. It is for this reason 
that the Apostle counsels the choosing of elder brethren of 
established character for leadership, rather than a "novice." 
While the Lord arranged that the Church should have some 
apostles, elders, pastors, teachers, evangelists, etc., he 
would not have us use any of these names as titles of honor; 
and therefore, while recognizing these positions of service 
in the Church, we should always continue to address and 

R1895 : page 267 

to speak of these brethren merely as brethren— brethren 



beloved in the Lord. 

While the Church is thus guarded on the one hand 
against the worldly spirit of vain glory, she is equally 
guarded on the other hand against that cold, unappreciative, 
cynical disposition which in that envious, pharisaical spirit 
plainly says, "Give God the glory, we know that this man 
is a sinner." "We beseech you, brethren," says the 
Apostle, "to acknowledge them which labor among you, 
presiding over you in the Lord, and admonishing you; 
and to esteem them very highly in love for their work's 
sake."-l Thes. 5:12,13. 

Again he says, "Have confidence in your leaders, and 
submit yourselves [i.e., if you, according to the Lord's 
methods, have chosen the right kind, or rather if you have 
permitted the Lord to choose them for you in the way he 
has indicated, as shown above]; for they watch for your 
souls as they that must give account, that they may do it 
with joy and not with grief."— Heb. 13:17. 

Thus, while the elders are cautioned against assuming 
to be lords over God's heritage, the flock is also 
cautioned not to defy the elders, nor to blindly and worshipfully 
follow them without proving their teachings by 
the Word of God, but all, in humility and meekness, are 
to harmoniously cooperate together as one body for the upbuilding 
of itself in love and in all the Christian graces, 
and for the general advancement of the work of the 
Lord.-l Pet. 5:1-11. 

THE ONENESS OF THE BODY OF CHRIST. 



Before leaving this many-sided subject of order in the 
Church, we would also briefly call attention to the Lord's design 
that the whole (living) Church, however widely scattered 
over the world, should be knit together as one. It 
was so in the Apostle's days, and it should be so still. It 
is a pleasant observation that, even with their limited 
means of communication, whenever there was opportunity 
the churches in one place were prompt to send Christian 
greetings and benedictions to those in other places (Acts 15:23; 
1 Cor. 16:19; 2 Cor. 13:13; Phil. 4:21-23; 
Col. 4:14,15; 1 Pet. 5:13; Titus 3:15; 3 John 14); 
and all were subject to the same regulations instituted by 
the apostles, having the "one Lord, one faith, and one 
baptism." Their earnest endeavor was to keep "the unity 
of the faith in the bonds of peace," and to avoid any 
schism in the body of Christ. -Eph. 4:3-13; 1 Cor. 12:25. 

It is noticeable, too, what a beautiful unity of spirit 
and of faith, and what steady cooperation, there was among 
the apostles and elders of the early Church. They were 
all zealously endeavoring to preach "the same things," 
the "sound doctrine," of the truth of which they were 
fully persuaded. One was not endeavoring to eclipse 
another by getting up some brand new patented theories of 
his own. Apollos was not endeavoring to discount the 



teachings of Paul; nor were the elders of the various 
little companies endeavoring to lead the sheep under their 
care into by-paths of speculation and vain philosophies. 
No, it was not so, though from time to time false teachers 
came among them with the evil spirit of vain glory 
attempting these things, to draw away disciples after them; 
but the true ones, on the contrary, were faithful to one 
another, as they were also to the Lord. Paul planted, and 
Apollos watered, and God gave the increase. 

We are glad to say that to a large extent this spirit 
prevails to-day, and we trust it will more and more prevail, 
till we all come in the unity of the faith to the stature of 
the fulness of Christ, as one body under the one Head, 
Christ Jesus, harmoniously cooperating together in the 
doing of his will under the direction of his Word, being 
knit together in love and full of zeal in the Lord's service 
—the great harvest work. 

THE HEAVENLY VS. THE EARTHLY CHURCH 
ORGANIZATION. 



Foregoing we have seen the beauty, simplicity and 
completeness of the organization of the Church whose 
names are "written in heaven." Its only ruler and Head, 
the Lord Jesus, is infallible; God has centralized the 
authority in his hands, and every one of its members is required 
to render loving, loyal and prompt obedience to 
him, not only in their words and conduct, but even in 
their very thoughts. He admits to membership, and, 
when needful, he excommunicates the disloyal, and "blots 
out" their names. 

Its members, firmly united to its Head, and thus to 
each other, according to their degree of development in 
the Master's spirit of love, are required to recognize as 
"brethren" all who have this spirit of love and consecration, 
with "the faith once delivered unto the saints"— that 
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and 
that he ever liveth to make intercession for us. They are 
required to meet together and to edify one another, and to 
conduct their meetings with decorum and order and to look 
out among themselves such as the Lord's Word and providence 
seem to indicate as suitable elders and to give to 
them their public recognition (as by vote for instance) and 
their cooperation in the service. This Church does not 
need to organize; for it has been organized since Pentecost; 
and if a new meeting is started it is only necessary 
for such to recognize the organization and its Head and his 
laws, and to obey them. 

But how great the contrast between this and an earthly 
church, organized according to various human traditions! 
with a self-constituted "clergy" who lord it over the 
"laity" and divide amongst themselves the spoils taken 
from the laity— the filthy lucre, honors, reverence, titles, 
etc.,— from those of the claimed infallible pope down to 



the "inferior orders of ministers;" only exceptional ones 
being ministers indeed (servants of God's flock); the majority 
lording it over God's heritage to the extent that their 

R1896 : page 267 

flocks will permit. Read carefully Jer. 23:1-4; Ezek. 34:1-16. 

The bond of love in the heavenly Church is, in the 
earthly organization, replaced by a selfish bond of sectarian 
pride and a fear that to die outside an earthly church would 
incur eternal woe. For the simple but forcible confession 
of faith in the heavenly Church, they substitute elaborate 
schism-making confessions and tests. Verily the strength 
of the earthly churches is in their carnality, and their 
"laity's" ignorance of the Lord's Word and their individual 
liberties. The individual faith, judgment and liberty 
of their members are surrendered to the congregation 
when they bind themselves with sectarian names, obligations 
and confessions of faith; and the faith, judgment 
and liberties of the congregation are in turn surrendered 
to ruling Presbyteries and Conferences, or to an earthly 
pope. In the heavenly organization anyone may advise 
and point out the Word of the Lord; but none can do more 
without violating the rules and risking his own excommunication 
by the great and infallible Head of this Church. 

The individual liberty of each member of the heavenly 
Church toward each other member, and the complete subserviency 
of each to the Lord only are characteristics of the 
Lord's organization which contrast sharply with those of 
human organizations. 



R1896 : page 268 

THE WOES OF INTEMPERANCE. 

--NOV. 24.-Isa. 5:11-23.- 

Golden Text— "Woe unto them that rise up early in the 
morning, that they may follow strong drink."— Isa. 5:11. 

THE text of this chapter is highly figurative and will 
not bear a literal interpretation. It is a symbolic 
prophecy concerning both the houses of Israel— Israel after 
the flesh, and spiritual Israel, the Gospel church. In 
both cases it applies to the whole nominal Israel, and takes 
no cognizance of the distinctions in each of wheat and 
chaff, or wheat and tares, or "Israelites indeed" and 
Israelites in name only. The prophecy is addressed to the 
Jewish and Christian systems respectively under the figure 
of a vineyard. 

But when the Lord looked for grapes, the fruit of the 
vine, "behold, it brought forth wild grapes." Then he 
inquires what more could he have done to make his vineyard 
produce better fruit, and shows that it was not for any 



lack of attention on his part, but rather because of the 
perversity of the vine, which, even under these favorable 
conditions had greatly degenerated and become "a strange 
vine" unto him. (Jer. 2:21,22.) Our Lord Jesus in 
his parable of the vineyard (Matt. 21:33-43) uses the 
same illustration and applies it to Israel. 

Seeing the double application of the prophecy,* and 
recognizing the fact that its fulfilment upon fleshly Israel is 
in the past, we proceed to note its significance as applied 
to this age in which our interest centers:— 

"He looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for 
righteousness, but behold a cry." (Verse 7.) So it is 
throughout the length and breadth of Christendom. They 
join house to house and field to field. (Verse 8.) The nations 
of Christendom, the religious organizations, the corporations 
and the individuals are all engaged in this business of 
acquiring wealth and property, while the cry of the oppressed 
comes up into the ears of the Lord of armies, who 
by the mouth of the prophet declares woe against this evil 
order of things and against all that participate in it.— 
Verses 9,10. See also James 5:1-6. 

The intoxication here referred to by the prophet is not 
that produced by alcoholic beverages, but that which is 
aptly symbolized by such intoxication; viz., the intoxication 
produced by imbibing the spirit of the world, the 
wine of Babylon.— Rev. 17:2; 18:3. 

"Woe," says the prophet, "unto them that rise up 
early in the morning that they may follow strong drink, 
that continue until night, till wine inflame them!"— that 
is, to those who all day long give themselves up to the intoxicating 
spirit of the world.— Verse 11. 

"And the harp and the viol, the tabret and pipe, and 
wine are in their feasts."— They are given up to pleasure-seeking, 
—"but they regard not the work of the Lord, 
neither consider the operation of his hands." They have 
no interest in the great plan of God, and in his methods 
of working it out: they give themselves up to selfish 
worldly pursuits of business and pleasure.— Verse 12. 

"Therefore my people [those professing to be God's 
people— Christians] are gone into captivity [to ambitious 
leaders who have usurped authority over them, and who by 
their unwise counsel have darkened knowledge, made void 
the word of God and buried deep the precious truth of 
his Word], because they have no knowledge [not being in 
that attitude of heart and mind in which God could teach 
and lead them]. And their honorable men [their clergy 
and bishops and popes] are famished, and their multitude 
dried up with thirst." Yes, there is a famine in the land 
not for bread nor for water, but for the word of the Lord 
—Verse 13; Amos 8:11. 

"Therefore sheol [the grave] hath enlarged herself, 
and opened her mouth without measure; and their glory, 
and their multitude, and their pomp, and he that rejoiceth 
shall descend into it." (Verse 14.) Thus is symbolized 
the fact that the great systems, religious, social and civil, 
that now, unitedly constitute Christendom, shall go into 



oblivion, destruction. --Rev. 16:19; 18:2,3,5,10,16-19. 

"And the mean man [the selfish man who exalted 
himself regardless of others] shall be brought down, and 
the mighty man shall be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty 
shall be humbled"— in the great leveling processes of the 
day of the Lord."— Verse 15. 

"But the Lord of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, 
and God that is holy shall be sanctified in righteousness." 
(Verse 16.) Such will be the outcome of this great day of 
trouble upon the nations of Christendom. 

"Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and 
the waste places of the fat ones [of the rich] shall strangers 
eat." (Verse 17.) Thus shall the whole present order of 
things be reversed; for the Lord will espouse the cause of 
the poor and needy, and especially of those who are of a 
humble and contrite heart.— Psa. 12:5; 34:16-22. 

"Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of 
falsehood, and sin as it were with a cart rope [who scheme 
largely with iniquity and who deal in lying and hypocrisy]: 
That say [by their conduct], Let him [the Lord] make 
speed and hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the 
counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, 
that we may know it." (Verse 19.) Thus in unbelief 
they scoff at the truth now due which disproves the long 
cherished doctrines upon which all of the systems of error 
are built. But the Lord says, "Woe unto them;" for 
their hour of tribulation cometh, and that speedily. 

"Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that 
put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put 
bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!"— that commend the 
errors of human tradition and scorn the divine truth. 
"Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and 
prudent in their own sight!" for "the wisdom of this world 
is foolishness with God."— Verses 20,21; 1 Cor. 3:19. 

"Woe unto them that are mighty to drink wine [those 
who, while professing to be the Lord's people, nevertheless 
greedily imbibe the spirit of the world], and men of 
strength [of intellect and influence] to mingle strong drink 
[to mingle the world's ideas and doctrines and customs 
with a little of the truth perverted and misused and so 
associated with the error as not to be understood, that so 
its power might be lost]: which justify the wicked [who 
thus pervert the truth] for reward [generally for the mean 
reward of popular approval or business or social interest], 
and take away the righteousness of the righteous from 
him [misrepresent those who hold the truth]!"— causing 
many to stumble.— Verses 22,23. 

The remainder of the chapter sets forth in strong and 
forceful symbols the nature of the woe or penalty which is 
to come upon the class described, which corresponds in 
every particular with other prophetic delineations of the 
great time of trouble which is to wind up the affairs of this 
Gospel age and sweep the social and religious world as with 
the besom of destruction, preparatory to the establishment 
of the Redeemer's Kingdom. "He that hath an ear to 
hear let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches." 



"The wise shall understand, but the wicked [perverters 

and scorners of the truth above referred to] shall do wickedly, 

and none of the wicked shall understand"— until 

the judgments of the Lord are abroad in the earth, and the 

Lord speaks unto them in his hot displeasure. 



*See MILLENNIAL DAWN, VOL. II., p. 209. 



page 269 

VOL. XVI. DECEMBER 1, 1895. No. 23. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 270 

Views From the Tower 271 

The Cup of the Lord and the Table 

of the Lord 273 

"Dawn Circles for Bible Study" 276 

Poem: The Plan of the Ages 277 

Bible Study: David Anointed King 277 

Bible Study: David and Goliath 278 

Encouraging Letters 279 

page 270 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS"-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1901 : page 270 

A NEW GERMAN TRANSLATION. 

SOME time since a German brother in conversation with the Editor 
remarked, "Although I am a German, I can understand the English 
DAWNS better than the German translation, which contains too many 
foreign words, not pure German." Investigation proved that, while the 
translation might be termed a good one, its language is in some places 
out of the range of the average reader. 

We have accordingly had a new translation prepared, Brother 
Otto Koetitz being the translator. We have good reason to believe that 
the desired form of language has been attained. 

The first volume is now ready, and the other two are in course of 
preparation. The prices of these will be uniform with the English edition. 
Indeed, for about a year and a half we have been purchasing the old 
edition and supplying them to our readers and to the colporteurs, at these 



prices, although many of them cost us seven cents per copy more than 
this. We will so continue to fill orders for vols. II. and III. of the old 
lot, as our new translation of these will not be ready for some months. 



R1897 : page 271 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE Episcopal Convention has closed its session without 

electing one of its Bishops a "Primus" or 

chief; so that question lies over for three years more. 

The tendency, however, among the "clergy" of all 
denominations, is toward the episcopal form of church 
government, and away from the congregational form. And 
each step in this direction is favorable to the federation of 
all with the Episcopal church. 

The Lutherans are moving for at least one bishop, believing 
that in this form of government lies much of the 
success of Episcopaleans, Methodist-Episcopals and Roman 
Catholics. At their recent Conference at Lancaster, Pa., 
the subject of bishops was freely discussed. The "clergy" 
said that the "laity" favored the movement; and the only 
question amongst the "clergy" seemed to be whether or 
not they should send to Sweden for a bishop. It was not 
claimed that the Lutherans had an apostolic succession of 
bishops any more than have the Methodists; but it was 
claimed that long usage would carry additional respect and 
reverence for the office. 

"Rev. Dr. John Kohler said the church wanted a historical 
succession. He thought a proper authority could not 
sustain the establishment of an indefinite supervision, but if 
the episcopate be established the history of the past would 
be a good authority back of the movement." 

The Baptists are gravitating more and more toward denominational 
organization; and, failing to see the Lord's 
method for supervising the Church, they also are moving 
toward a hierarchy with bishops. These are not proposed 
under these names, but suggested to be (1) A "Permanent 
Council" and (2) "Pastor at Large." These matters, 
recommended by a committee, are set forth in several columns 
of the leading Baptist journal, The Examiner. Apparently, 
by the time the Protestant Federation is ready to 
form, the Baptist churches will be a denomination also and 
ready to be received as a member of the alliance. 



We recently called attention to the fact that the young 
people's societies amongst the United Presbyterians, Methodists, 
Lutherans and Baptists were intended in a quiet way 
to offset the Y.P. Christian Endeavor Society which, starting 
amongst Congregationalists, had proved so popular and 



unsectarian a movement. Now it appears that our Presbyterian 

friends are disturbed on this subject also, fearing 

that their young people will become too independent, and, 

learning to vote for themselves, may learn also to think for 

themselves. A committee appointed to consider the subject 

met in Pittsburg during the past month. It appears 

that young people's societies have already been formed in 

several of the churches hereabouts, and the name Westminster 

is favorably considered. No definite action as to a 

denominational society has yet been taken, but the committee 

will report to the next General Assembly. 

Objection is made that Christian Endeavor societies 
are too "interdenominational," and not calculated to promote 
sectarian "loyalty." The hope was expressed that 
if the General Assembly were to offer some suggestions the 
C.E. Society might accept them rather than risk so important 
a deflection. It is doubtful, however, if it is not 
too late to fight the Y.P.S.C.E. It is as likely to split 
some churches as to split the ranks of the Christian Endeavorers. 
Young Presbyterians are about as independent 
as the old ones. 

After all, though, the liberty and activity of the C.E. 
may yet prove a snare to many of them. Not having the 
great divine plan before their minds, they are open to many 
assaults from which they were previously protected by the 

R1897 : page 272 

bondage of superstition and the errors of their denominations. 
Now is the time to let these Young People have the 
truth, before they fall into the traps of Theosophy, Christian 
Science, Spiritism, no-ransom evolutionism, the infidelity 
of Higher Criticism and Good Citizenship moralism. 



As an evidence of the so-called gospel that is being 
preached, we notice the following among "Summary of 
Principal Sermons" in the N.O. Times-Democrat: 

Rev. F. F. Passmore, Denver, Col., subject, Preachers. 
He said in substance, "Our great preachers to-day are 
preaching for big salaries, fine mansions and sumptuous 
living, and they are getting them." 

Rev. Dr. Lloyd, Christian Church, Nashville, Tenn., 
subject, Ignorance. He in substance said: "The greatest 
tyrant oppressing the masses to-day is King Ignorance. A 
people rushing at such a rate of progress as we are going 
to-day need to keep informed, to think some for themselves. 
They should read the newspapers." 

How to vote is also considered by many preachers to 
be a part of the gospel to-day. As an illustration, on Sunday 
evening, Oct. 20, the Cornell Memorial Methodist 
Church had a political meeting presided over by Mayor 
Strong, to whom it was surrendered by the pastor after an 
opening prayer. The Mayor, the report says, "was greeted 
with loud applause." The N.Y. Sun says, "He told the 



R1898 : page 272 

congregation that 'a better ticket to vote for than the fusion 
ticket' could not be selected; and he complimented 'the 
clergy of New York' for being 'willing to devote an evening,' 
that is, to open their churches on Sunday evening, for 
political meetings in its behalf. 'This is the third church,' 
he continued, 'that I have been invited to attend to-night to 
talk about whom we should vote for, and I suppose next 
Sunday there will be many more churches open for the 
same purpose.' 

"Commissioner Roosevelt then entered the pulpit and 
was received with enthusiastic applause. He made a rattling 
speech in his best vein, hitting out against his critics 
without mercy; and his many spirited sallies provoked frequent 
applause and much merriment." The session closed 
by singing the Doxology. 

In the same great city recently another great preacher's 
gospel was an advocacy of the German Sunday. He (Rev. 
Heber Newton— Episcopalean) explained that the Germans 
have services at 9.30 Sunday morning which are well attended; 
at 1 1 o'clock the children's session has its turn till 
noon. In the afternoon the whole population in families 
visit the beer gardens and chat pleasantly and drink beer 
and listen to the strains of sweet music. Rev. Newton 
pleads for saloons to be permitted to be open on Sunday 
afternoons that the American Christians might similarly 
have the (spiritual?) refreshment of music and beer. 

How strange that those various preachers and their 
intelligent congregations should consider that they preach 
and hear "the Gospel of the Son of God." Ah! they 
think that the old, old story is worn out and has lost its 
charm; they consider the crowds and the applause of men 
and the big salaries,— and these they must have. 

The trouble is that in both the pulpits and pews the 
"tares" outnumber the "wheat," the sanctified in Christ 
Jesus. The gospel, because it acts only upon the heart, 
controls only the "wheat." The preponderating "tare" 
element needs constantly to be rubbing up the outside, 
because inwardly they are full of the spirit of the world 
—pride, ambition, selfishness, envy. "Come out of her, 
my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that 
ye receive not of her plagues."— Rev. 18:4. 



A speculative craze has recently spread over Europe. 
South African gold fields are reported to be very rich; and 
on the strength of this report numerous share-companies have 
been started. The purchasers of these shares are chiefly of the 
"middle classes" who by economy have saved a little 
money, and who now hope by these investments to have a 
comfortable income for the remainder of life. Beginning 
with England, this wave has spread all over Europe. 

Prudent, far-sighted men see that the "promoters" 



who organize these companies and boom them to fabulous 
prices will make immense fortunes (many have done so already), 
and that the people who invest their hard-earned 
hoardings at the boom prices will lose their little alls; and 
they so advise them, but to no purpose;— the whole world 
is racing for wealth. 

The boom may last a year or two, but it must sooner or 
later collapse in a panic. The fluctuations in the value of 
these shares in one day recently was $500,000,000. When 
the crash comes and these investors lose all it will tend to 
make them, the "middle class," sour, gloomy and dejected; 
and thus it will push many of them into the ranks of the 
socialistic and anarchistic, hopeless "lower classes." Thus 
we see another factor preparing for the bringing forward of 
the great crash of the "time of trouble." 



The threatened dismemberment of Turkey is exciting 
great interest the world over. It seems imminent; and our 
"Second Adventist" friends have long held the theory 
that Turkey is the False Prophet of Rev. 19:20, and that 
its overthrow means "the end of the world." As our 
readers are aware, we take a totally different view of these 
things, believing that Turkey has nothing whatever to do 
with the symbolic False Prophet referred to. Should dismemberment 
be determined on it will be done very cautiously; 
for all Europe dreads war as never before. But if 
war should occur, it would by no means be even a part of 
the final "trouble such as was not since there was a nation." 
If this were the year 1905, instead of 1895, the matter would 
have a totally different aspect. How blessed in the midst 
of so many rumors of wars and commotions and trials of 
life to have the peace of God which passeth all understanding 
keep our hearts! Our Master's words were, "My peace 

R1898 : page 273 

I give unto you, not as the world giveth, give I unto you. 
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid." 



We have already called attention to the Jew-haters, 
the anti-Semitic party of Austria. It grows more bitter 
and more strong daily. This party has by recent elections 
gained a large majority in the Municipal Council of Vienna, 
on the proposition that the Jews be persecuted— by being 
refused public office and contracts, that present contracts 
held by them shall be cancelled and that their children be 
separated from others in the public schools: and these are 
only beginnings of persecutions. This Council elected a 
rabid "Jew-hater" for mayor, charged with executing these 
measures. The Emperor, contrary to custom, exercised 
his power and set aside the choice and ordered a new election. 
The Council re-elected the same man by way of 



showing their determination; whereupon the Emperor's 
representative declared the Council dissolved. Great excitement 
results, and the Jews, who represent one-tenth of 
the population and one-third of the wealth, are sorely 
perplexed. 

Yes, we are in "the time of Jacob's trouble;" and we 
shall not be surprised if bitterness against the race shall 
reach such intensity as to expel them from Austria, Germany, 
France, Spain and Portugal— possibly from England. 
The Lord has promised to gather the "remnant of Israel" 
that they shall come back to their own land "with weeping 
and with supplication."— Jer. 31:8-10. 



R1898 : page 273 

THE CUP OF THE LORD AND THE TABLE OF THE LORD. 



"Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils: ye cannot 
be partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of devils. Do we 
provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we 
stronger than he?"— 1 Cor. 10:21,22. 

WE find these words of warning addressed, not only 

to "the Church of God at Corinth," but also 

"to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be 

saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of 

Jesus Christ our Lord." (1 Cor. 1:2.) They apply to 

the entire probationary membership of the Gospel Church 

down to the end of the age. 

Those whose hearts are still loyal and true to God may 
at first think strange of such an admonition, and say, 
"Paul, Paul, why so counsel us when we have no desire to 
touch or taste or handle the devil's goods? Such counsel 
seems to betoken some mistrust of our loyalty to the Lord." 
But Paul replies, "Let him that thinketh he standeth take 
heed lest he fall." The warning is a wholesome one: our 
testing and trial are not yet finished: while the Lord's 
cup is presented to us, the devil, as an angel of light, and 
with great subtlety, presents his cup also; and while the 
Lord spreads his table, the devil spreads his also. 

What is the Lord's cup? Call to mind the Lord's reference 
to it— "The cup which my Father hath given me 
to drink, shall I not drink it?" And again, when its bitter 
dregs were to be drained to the end, hear him pray, 
"O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from 
me! nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wilt." And yet 
again, "O my Father, if this cup may not pass from me 
except I drink it, thy will be done." It is the cup of 
sacrifice, even unto death. And not only is it the sacrifice 
of life, but of reputation and all that humanity holds dear. 
The life is sacrificed in the midst of reproaches and persecution 
and extreme trials of faith and patience. After the 



last supper with his disciples Jesus took the symbolic cup, 
saying, "This is my blood of the new testament which is 
shed for many for the remission of sins. ...Drink ye all 
of it." (Matt. 26:27,28.) The Apostle (1 Cor. 10:16) 
refers to the same cup saying, "The cup of blessing, for 
which we bless God, is it not a participation of the blood 
of the Anointed one?" And so also, "The loaf which we 
break, is it not a participation of the body of the Anointed 
one? Because there is one loaf we, the many, are one body." 

Thus we see that the body of Christ is invited to share 
the same cup with the Head— the cup of sacrifice, of ignominy 
and reproach. "Drink ye all of it." And blessed 
is he who has thus far so faithfully partaken of the 
Lord's cup that he can say, "The reproaches of them that 
reproached thee have fallen upon me." 

We have seen what is the Lord's cup: now what is the 
cup of devils? Well, it is a cup of sacrifice also; and 
those who drink of it sacrifice their true happiness in the 
present life and their prospects for the life to come. 
These, however, are the dregs of Satan's cup: these do 
not appear upon the surface. Its surface sparkles with 
hopes of earthly prosperity, pride, self-exaltation and 
"honor one of another;" and to attain these hopes, time, 

R1899 : page 273 

talent and influence are sacrificed to the bitter and disappointing 
end. 

That is indeed a cup of intoxication, a cup of deceptions 
and delusions, whose awful potency finally is unto 
eternal death. Well does the Apostle say, "The things 
which the Gentiles [the unbelieving world] sacrifice they 
sacrifice to devils, and not to God: and I would not that 
ye [believers, Christians] should have fellowship with devils. 
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils." 
In other words, we cannot partake of the spirit of the 
world, the spirit of selfishness, ambition, pride, and sacrifice 
our lives to these ignoble aims, and at the same time 
partake also of the spirit of Christ, which is unselfish, 
humble, self-denying and glad to sacrifice earthly ambitions 
in the service of him who bought us with his own precious 
blood. We cannot partake of both spirits; for the 
one is the reverse of and antagonistic to the other. "Ye 

R1899 : page 274 

cannot serve God and Mammon." Nor can ye long halt 
between the two. "A double minded man is unstable in 
all his ways," and "Let not that man think that he shall 
receive any thing of the Lord."— Jas. 1:7,8. 

Since this warning is addressed, not to the world, but 
to those who have already pledged themselves to drink of 
the Lord's cup, their partaking now of the devil's cup implies 
their turning away from the Lord's cup. And if any 
are so foolish as to give the consent of their minds to the 
partaking in some measure of both the cup of the Lord 



and the cup of devils,— of the spirit of the Lord and the 
spirit of the world and of devils, of the doctrines of the 
Lord and the doctrines of devils, he is wilfully despising 
his covenant and doing despite to the spirit of favor. 

Let us consider now what is "the table of the Lord." 
It is the board richly spread with a bountiful supply of 
divine truth— bread of life and meat in due season and 
honey in the honeycomb, and the choicest beverages of 
milk and wine, and of the pure water of life, clear as 
crystal. (John 6:32-35; Matt. 24:45; Psa. 19:10; Isa. 55:1; 
Rev. 21:6; 22:1.) It is spread for every one 
that is hungering and thirsting after righteousness; and 
blessed are they that come to it, for they shall be filled: 
they shall be richly fed and abundantly satisfied, and their 
souls shall delight themselves in fatness.— Isa. 55:1,2; 
Matt. 5:6; Psa. 22:26. 

This table of the Lord has been spread for his saints, 
his Church, from the very beginning of the Gospel age; 
and it has always been supplied with meat in season; and 
some of the Lord's people have been appointed to serve. 
Thus, for instance the apostles served in the beginning 
of the age, not only in setting before the Lord's people 
the meat in due season, but also in laying up in store food 
for the Church in future days. (2 Pet. 1:15,19.) Their 
service has been valuable to the entire Church, even to the 
present day. And all through the age there have been 
devout, godly men who called the Lord's people to his 
table, and ministered to them from its bounty; and the 
hungry have been fed and blessed. 

But now the end, the harvest of the age, has come, 
the richest season of all the year, when the buds of prophecy 
and promise have developed and are now bringing 
forth their golden fruit, and the table of the Lord fairly 
groans under its bounty. And not only so, but the Lord 
of the harvest himself, being now present, according to his 
promise, comes forth and serves his people. (Luke 12:37.) 
Here, as never in all the past, the richness and fatness of 
the purposes and promises of God are made manifest in all 
their completeness. Here is a systematic theology such as 
the Church has never before known,— the plan of salvation 
set before us in such order and beauty that it surpasses our 
brightest hopes; a plan consistent and harmonious in every 
part and wrought out silently and grandly through all the 
ages past on principles of the most profound moral philosophy, 
and with a precision and exactness of time and order 
that are suggestive of the mathematical precision of the 
great Designer, Executor and Revealer. So glorious is it 
in its completeness, its symmetry and beauty, that the satisfied 
soul perceives that no addition could be made to it 
without marring its excellence, and joyfully exclaims, "It 
is the Lord's doing and the Lord's revealing, and it is marvelous 
in our eyes;" and "What more can he say than to us 
he hath said" of his wisdom and love and grace? Though the 
Lord makes use of human agency to portray and proclaim 
the riches of his grace and his loving kindness to the sons 
and heirs of God, and though he permits all at the table 



to be co-workers together with himself in serving one another 
at the feast, to God belongs all the glory of both plan and 
execution; and to our Lord and Head belongs the praise 
of this service of the revealing, and of the anointing of 
our hearts to receive it, and our eyes to behold it, and our 
ears to hear it, and our tongues to declare it. Glory to 
God in the highest, and unto the Lamb forever and ever! 
Let the whole earth be filled with his glory! 

While the Lord's table is thus richly spread with a satisfying 
portion for all who hunger and thirst after righteousness 
and after the knowledge of God, whom to know 
is life and peace, there are many other tables spread to 
which the people of God are invited. Papacy has its table 
upon which, with some fragments of truth, are found in 
abundant supply the abominable doctrines of the mass, of 
eternal torment, and purgatory, and the idolatry of Mary, 
and the presumed saints, and auricular confession, and implicit 
obedience to scheming priests, etc., etc. Protestants 
also have their several tables, upon which may be found 
some truth, such as the redemption through the precious 
blood of Christ, baptism, faith in God and in his inspired 
Word, etc.; but oh! what fragments of truth they have are 
all befouled; for, says the Prophet (Isa. 28:8,— and his 
words are true), "All [their] tables are full of vomit and 
filthiness, so that there is no place clean." They are full of 
rejected matter— old errors swallowed in the past with 
thoughtless complacency. But the shakings (Heb. 12:26,27) 
of these judgment times are making the people sick, so that 
they cannot retain those horrid doctrines of eternal torment, 
the predestination to eternal woe of the great majority 
of mankind before they were born, etc., etc. And 
yet, lacking the moral courage openly to disown and abandon 
them, their tables are therefore polluted with the sickening 
rejected matter: their tables are all unclean. 

Before the "shakings" of this present time produced 
the nausea that befouled those tables, many of the Lord's 
dear people were permitted to sit there and select the good 
food and to antidote the poison of the errors with larger 
draughts of the water of life from the fountain of God's 
Word. But now, harvest having come, and the separating 
work being due (Matt. 13:30), all the true people of God 
are called away from those tables to the bountiful harvest 
table where the Lord himself is now serving. In obeying 
the voice of the Lord and abandoning the unclean tables 

R1899 : page 275 

many enemies are made, but blessed are those who have 
the hearing of faith and obey the call to the Lord's table. 
It was of this the Psalmist sung, saying, "Thou preparest 
a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou 
anointest my head with oil: my cup [of blessing] runneth 
over." 

But there are other tables besides the unclean tables of 
Babylon. There are tables of devils: tables laden with all 
manner of subtle and ingenious evil doctrines, bringing in 



"damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought 
them," wresting the Scriptures, perverting them, undermining 
their teaching, and substituting human philosophies. 
Of these are such tables as the Papacy— that "masterpiece 
of Satanic ingenuity," Theosophy, Spiritism, Christian 
Science (falsely so called), Evolution, and all the various 
phases of human philosophy which ignore the doctrine of 
redemption through our Lord's vicarious sacrifice, and aim 
to teach men how to climb up to eternal life by some 
other way. These all are tables of devils, against which 
the Apostle warns us, saying, Ye cannot partake of the 
Lord's table and the table of devils. 

Some, alas! after they have accepted the invitation to 
the Lord's table, and have tasted and seen that the Lord is 
good, do turn away from the Lord's table to the tables of 
devils, apparently thinking they can return at their pleasure 
and be welcomed again at the Lord's table, and come and 
go at will and partake of both. "Oh yes," say they, "we 
are not narrow-minded weaklings, afraid to taste anything 
except what we find on one table. True, the table of the 
Lord is a very good one; but there are good things on the 
other tables too, and we taste every thing; yes, we 'prove 
all things, and hold fast that which is good,' no matter 
where we find it." 

Such, alas! is the attitude of many, who forget that 
"Pride goeth before destruction, and a haughty spirit before 
a fall;" and if the efforts of faithful brethren fail to 
convince them of the error of their way, it is not long 
before they begin to manifest a distaste for the food supplied 
at the Lord's table, and it becomes more and more 
evident that soon they must leave it altogether. The unwholesome 
and poisonous dishes on the devil's table soon 
vitiate the taste, undermine the spiritual health, and produce 
abnormal cravings for that which is not good; and 
the spiritually sick soul has no longer any disposition to 
feast at the Lord's table. Nor does the Lord desire that he 
should; for in leaving the table of the Lord he has done 
despite to the spirit of favor, and if he persist in such a 
course he must depart altogether; for "Ye cannot be 
partakers of the Lord's table and the table of devils." 
"Ye cannot please two masters." 

In the act of going from the Lord's table to the table 
of devils he who does so virtually says that he is not satisfied 
with the bounties of divine providence, and that he 
still has some respect for the devil, the great enemy of 

R1900 : page 275 

God. Thus he proves his disloyalty to God by his fellowship 
with unrighteousness. In quoting the scripture, 
"Prove all things, hold fast that which is good," he 
forgets the accompanying modification, "Abstain from all 
appearance of evil." (1 Thes. 5:19-22.) We have much 
to do, and all we can do, if we do it well, in proving the 
abundant merits of the food upon the Lord's table, and in 
appropriating it to our spiritual life and health and serving 



it to others. We taste and see that the Lord is good, and 
prove the healthfullness of his doctrines, but we have nothing 
to do with the doctrines of devils, except to abstain from 
them, and to warn others of their ill effects, as illustrated 
in those who have tampered with them. 

Any child of God should be able to tell at a glance the 
devil's table from the Lord's table, especially after he has 
been fed at the Lord's table. The foundations of any 
system are easily discovered, and there is only one true 
foundation— Christ, the ransom. "Other foundation can 
no man lay." (1 Cor. 3:11; 15:3.) And any one whose 
soul has been satisfied with the truth, should perceive at 
once the deformity of error. As a musician's ear, trained 
to the beautiful harmonies of sound, quickly detects a discordant 
note, or as an artist's eye, trained to all the fine 
distinctions of form and color and order, quickly marks the 
defective work of an amateur, so the mind and heart, educated 
in the beautiful harmonies and the perfect and artistic 
order and system of the Divine Plan, quickly detect the discord 
of error, and they need no other satisfaction and can 
find no higher delight; and the soul armed with this "whole 
armor of God" needs no other preparation to be able to 
withstand either the subtle or the brazen-faced incursions 
and attacks of error. "Put on the whole armor of God, 
that ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil;" 
rest in the Lord, and be satisfied; and feed at the Lord's 
table only, if you would have that spiritual health and vigor 
which is proof against all the pestilences of this evil day. 

To those who are not satisfied at the Lord's table after 
having feasted there, apply those words of the Lord by the 
Prophet Isaiah (1:1-6), "Hear, O heavens, and give ear, 
O earth, for the Lord hath spoken: I have nourished and 
brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. 
The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib; 
but Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider." 
The ox and the ass know enough to return again and again 
to the owner and crib where hitherto they have been well 
fed. In this they manifest more discretion than those of 
the Lord's people who forsake his table to prove the dishes 
offered on the devil's table, or to turn to the unclean tables 
where all that is good is made unclean by association with 
that which is unclean. 

It is not surprising, then, that the Lord will not permit 
such to return to his table— "Ye cannot be partakers 
of the Lord's table and the table of devils." Why? Because 
in thus turning away from the Lord's table where they 
have been so richly fed, and where the Lord has girded 
himself to serve, they have manifested disloyalty to him, 

R1900 : page 276 

and have despised the riches of his grace, and done despite 
to the spirit of favor. Those who wilfully do so after being 
once enlightened are of that sinful class typified by rebellious 
Israel. The Prophet describes them in no uncertain 
terms, saying, "Ah, sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, 



a seed of evildoers, children that are corrupters! 
They have forsaken the Lord, they have provoked the Holy 
One of Israel unto anger, they are gone away backward. 
....The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 
From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no 
soundness in it." 

Nor are we narrow-minded in confining our studies to 
the divine plan, regardless of all vain philosophies and 
human traditions and speculations; for its scope is as wide 
as redemption, its science the most exact, and its philosophy 
the most profound. Having learned the divine plan 
revealed in the Scriptures, it is the privilege of all who are 
imbued with its spirit to apply its measuring lines to the 
whole matter of divine revelation, and thus, by its assistance 
together with the hallowed influences of prayer and 
communion with God, to receive that education in spiritual 
things which enables us to appreciate with a musician's ear 
the finer strains of the heavenly melody and its precision 
of rhythm and order; and with an artist's eye the fine and 
beautiful shadings of divine wisdom and grace. 

Oh, no! we shall not be narrow-minded in thus following 
the guidance of the Lord into "the deep things of 
God," now revealed in his due time, "which things the 
angels desire to look into," and which will be the saint's 
delight through all eternity. What think you? Will the 
saints and angels be narrow-minded when the devil and his 
tables are all destroyed? Let us away with every evil thing, 
and find our delight in God, and be satisfied with the consolations 
of his abundant grace. Let the language of our 

page 276 

hearts continually be:— 

"No longer far from rest I roam, 
And search in vain for bliss; 
My soul is satisfied at home: 
The Lord my portion is." 



R1900 : page 276 

"DAWN CIRCLES FOR BIBLE STUDY." 



IN our issue of Sept. 15, we commended these as profitable 
for the upbuilding of the Church by establishing 
each one in the general features of the complete plan 
of the ages, whereby alone all Scripture can be rightly 
divided and appreciated. This method has four specially 
commendable features. (1) It brings into use and study 
the entire range of Scripture from Genesis to Revelation, 
instead of confining the attention to a few verses of one 
chapter. It is a topical, instead of a verse and chapter, 
study of the Bible. (2) It leads the mind and heart 



to refreshment in that which we all have proved to be 
rich and nutritive food from the Master's storehouse, 
and away from vain speculations which neither satisfy nor 
strengthen the heart. (3) It accustoms each one to think 
for himself, and to study to arrange his conceptions of the 
truth in harmony with all the Scripture statements bearing 
thereon, and also to express to others the truth which he sees. 
(4) These are the objects of all teachings in the Church, as 
the Apostle states them— "For the edifying of the saints 
"for the work of ministry." 

We notice, however, that a few, very few we are glad 
to say, have totally mistaken the suggestions made respecting 
this kind of meetings, and understood us to advise the 
abandonment of the Bible and instead that the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN be read. Nothing could be farther from our 
thought. As for the mere reading of the BIBLE or the 
DAWN, that can be better done privately, each for himself. 

On the contrary, the suggestion is to make Bible studies 
general; and as the light has come to us all by studying 
God's orderly plan as set forth in DAWN, so it will continue 
to become more and more clear in all its minutiae as we 
continue to study it from the same standpoint. If the Plan 
of the Ages gives the only true outline of the divine plan, 
and if we have learned that outline thoroughly, let us use 
the same helping hand, observe the same divine plan and 
order, in continuing the study of the minutiae of God's 
plan of the ages. 

It is for this purpose that we advise "Dawn Circles 
for Bible Study;" and as an illustration of the proposed 
method we offer the following as a sample analysis of the 
first paragraph of DAWN, VOL. I., viz.— 

What constitutes the divine revelation?— 2 Pet. 1:21; 
2 Tim. 3:16,17. 

When and how did sin come into the world?— Rom. 5:12; 
etc. 

Who is the "Sun of Righteousness"?— Mai. 4:1,2; 
Matt. 13:43; Dan. 12:3. 

When will this "Sun" arise?-Acts 3:19-21; Col. 3:4. 

What will its shining effect?-Mal. 4:1,2; Isa. 60:18,19; 
25:7-9; Acts 3:23. 

What will be its "healing," and how performed?— 
Rom. 5:18,19. 

Do sin and death, directly or indirectly cause present 
"weeping" and trouble? How? 

Upon what sure ground can we hope for the "morning" 
and its "joy"?-Rom. 5:6-8; 14:9; 1 Cor. 15:3,21; 
2 Pet. 1:16,19; Prov. 4:18; Job 14:13-15; 
Psa. 49:14,15. 

Will that "glorious day" be followed by a night?— 
Rev. 21:21-25; Isa. 60:20,21. 

Other Scriptures might be brought forward profitably, 
but all will see the necessity for not permitting too much 
latitude, and the leader of the class will exercise his best 
judgment in kindly reminding any who might be disposed 

R1900 : page 277 



to digress considerably. The class should contain several 
Bibles, and we recommend that all meetings be opened and 
closed with praise and prayer. The plan of some of having 
pencils and noting the references in the margins of 
their DAWNS is also commended. It will be of great help 
to all when endeavoring again to prove the truth to the 
skeptical. 

A Bible-study more interesting or more profitable than 
the foregoing could scarcely be imagined. In this everyone 
can take part; all can thus be assured of the firm foundation 
upon which the good tidings of great joy rest; all can 
edify and build one another up in the most holy faith; the 
"meat in due season," now provided by the Lord for all 
who feast at his table, is thus with an open Bible before the 
entire class, and each one may pass to the others refreshing 
portions. 

A class of three would find abundant and rich Bible 
food for an hour, suggested by this one paragraph; and a 
larger class of say a dozen would scarcely get through with 
it at one meeting. We commend to all the little companies 
of the Lord's flock these "Dawn Circle Bible Studies" 
for one meeting in each week. They will tend to make all 
proficient in the understanding of God's Word which is a 
prerequisite to the required "work of ministry," serving it 
to others. (Eph. 4: 12). It is a much safer plan than to 
meet to speculate and try to make types out of every person 
and every thing mentioned in the Bible, a plan that has 
led many (into pride of skill in making something out of 
nothing and thence) into "outer darkness." And it will 
generally be found much more profitable than to take any 
chance subject, or to be without some previously appointed 
subject. Each lesson should be thought out by all and 
especially by the leader or "elder." However, each class 
ought to be willing to consider any Bible topic suggested 
by any attendant, and considered by a majority of the class 
to be a profitable topic. For this purpose the DAWN lessons 
could be temporarily discontinued or, preferably, extra 
meetings could be appointed. 



R1901 : page 277 

THE PLAN OF THE AGES. 



A beautiful vision of glory has caught my enraptured gaze; 
It is thrilling my heart with gladness, and filling my mouth with praise. 
My soul had so longed for this vision; I knew it must come to view, 
When Faith would behold God's goodness in the light which makes all 

things new. 
And so I have searched for the treasure, believing I yet would find; 
And that God in his infinite mercy would open my eyes, so blind, 
To see the Truth in its grandeur, all fresh with the dews of grace, 



And sparkling in the glory that beams from the holy place; 

To know his love, passing knowledge in its length and depth and height, 

With a breadth no man can measure, and a strength sin cannot blight. 

The Lord hath his time appointed to fulfil our hearts' desires, 

And there comes an hour in his "due time" when the weary watch expires. 

So, standing upon my tower in the dawn of a better day, 

And waiting there for the vision he promised should not delay, 

I saw God's plan of the ages on tablets of truth made plain, 

And the love wherewith he loved us, and his plan man's love to regain. 

Oh, truly, the scene was blessed, transcending my noblest thought; 

With my cup of joy overflowing, I cried, "What hath God wrought!" 

In the past I had had some glimpses of what his great love might be; 
But the scene had so many shadows it seemed a vast mystery. 

The creeds of men, and false doctrines, had formed a veil o'er my eyes, 

And the truth of God looked sombre when hidden 'mid such disguise; 

But now it is joy and gladness, "glad tidings of great joy!" 

And e'en if I had a thousand tongues I could each one employ 

To tell it out to his people, and call to his saints beloved, 

To come and gaze on the vision with the shadows all removed; 

To trace with love's guiding finger, in the light of the holy oil, 

God's plan for the world's redemption from sin and all its turmoil. 

For, Oh, such a vision, surely, will quell all their doubts and fears; 

And such a bright dawn of promise will banish night's falling tears. 

Then come to the watch tower, pilgrims, come up to this height serene, 
And gaze on this rapturous vision, and take in the blessed scene, 
'Til the truth of God, so mighty, shall break every captive's chain, 
And the bliss that was lost in Eden is restored to mankind again. 

F. G. BURROUGHS. 



R1901 : page 277 

DAVID ANOINTED KING. 

-DEC. 1.--1 SAM. 16:1-13.- 



Golden Text— "Man looketh on the outward appearance, 
but the Lord looketh on the heart."— 1 Sam. 16:7. 

IN selecting David to reign over Israel God chose one 
who was not only suitable to the necessities of that 
people and time, but one who aptly prefigured the Christ, 
Head and body, selected during the Gospel age and anointed 
to sit on the throne of the Kingdom of the Lord. 
In this view of the matter the golden text forcibly reminds 
us of the statement of the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. 1:26), "Ye 
see your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men 
after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble, are called: 
But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to 
confound the wise, and God hath chosen the weak 
things of the world to confound the things which are 
mighty; and base things of the world, and things which 



are despised hath God chosen; yea, and things which are 
not, to bring to naught the things that are; that no flesh 
should glory in his presence." 

God looked for the same characteristics in David that 
he now seeks in those whom in this age he calls to be 
anointed for the Kingdom. He found in him faith, meekness, 
courage, energy and loving obedience. Yet he was 

R1901 : page 278 

young and inexperienced and untrained and unskilled in 
the duties of the high office to which he was called. This 
latter condition, which, in the estimation of men, would 
have been an insurmountable barrier, was no obstacle in 
God's sight; for God is able to inspire his called ones with 
his spirit and to arm them with his might. So he did with 
David, and so he does with the Christ— our Lord Jesus and 
his body, the church. In the Psalms of David his typical 
character is very clearly indicated, sometimes personifying 
Jesus our Head, and sometimes the whole body of Christ. 
Thus, for instance, when he says, "They part my garments 
among them, and cast lots upon my vesture," the reference 
is only to our Head; while in other cases, as in Psa. 23, the 
application is to the whole body, whose Shepherd is the 
Lord Jehovah. 

It required the two reigns of David and Solomon to 
represent the great work of the Lord's Anointed. David's 
reign represented the work of the church in the flesh, while 
Solomon's reign represented the work of the church glorified 
and at rest from all her enemies. 

David when anointed was but a youth. He was not 
one, however, who wasted the precious spring time of life 
in sowing "wild oats." He was a bud of promise, a 
noble youth,— meek, modest, gentle, faithful, courageous 
in the line of duty, and brave to face danger and to endure 
hardness in any good work, especially wherever the interests 
of God's cause or God's people were at stake. Seeing in 
him this sterling stamp of character God called him to 
higher service. So he has been calling and anointing with 
his holy spirit a similar class all through the Gospel age. 
They are the Lord's anointed kings; but their kingdom, 
like that of David, is not established: they are surrounded 
by enemies on every side as was David, and the whole time 
of their life in the flesh is a continual warfare as was his. 
Like David, too, they have had it in their hearts to build 
the temple of God in the present age, that all the world 
might come and worship. But this privilege is not granted 
to the church in the flesh, even as the building of the typical 
temple was denied to David, but was reserved for Solomon, 
to whom the Lord gave a rest, peace and prosperity which 
made it an apt symbol of the reign of the glorified 
church.- 1 Chron. 22:7-9. 

But while David was not permitted to build the temple 
of God, he was permitted to gather together and prepare 
the materials for the building. So the church in the flesh 
makes ready the materials for the temple of God which in 



the dawn of the Millennium will come together noiselessly 
as did Solomon's temple, without the sound of a hammer. 
David's warfare, then, was a type of the warfare of the 
whole church, Head and body, while in the flesh, against 
the principalities and powers of darkness on every side 
that oppose her to the very end of her earthly course, so 
that, though she is anointed for the kingly office, she is 
never established in power, peace and security to the day of 
her death. Her work on this side the vail is to war a good 
warfare, and to industriously gather the materials and prepare 
the living stones for the glorious temple which shall 
by and by call all the world to worship. 

Beyond the vail of the flesh this same anointed company 
(all the faithful overcomers of this age) will enter into 
the glorious reign prefigured by the reign of Solomon— 
"They shall rest from their labors, and their works follow 
with them." (Rev. 14:13.) And the temple of God 

R1902 : page 278 

shall rise and shine in its beauty, and in it shall all the 
nations of the earth be blessed, which blessing was typified 
by the abundant blessing, peace and prosperity of Israel 
during the reign of Solomon. 

Let all who have this glorious hope in them remember 
the words of our golden text— "The Lord looketh on the 
heart." He is looking to see who is worthy to sit on the 
throne of his Kingdom; and has shown us very clearly the 
traits of character for which he is looking. It behooves 
us, then, to see that our hearts (our will, purpose, intention 
and effort) are in such a condition of loyalty, faithfulness 
and obedience as will bear the inspection of the all-seeing 
eye, while we remember for our encouragement that, as 
shown in the type, no conditions of birth or station or 
circumstances can form any obstacle to our acceptance with 
God and our future exaltation with Christ if we are 
faithful. 



R1902 : page 278 

DAVID AND GOLIATH. 

-DEC. 8.-1 SAM. 17:38-51.- 

Golden Text— "The battle is the Lord's."— 1 Sam. 17:47. 

THE lesson to the Christian to be gathered from this 
narrative is briefly embodied in the golden text— 
"The battle is the Lord's." Let him ever bear this in 
mind, and daily go forth to battle with the great powers of 
darkness, strong in the strength which God supplies, with 
the faith, courage and heroism that distinguished David, 
and no foe can stand before him. The one great essential 
to victory is faith. "This is the victory that overcometh the 



world, even our faith." "Without faith it is impossible to 
please God" or to secure his interposition on our behalf. 

Having faith, we need no carnal weapons, and no 
armor of human invention is of any service to us; but 
trained and practical faith can work wonders as great as 
did David's sling and stone. The sling and stone were not 
an untried weapon with David. He was in constant practice 
with them, and thus he had gained skill and confidence 
in their use. So the Christian must practice dependence 
upon God continually in all the small affairs of life, and 
then when the giant trials come his practised faith will be 
abundantly able to meet and overcome them. And the 

R1902 : page 279 

more severe the trial, the more glorious the victory of faith 
and the greater the strength of character derived from its 
exercise. Doubtless it was the previous struggle with the 
lion and the bear, and the victory God gave him then, that 
gave David such boldness in defying the power of Goliath. 
So every battle we fight and every victory we win through 
faith in God develops strength for future conflicts and 
makes the more sure our final overcoming. 



R1902 : page 279 

ENCOURAGING WORDS FROM FAITHFUL WORKERS. 



New York. 

DEAR BROTHER AND SISTER RUSSELL:-You are entitled 
to a little report of our "Dawn Circle for Bible 
Study." We have been longing for a Sunday afternoon 
meeting, and have prayed for a brother in our midst to be 
touched with the spirit of truth to take the care of such a 
meeting. At one time it looked as though our requests 
were to be granted, but every hope of a present answer was 
taken away as we found unwillingness or faintheartedness 
among all the good men we thought interested. So the 
meeting must be abandoned or I must take the forward 
step, which, in the strength of the Lord, I did, and announced 
a series of Bible studies on the Plan of the Ages 
with chart illustrations. Last Sunday we began with but ten 
present; nevertheless the Lord was present to fill all the 
vacancies, and we spent a blessed time. All expressed 
themselves as greatly interested and enlightened, and purposing 
to attend regularly and to bring others. It was all 
the Lord's doings. 

I was led in opening to give a little of my experience 
in Bible study, past and present, and the dear friends 
seemed very much touched, so much so that when I came 
home I thought I would try to express the same in verse, 
and wrote the enclosed, which I know is too long to be used 



in the TOWER; and which please return to me, as I have 
no copy. 

We have a table at the meeting place, containing tracts 
and books and TOWERS, which we urge the attendants to 
take with them; and last week they did so very generally; 
so we hope for good results from this mode of circulating 
the truth. You must count us now as really a little Church, 
and pray for us daily. Remember especially the poor earthen 
vessel the Lord has to use, that his may be all the glory. 

Your sister in His service, F. G. BURROUGHS. 

[We are well pleased with the report of your "Dawn 
Circle for Bible Study." We think that under the circumstances 
there you have done right to step forward and take 
the initiative, which we perceive you have done in the 
spirit of meekness with all deference to the Lord's will in 
the choice of brethren generally for the more public service. 
But if there be no brother in the company sufficiently 
or equally competent to lead, then the interests of the 
flock should not be permitted to suffer from that cause, 
when a sister with the necessary qualifications stands ready 
with consecrated talents meekly and faithfully to serve them. 
We call to mind that once God raised up a female judge 
in Israel; and if in these days of more general education 
and enlightenment he should bring forward some sisters 
with marked meekness, faithfulness, sobriety and ability to 
serve his flock with a little more prominence than others, 
we may not despise these indications of the Lord's will. 
No brother who is a mere novice in the knowledge of the 
truth, or a mere babe in Christian experience, should be 
asked to take a leading part merely because he is a brother. 
If a sister have preeminent talents, by all means use them. 
You did well, too, in starting the class with a Chart 
exposition. 

Believing all will enjoy our Sister's poem, "The 
Plan of the Ages," we here published it on another page 
of this issue. --EDITOR.! 



Virginia. 

DEAR SIR AND BROTHER:-I loaned the DAWN to a 
man recently, whose comments were, "Oh! I must go over 
it again;" adding, "It is splendid." 

I find that very few members of the church wish even 
to talk about Christ's coming now. Of course, there is 
but little oil in their lamps. Some tell me I would be 
frightened at his coming. The idea of being frightened 
at the coming of my Brother, with whom I am on the best 
of terms of love; never! Neither will any Christian who 
is striving and praying without ceasing. 

Well, as the child grows in grace his troubles accumulate; 
hence we have to tighten the cords of prayer. 

Since Christians are liable to sins of omission or sins 
committed inadvertently, or sins committed because of 
doubt as to whether "so and so" is a sin (And so many 
take advantage of this doubt!), I am constrained to ask 



them to read the seventh chapter of Joshua, which clearly 
explains why prayers are so often not answered. 

In this chapter it is recorded that God said to Joshua, 
"Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face?" 
Joshua had asked God why it was that Israel was defeated 
in battle, and his army put to flight? God answered, The 
children of Israel cannot stand before their enemies, because 
a theft has been committed by one of the people. 

Thus we see that our prayers and our efforts in life will 
not be blessed by our heavenly Father if our hearts are 
sinning against God as did Achan, who with his sons and 
daughters was put to death for the theft in question. Thus 
it is that millions of good deeds and fervent prayers are 
nothing in the sight of God. Why? Because a wrong 
has been committed, and until reparation has been made 
it will be vain to plead at the throne of God. 

Our faith may be strong; we may love God; if we are 
his children he does love us; but if we have committed 
that which is evil in his sight, until we make a clean surrender, 
our prayers will not be answered: there are formidable 
barriers between us and heaven. 

To any in that condition I would say: You promised 
an unconditional surrender when you declared you would 
stand on the Lord's side. Do you not know that you did? 
But probably "one thing thou lackest;" and doubtless 
you know what it is. Does the thought of surrendering it 
make you sad? Is it a "sweet morsel?" Ask yourself 
what is its name! Is it worldly gain? malice? envy? 
revenge? or a want of charity? with which you have built 
a barrier around yourself, excluding your prayers from 

R1902 : page 280 

heaven? Be it what it may, you will be compelled to 
make a clean surrender ere you can expect a realization of 
divine favor. Will you surrender now? or will you continue 
your warfare against your own soul, and remain like 
an army that is whipped and continues to fight until nearly 
annihilated over a long and fruitless retreat? 

The religion of many who profess to be God's children 
is of three kinds. Either they have never become children 
of God, and hence their religion is wholly theoretical; or 
they have been truly converted, but fail to live a consistent 
Christian life; or, not having kept very close to our 
Heavenly Father, temptation has found them unsheltered, 

R1903 : page 280 

sin has crept in and taken root and developed to such 
alarming proportions that suddenly they awaken to a sense 
of their condition, and become doubtful as to whether God 
really owns them or not. [A small minority, having by 
their own experience or that of others come to appreciate 
the above dangers, are living close to him; and because in 
Christ they endeavor to do always those things which please 
Him, they are able to approximate the sentiment expressed 



by him when he said, "I know that thou hearest me always." 
-John 11:42; 8:29.-EDITOR.] 
Yours in Christ, LEWIS W. BURWELL. 

South Dakota. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I am still holding the 
truth, and hope to remain faithful to the end. 

I have just returned from Minnesota, where Bro. Melin 
has been preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom. Many 
Swedes are stepping into the light there. I have visited 
N. Dakota twice this summer, and have been blessed and 
encouraged. 

Three years ago I preached the gospel of restitution 
in my native country, Norway. Many were interested, 
and would, I believe, have been brought into the full light, 
if I could have remained longer with them. I intend to 
go back soon. 

Yours in the faith, K. P. HAMMER. 

page 280 

Alabama. 

DEAR BRO. RUSSELL:-I am getting more and more 
every day into the knowledge of our gracious Lord and 
Savior Jesus Christ and God's glorious plan for redeeming 
poor fallen man. I have been a student of the MILLENNIAL 
DAWN series for about one year. I am entirely a 
different man to what I was when I first commenced their 
study, and since through a diligent search of the Scriptures 
I have come over on the Lord's side and have left Babylon. 
I am now happy in Christ, when before all was dark and 
gloomy. I was raised a Methodist, my father being an 
itinerant Methodist minister. He says their church is not 
what it used to be when he was actively engaged in the 
service. He is very much grieved that the ministry and 
the church have so far retrograded from its old teachings. 

I am studying hard and praying that I may not only 
hold on to what I already have but that I may see more and 
more of God's glorious plan, and receive "meat in due 
season" for the household of faith, which is so necessary 
for growth and development in the Christian life that 
I am trying to live. A great field is open here for the 
spread of the truth. Pray for me, dear brother, in my solitary 
efforts for its advancement, and "Pray the Lord of the 
harvest, that he will send forth more laborers into his 
harvest." Your brother in Christ, J. L. BAKER. 

Nova Scotia. 
DEAR TOWER:— I have heard that some of the members 
in the church from which I withdrew have been enquiring 
of the minister and elders why I left; and they 
have been told that I did not leave the church, only withdrew 
from the eldership. And on the strength of that 
they have called on me for money for the church. I was 
going to write the minister and explain to him my reasons 
for coming out of Babylon, but fear he would not read my 



letter before the congregation. He knows my position, 
for I have sent him many tracts and TOWERS. 

I see in a recent TOWER that you have prepared a 
letter for just such cases, and I gladly avail myself of the 
chance to set some of my friends at rest on the matter. 
See enclosed order. 

Yours in love, PETER DOUGLAS S . 

R1903 : page 280 

New York. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:-I have made a startling 
discovery lately. Although I left the M.E. church four 
years ago, I find upon inquiry that the minister under 
whose pastorate I left the church did not take my name off 
the church roll as I told him to do. And he has misrepresented 
me greatly. A great many regard me as a backslider, 
others think me an infidel, etc. I have searched 
into the matter and brought these things to light. Your 
suggestion about the letters of withdrawal in a recent 
TOWER seems to me very good, and I will be glad to avail 
myself of them. I am glad so much provision is made by 
the Lord for all his sheep, and praise him for his bountiful 
providence. 

May the Lord abundantly bless and use you is my 
prayer every day. Continue to pray for me. 

Yours in Him, ARTHUR CLARK. 

[The "Withdrawal Letters" were meant for just such 
cases, or, rather, to prevent such misrepresentations. They 
are kindly presentations of our reasons for standing separate 
from sects of "Babylon." They show that we feel 
no bitterness, but only love and sympathy, toward all of 
the Lord's sheep,— whether in or out of Babylon. Use 
these letters freely. They are now a number of the O.T. 
Tract series.— EDITOR.] 

page 280 

Oregon. 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELLr-Enclosed you will find one 
dollar for a WATCH TOWER subscription for a brother to 
whom I have already sold DAWNS. He is delighted with 
them. 

Am happy to say our "Dawn Circle" is making progress 
and I have strong hopes it will be a fruitful source of 
growth in the truth and knowledge of God in just the manner 
the Lord delights in. (See Jer. 9:23,24.) It is this that 
has caused us so much joy. Bro. Mogensen has been baptized, 
and is full of preparations to go forth colporteuring. 

Yours in love and the faith, T. H. LLOYD. 

Scotland. 
MR. RUSSELL: -Early this year MILLENNIAL DAWN 
VOL. I. came into my hands, I might say heart; for no 
book ever laid hold of me in the same way. I cannot tell 
you what it has done for me and cost me already. It is no 



small thing at sixty-seven to be turned upside down and 
outside in, until I don't know where or what I am, only a 
sinner saved by grace, and that I stand on the Word which 
liveth and abideth forever! Many are the questions I would 
ask if I saw you face to face. I want to prove all things by 
the Word. Praying that God may use and bless you in 
work for the saints, 
I remain yours very sincerely, MARY DRUMMOND. 



page 281 

VOL. XVI. DECEMBER 15, 1895. No. 24. 



CONTENTS. 



Special Items 282 

Views From the Tower 283 

Poem: Lead Thou Me! 285 

Tract Society's Report for 1895 285 

Thy Shield and Thy Reward 287 

The Law of Development 288 

Bible Study: David and Jonathan 290 

Bible Study: The Birth of Christ 291 

Bible Study: Review 291 

page 282 

SUBSCRIPTIONS AND BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS 
-ADDRESS TO- 

TOWER PUBLISHING CO., BIBLE HOUSE, 58 & 60 ARCH ST., 
ALLEGHENY (NORTH PITTSBURG), PA., U.S.A. 

SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 A YEAR, IN ADVANCE, 

INCLUDES A SUBSCRIPTION TO "THE OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS "-QUARTERLY. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, N.Y. DRAFT, MONEY ORDER, 

OR REGISTERED. FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN 

MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. SPECIAL TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR, AS FOLLOWS: 

Those of the interested, who by reason of old age or accident, or 
other adversity are unable to pay for the TOWER will be supplied FREE, 
if they will send a Postal Card each December, stating their case and 
requesting the paper. 



R1908 : page 282 

"THE TESTIMONY OF THE LORD IS SURE." 

"Stand fast in the faith, quit you like men, be strong." 

"Take unto you the whole armor of God that you may be able to 



withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand." 
"Watch and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 



"GOOD HOPE" SUPPLEMENT. 

AS usual at this season we enclose blanks for the convenience of 
those who desire to use them. The knowledge of what may be 
expected is very helpful in gauging beforehand the work that may be 
undertaken. No obligation is incurred by filling out these blanks: they 
state very plainly that they show only what you hope by God's grace to 
do. Should you not do as well as you "hope," the balance will not be 
charged or in any manner considered a debt. The report for the past 
year, furnished in this issue, should be very encouraging to all concerned. 

page 282 

THE TOWER FOR 1896. 

AS will be seen by the terms, above, ZION'S WATCH TOWER desires 
to visit regularly all who desire its visits. The terms are so liberal 
that none need be without it— for all can command at least a postal card 
for a request to have it as one of the Lord's poor. We desire, however, 
to hear from all if they desire to have these semi-monthly calls; for we 
do not wish to send it where it is unwelcome or merely tolerated. 

We, therefore, ask to hear from all readers as promptly as possible. 
If the money for 1896 is not convenient to you now, say so. If too 
poor to afford it, state that. Do so before your name is taken off our 
lists. Expect tag on Feb. 1 TOWER to show credits received by us up 
to December 31. 



R1903 : page 283 

VIEWS FROM THE TOWER. 



THE Prophetic Conference mentioned in our issue of 

October 1 has just been held (December 3-6) in 

Allegheny, instead of in Pittsburg and at the date first proposed. 

Four of its sessions were held in the Fourth U.P. 

Church, and the remainder in the First Presbyterian 

Church, opposite the Bible House. 

Although not a conference in the sense of interchange 
or discussion, its meetings were very enjoyable to all interested 
in the second coming of our Lord. 

The speakers, mostly Presbyterians and United Presbyterians, 
included Bishop Nicholson, of the Reformed Episcopal 
Church— all men of ability— and much truth was 
set forth. So far as we noticed (and it gave us great satisfaction), 
every speaker acknowledged the Bible as the only 
inspired authority, and appealed to it as the only test of 
what they presented, and many of them scored the "higher 



critics;" and the value of our Lord's sacrifice at Calvary 
was also made prominent, as the only basis of true faith and 
of our acceptance before God. 

We were disappointed, somewhat, that after pointing 
out clearly, from the Scriptures, that our Lord's second 
coming will not be after the conversion of the world, but 
before it, and after showing ably that all of God's past and 
present dealings, for six thousand years, are but preparations 
for the Millennial Kingdom, the speakers seemed to 
overlook the most important part of this subject; viz., 
What will be the character and extent of the work of 
Christ and the Church for the world of mankind during 
the Millennium? But then we must remember that these 
dear brethren do not yet see that the full meaning of the 
ransom for all is a full opportunity for eternal life for all. 
They hold that those of mankind living at the time of the 
establishment of the Kingdom will be blessed with special 
opportunities for coming to a clear knowledge of the truth, 
and thus of attaining everlasting life in "the only name;" 
but they do not see that the "blessed hope" extends to the 
millions and billions of earth that have gone into the tomb 
without either faith in or knowledge of "the only name." 
Thank God! we can see that the "ransom for all," given 
by our Lord, included those who are prisoners in the great 
prison house of death (sheol— hades); and that by and by, 
in promised "times of restitution" (Acts 3:19-21), the 
prison doors shall be burst for them by the great Redeemer 
(Isa. 61:1) and "all that are in the graves shall hear 
his voice and shall come forth" "and they that hear [obey] 
shall live [everlastingly]." (John 5:25.) And to ascertain 
which will "hear [obey]," all must stand before the great 
white throne of justice, then established, and be judged 
[tried] according to the things written in the "books [of 
the Bible]" (Rev. 20:11,12), even as the Church is now 
being judged during the Gospel age. 

We were pleased to note the reverent interest of so 
many of our fellow citizens, and are more than ever convinced 
that there are thousands of true "sheep" in Babylon whose 
eyes and ears will yet open to the good tidings of great 
joy for "all people." After the various sessions several of 
our brethren were active in distributing OLD THEOLOGY 
TRACTS-"Bringing Back the King," and "Do You 
Know?" which were well received, some inquiring for 
more for their friends. One or two of the speakers made 
some caustic references to the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS and 
to MILLENNIAL DAWN, but this we feel sure was only because 
their eyes are only partially open to the truth. In 
most of them we feel that we could discern a large measure 
of the Master's spirit, by which together with their faith in 
the Redeemer we recognized them as brethren in Christ, 
even though they cannot yet venture to bear the reproaches 
of the whole truth. 

R1903 : page 284 

We believe that good will result from the Conference. 



Already many are inquiring for more light, and we are giving 

it to them as best we are able. We fear that some of the 

dear friends in their zeal for the truth offend and separate many 

who need our help and whom we desire to assist. The Bible 

expresses some hidden truths in very forceful language— 

"mother of harlots," etc.— but it is our judgment of the 

Lord's will that, while we are not to shun to declare the whole 

counsel of God, we should do so as wisely and lovingly as possible, 

and instead of adding repulsive vehemence, to such 

strong passages of the Lord's Word, as would make our hearers 

misjudge our motives, we should "speak the truth in love" 

—explaining such passages in their kindest rather than in 

their severest light, showing that not persons but systems are 

referred to. We urge that all remember to copy our Lord, 

of whom it was written, "Grace is poured into thy lips." 

"His mouth is most sweet." Let all the cutting be done 

by "the sword of the spirit," the Word of God. 

As a further comment on the Conference, which we 
believe will interest you all, we give below an article by the 
Editor, published in the Pittsburg Post, Dec. 9:— 
"To the Editor of The Post: 

"It is reported that I approached the Prophetic Conference 
in Allegheny and requested an opportunity to present 
views in opposition. The impression thus given is very 
erroneous, and I crave a little of your space wherein to 
correct it. 

"In the first place, I made no such request; nor did I 
authorize anyone to make it for me; nor did I know of any 
such intention on the part of my friends. Indeed, so far 
from desiring to oppose the gentlemen, I have heard as 
many of them as possible, and with great interest and 
pleasure. I am glad, indeed, that truths so important are 
handled in so scriptural a manner, and glad, also, that so 
many of our fellow-citizens are availing themselves of these 
privileges. The speakers are certainly far in advance of 
Christian thought in general on this subject of the long-promised 
Millennial kingdom. 

"As many are querying what are our points of difference, 
I will state them briefly. 

"(1) The conferees hold that our Lord Jesus is still 
a man, and that his return will be in the flesh. 

"I hold that the Scriptures teach that he is no longer 
a man, a fleshly being, but that he is now a spirit being, as 
he was before he was made flesh; that he humbled himself, 
and took the fleshly form of a servant only for the 'suffering 
of death' (Heb. 2:9); that, having accomplished man's 
redemption by the sacrifice of himself, he was glorified with 
the glory he had with the Father before the world was; and 
that hence he is not to be expected to return a flesh and bone 

R1904 : page 284 

being, but a spirit being. When made flesh he was made 
lower than the angels, but now, highly exalted by the Father, 
he is far above angels. (Phil. 2:9; Eph. 1:20,21.) Hence 
his coming as a spirit being would not be visible to men, as 



he declared before he died, 'Yet a little while and the world 
seeth me no more.' (John 14:19.) The Apostle also declares 
that we know Christ after the flesh no more (2 Cor. 5:16); 
and even at his second coming, 'without holiness 
no man shall see the Lord.' (Heb. 12:14.) He assures us, 
however, that the holy ones shall be changed and made like 
Christ (spirit beings), and that, when 'changed,' they 
shall see him as he is.— 1 John 3:2. 

"(2) The Conferees hold that the Kingdom of God 
will be a fleshly kingdom, with an earthly court, of which 
Christ and his saints in the flesh will be the kings, etc., 
associated with which will be the kingdom of Israel— all 
fleshly and all visible. 

"I hold that the Kingdom of God (Christ and the 
saints) will be a spirit kingdom, as invisible as that of Satan, 
the present 'prince of this world'— because it will be composed 
of spirit beings. The power will be everywhere present, 
ruling and overruling, for the welfare of the redeemed 
world during the 'times of restitution.' (Acts 3:19-21.) 
First blessed under the Kingdom will be Israel, whose 
fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob (not spirit beings, but 
resurrected and perfect men), shall be recognized by Israel 
and all the nations as the 'princes' (Psa. 45:16) of earth, 
and as the representatives of the invisible spirit kingdom 
of Christ. Hence it is written: 'The Kingdom of God 
cometh not with observation— neither shall ye say, Lo, here! 
or lo, there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is [to be] 
in your midst [everywhere].' 

"(3) The conferees hold that the 'Man of Sin' of 
2 Thes. 2:3-8 has not yet come, and they are looking for 
and expecting him daily, rather than expecting the Lord. 
They expect that this wonderful human being will pervert 
the hundreds of millions of India, China, Africa and the 
islands, and (no less wonderful) the civilized millions of 
Europe and America to believe in him as God; so that all 
(Jews, Mohammedans, Buddhists, Brahmins and Christians) 
except the elect Church will worship him as the Almighty 
God. And this stupendous work, and much more, he is 
expected to accomplish in less than seven years from the 
time he makes his debut. 

"But to me such expectations are both unreasonable 
and unscriptural. It is unreasonable, in my judgment, to 
suppose that while millions of Christians and millions of 
money have failed to make any impression upon the heathen 
millions in eighteen centuries, one literal 'man of sin' 
could ever, under any circumstances, accomplish such a 
work. And as for the civilized nations, they daily grow 
less reverential toward both God and man; and nothing 
would seem to me more improbable than that a short seven 
years should witness so radical a change, and that a human 
being would be mistaken for God and be worshiped as God 
by all except the 'saints.' True, a miracle could be performed; 
but God works no miracles of that kind. 

"As to the unscripturalness of such expectations, I am 
prepared to furnish to all who will request it, the evidence 
that this passage of the Scriptures (which to my brethren 



seems to necessitate such an incredible exposition) has already 
been fulfilled in every particular. These brethren, instead 
of looking for the 'Man of Sin,' should recognize him, 
and should now be looking for the 'parousia'— the presence 
—of our Lord and the setting up of his Kingdom. 

"I must, of course, take exceptions to the peculiarly 
horrifying expectations of Bishop Nicholson— that our sun 
will shortly meet with an accident, which will so intensify 
its heat as to kill off all of earth's population except the 
few who shall hide among the icebergs. The good Bishop 
has gotten unduly excited. There is no danger of such 
calamity. Prophecies now in course of fulfilment, which 
would be interfered with by such a program, are our sure 
guarantee. Even the bishop must concede that the time 
between now and 1897 is very short for this, in addition to 
his 'Man of Sin' program, and the return of the Jews to 
Palestine. 

On the other points, I am in substantial accord with 

R1904 : page 285 

the utterances of this Conference. And while I should be 
very willing to discuss these points of difference, either 
publicly or privately, with these or any other earnest Bible 
students, at any time, I totally disown any hostility toward 
these gentlemen and their worthy themes. 

"It may be expected that I should make some reply 
to Prof. Morehead's strictures upon my publications, called 
MILLENNIAL DAWN. When the gentleman says that these 
deny the bodily resurrection of our Lord, etc., and that 
they teach that Christ 'was here in 1874 and will be here 
again in 1914,' he greatly errs, and, no doubt unwittingly, 
bears false witness against his neighbor, as the thousands 
who have read MILLENNIAL DAWN could testify. But his 
charge, that our Lord Jesus Christ was created, has enough 
truth in it to require an explanation. 

"The Professor holds that our Lord Jesus is one and 
the same person as the Heavenly Father; and the difference 
of names merely represents different offices and characteristics 
of this one being. 

"To my understanding of the Scriptures, the oneness 
existing between the Father and the Son is not a oneness 
of person but of sentiment and will, just as the true Church 
of Christ, although of many persons, is ultimately to be 
one— not one person, but one in faith, hope, knowledge 
and service. Thus our Lord prayed for the Church— 'that 
they may be one as we are.' (John 17:12,21.) Scriptures 
proving that the Father and Son are not one in person 
are numerous, and familiar to all. And, if they are two 
persons, which was first, according to the Bible, the Father 
or the Son? The names themselves explain: Father signifies 
sire, life-giver; Son signifies offspring. To this 
thought the following and all scriptures agree. 

"Our Lord Jesus' words were: 'My Father is greater 
than I.' (John 14:28.) 'The Father hath sent me.' (John 5:37,27.) 
'Not my will, but thine [Father] be done.' 



(Luke 22:42.) 'Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, 
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was.' 
(John 17:5.) 'To him that overcometh I will grant to 
sit with me in my throne, even as I also overcame and am 
set down with my Father in his throne.' (Rev. 3:21.) 
The emphatic apostolic statements are that the Heavenly 
Father was the Creator of our Lord Jesus. Hear their 
testimony— He is the 'first born of every creature'— 
literally 'first brought forth of all creation.' (Col. 1:15.) 
He was the 'beginning of the creation of God.' (Rev. 3:14.) 
He was not only the beginning but the ending; not 
only the first, but the last, of Jehovah's direct creation. 
(Rev. 1:17; 2:8.) This 'Only begotten of the Father,' 
in whom dwelt all the Father's fullness, was designed in all 
things to have preeminence above all others— that all should 
'honor the Son even as they honor the Father' (John 1:14; 
5:23; Col. 1:19); and hence, as the Father's representative, 
'all things were made by him, and without him was 
not anything made that was made.' (John 1:3.) To this 
agree the words of the Apostle 'To us there is but one 
God, the Father, of whom are all things and we by him.'— 
1 Cor. 8:6. 

"Speaking of the Millennial kingdom, the Apostle 
declares that God the Father subjects it to Christ, and that 
when by his reign evil shall be subdued, Christ will deliver 
up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; that Christ our 
Lord will be subject to the Father.-l Cor. 15:24,27,28. 

"We commend the Scriptures cited to the careful 
consideration of the thoughtful. 'Thy word is truth!' 

"Thanking you in advance for your courtesy, I subscribe 
myself, yours respectfully, CHARLES T. RUSSELL." 



R1912: page 285 
LEAD THOU ME! 



Lead thou me ever! Lead thou me! 

Dark is the way; by faith alone I tread. 

Thus in each age thy saints have walked with thee, 

Content to "bear the cross," as thou hast said. 

Dead to the world! Alive, dear Lord, to thee! 

Oh! well we know, dear Savior, thou art near, 

And though the way be dark, love knows no fear. 

Lead thou me ever! Lead thou me! 
And as by night the pillared fire did shine, 
O'er Israel's path to the dividing sea, 
So now thy light serene illumines mine. 
And armed with peace divine, thy saints can stand the strain, 
E'en though they wealth and honor must resign; 
For we endure with thee, with thee to reign. 
FROST JOHNSON. 



R1904 : page 285 

TRACT SOCIETY'S REPORT FOR 1895. 



OUR accounts are run from December 1 to December 

1, in order to permit our report to reach you before 

January 1 . The present report is for the year ending 

December 1, 1895. We recognize our stewardship as being 

unto the Lord, and trust that the use made of the time, 

opportunity and means has been pleasing and acceptable 

through him to the Father. But inasmuch as our fellow-contributors 

to this Fund are to be sharers in our Lord's 

"Well done!" it is proper that they should know of the 

results of our united efforts, and thus share our present joys 

and encouragements. Amongst these co-laborers we reckon 

not only those who contributed funds, "Good Hopes," 

etc., and those who contributed time and strength, as Colporteurs, 

but those also who, having no opportunity for the 

latter service and no means for the former privilege, have 

"done what they could" in circulating OLD THEOLOGY 

TRACTS and DAWNS and TOWERS. Nor do we forget to 

reckon amongst these helpers those whose opportunities for 

service are few, whose efforts are necessarily confined to the 

building up of their own characters, and the few with whom 

they are associated, and who often cheer and encourage us 

with kind words of love, sympathy and fellowship, assuring 

us as some do, that no day ever passes without their mention 

of us before the throne of grace. Yes, these too, in 

thus "holding up our hands" do a service that is appreciated 

both by the Lord and us. 

R1904 : page 286 

Notwithstanding the fact that the year has been far 
from a prosperous one with many, it has shown a slight increase 
over last year in the sales of MILLENNIAL DAWN, a 
slight increase in the Tract Fund receipts, a considerable 

R1905 : page 286 

increase in the WATCH TOWER subscription list (the surest 
index of the number deeply interested), and quite a large 
increase in the tract-pages circulated. The work in England 
and Scotland has made quite an advance within the 
past eight months— three brethren having found greater 
opportunities for serving the truth than they had previously 
recognized. 

These annual reports are among the best evidences of 
the progress of the work of grace, no less than the work of 
service (financial conditions being kept in mind); for it 
requires heart-interest to touch the pocketbook, also to 



circulate unpopular literature. By this rule of evidence it 
would appear that those favored by the Lord with a knowledge 
of his gracious plan are growing more "fervent in 
spirit, serving the Lord." But in still another way we 
are enabled to know of your welfare; viz., by your letters. 
Through these we learn of your hopes and fears, your difficulties 
and perplexities, your successes and discouragements 
as individuals and as companies. Through these 
letters we know that many of late have been passing 
through severe trials and testings which we trust will all 
work for their good— purifying them as gold is refined, by 
the elimination of its dross. "Pray one for another," 
and, "Brethren, pray for us." 

This pastoral work extends all over the world; for the 
"harvest" work extends now to every land. The same 
mail which brings many queries on many subjects, and requests 
for remembrance in prayer, and kind expressions, or 
occasional fault-findings, from all parts of our land and 
Great Britain, sometimes brings also an inquiry from individuals 
or groups of the interested in Africa, or India, or 
Australia, or South America, or the West Indies, asking for 
advice from God's Word concerning the ways of life. 
Some of these require no reply; or only a reference to a 
back number of the TOWER or to the DAWN, while others 
require replies at considerable length. But all that we can 
do is gladly done, for the Lord and his people. It will, 
perhaps, surprise some to learn that we received about 20,000 
letters during the past year, 12,939 of which were answered. 

In the handling of this correspondence, and in other 
departments of the work, we are blessed by the Lord in 
having assistants whose hearts and hands join with ours in 
this blessed service to the King, his people and his truth. 
All are actuated by the spirit of the Master, so that they 
do not count their lives (time, talent, strength) precious 
unto themselves, that they may be spent "in the 
service of the King." 

In the Treasurer's Report herewith presented you will 
find no salaries of thousands of dollars— the item which 
usually eats up such funds. The office expenses, including 
the items of rent, fuel, light, taxes, etc., are borne by the 
TOWER PUBLISHING CO. 

SECRETARY'S ACCOUNT. 



During the year from December 1, 1894, to December 
1, 1895, there have been circulated, at the expense of the 
Tract Fund, 

Copies of the OLD THEOLOGY TRACTS, 1,440,374 

" ZION'S WATCH TOWER, 122,616 

Since tracts vary as to the number of pages, it is customary 
to state their circulation by pages. The foregoing, 
so stated, represent 26,505,972 pages. 

The total number of copies of MILLENNIAL DAWN circulated 
by the cooperation of this fund, but not at its expense, 



was 87,526. 
TREASURER'S ACCOUNT. 



EXPENDITURES: 

For Tracts, and for TOWERS sent out free, $ 8,388.53 

Postage, freight, wrappers, etc., 826.63 

Labor, for mailing same, 520.00 

Foreign translations, etc., 844.40 

DAWNS to the poor, and hopeless, long 
standing, abandoned debts of former 
Colporteurs, etc. (Monies ever received 
on these accounts will be credited 

to the Tract Fund direct.), 896.95 

Interest on accounts of Colporteurs, etc., 

owing to TOWER PUBLISHING CO., 570.71 

Expenses of traveling Evangelists, 1,172.63 



Total, $13,219.85 



RECEIPTS: 

From "Good Hopes," 5,868.85 

" other sources, 7,351.00 



Total, $13,219.85 



These reports are certainly very encouraging to all 
who love the Lord's cause, and who, being blessed thereby 
themselves, are seeking to bear the "harvest" message and 
to "gather together" his saints unto HIM. (Psa. 50:5.) 
They will help to offset discouragements which are sure to 
come to us all. One item alone is unfavorable— that of interest. 
The debts for which the Tract Fund is responsible 
to the TOWER PUBLISHING CO., and for which the latter 
has pledged its credit (notes), because of the money stringency, 
and because of our desire to assist the colporteurs 
and others, has climbed to the large sum of $10,623.31 
against which there is an offset of $1,1 1 1.48, paid in advance 
by some of the most successful colporteurs, and subject to 
their future orders. This leaves a net balance of $9,5 1 1 .83 
on which we pay interest. In view of this we must refuse 
additional credits to those already in debt, and ask them 
to use every reasonable effort to cancel their indebtedness, 
and thus relieve us of trouble and loss of interest. (This 

R1905 : page 287 

indebtedness is entirely aside from WATCH TOWER subscriptions 
in arrears, and those which are supplied free to the 
Lord's poor. We do not wish to stop your paper so long 
as you are interested in it. See page 2 and write at once.) 

Let us unite our prayers and efforts that the year beginning 
may show "a work of love well done" on the 
part of each of us severally and all of us collectively. Experience 



proves the wisdom of the Lord's arrangement that 
"his people" should be developed by "overcoming;" 
and that their love and harmony with his spirit, should thus 
be put to the test. Let us watch and pray, and continually 
seek to provoke one another to love and good works. 

Great Shepherd of the sheep, continue, we pray thee, 
to lead and direct thy flock! 



R1905 : page 287 

THY SHIELD AND THY REWARD. 



"After these things the word of the Lord came unto Abram in 
a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield and thine 
exceeding great reward."— Gen. 15:1. 

THESE words were addressed to the "father of the 

faithful," and as a heritage they descend to his 

children— to all those who are of the faith of Abraham 

(Gal. 3:7; Rom. 4:16), whether of the fleshly or the 

spiritual seed. Abram had entered into covenant relationship 

with God. God had called him to separate himself 

from his native country and kindred and friends to follow 

the course of his providential leadings toward an unknown 

land. And Abram, in full reliance on the promise of God, 

had obediently severed the familiar social and business ties, 

and, with his wife and family and father and nephew who 

shared his faith and obedience to God, started on his pilgrimage 

to the unknown land. And having entered the 

land and received the promise— "All the land which thou 

seest, to thee will I give it and to thy seed forever," etc.— 

though he was not then permitted to own a foot of it, he 

wandered up and down in it as a pilgrim and stranger, encountering 

difficulties, too, in coming in contact with the 

godless inhabitants of the land and with the Egyptians, yet 

always believing that what God had promised he was able 

and willing also to perform in his own good time and way. 

But that which taxed Abram's faith most was that, as 
the years rolled by, not only was the promise of the land 
delayed, but also the promised heirs who should inherit it; 
for not even one heir had yet come. 

It was in one of these seasons of discouragement— 
though not of despair, for Abram never relaxed his faith, 
but trusted and hoped still when in darkness and perplexity 
—that God in a vision graciously encouraged his fainting 
heart with the above words of cheer and hope— "Fear 
not, Abram: I am thy shield and thine exceeding great 
reward." Then Abram was permitted to inquire into the 
mysterious ways of God and received the renewed assurance 
that the promise had not been forgotten, and that his hope 
would certainly be realized. 

We find a very similar fatherly providence in the case 



of Jacob, who also, in the faith of Abraham, had forsaken 
all to follow the Lord's leading. In a time of great perplexity 
and trial of faith the Lord appeared to him in a 
vision prophetic of the future glory of his Kingdom and 
of the communication of its heavenly and earthly phases, 
and again confirmed his covenant unto him (Gen. 28:10-15); 
and Jacob arose from his sleep on the stony pillow, 
bearing in mind the bright vision of the Kingdom glory— 
of the messengers of God ascending and descending upon 

R1906 : page 287 

the ladder suspended 'twixt earth and heaven— refreshed 
and comforted, saying, "Surely the Lord is in this place, 
and I knew it not.. ..This is none other but the house 
of God, and this is the gate of heaven."— Gen. 28:16-19. 

Thus God has always been watchful over his people, 
never suffering them to be tempted or tried beyond their 
power of endurance, yet permitting them often to be very 
severely tested. The consolation here offered to Abraham 
is that offered to all who are of the faith of Abraham, and 
its parallel in the New Testament is that precious statement 
of our Lord (John 14:21-23), "He that loveth me shall 
be loved of my Father, and I will love him and will manifest 
myself to him, ...and we will come unto him, and 
make our abode with him." So in the midst of all the 
temptations and trials that beset us in our earthly pilgrimage, 
while we walk by faith toward the blessed inheritance 
reserved for the overcoming saints, we also may recognize 
the voice of our God, saying, "Fear not: I am thy shield, 
and thine exceeding great reward." 

"Fear not," beloved; "there is no fear in love; but 
perfect love casteth out fear; because fear hath torment" 
(1 John 4:18); "If God be for us, who can be against 
us?" or "Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's 
elect?" Say in your heart as did Paul, "I am persuaded 
that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, 
nor powers, nor things present, nor things to 
come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall 
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus. "-Rom. 8:31-39. 

Do hosts of foes oppose themselves— place obstacles in 
your way, hinder your influence and seek to dishearten you 
by heaping upon you reproaches, and do circumstances seem 
to conspire against you to fill your heart with alarm and 
dread? say to your soul, "Fear not," "hope thou in 
God," and mark his loving providences as— 
"Through waves and clouds and storms, 
He gently clears thy way,"— 
until a blessed acquaintance with God through such experiences 
develops in the heart that perfect love that casteth 

R1906 : page 288 

out fear. Then shall you enter more and more fully into 
the blessed rest of faith, and like the eagle that soars above 



the storm cloud, live at such an altitude of Christian experience 
as to enable you to rejoice in the Lord always and 
in everything to give thanks. 

"Fear not, I am thy shield," saith Jehovah. Then 
"Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou 
disquieted in me? Hope thou in God." He would not 
have one of his children live in an atmosphere of tormenting 
fear, but would have them happy and always rejoicing 
in the glorious liberty of the sons of God, free from all 
fear and corroding care by simply trusting in him, ever remembering 
the blessed promise— "The Lord Jehovah is a 
sun and shield [to shine upon our pathway and into our 
hearts and to protect us from all the fiery darts of the 
wicked]: the Lord will give grace and glory; no good 
thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly."— 
Psa. 42:5; 84:11. 

"I am [also] thy exceeding great reward." Notice, 
the promise is not put in the future tense, having reference 
to the promised glory of his people in the ages to come; 
but it is present, "I am," etc. Yes, the abiding presence 
of God, manifested to the hearts of his people now, even 
to-day, in the midst of its cares, its vexations, its labors, 
its trials of faith, patience and endurance, this is the blessed 
present privilege of all his saints. And not only the presence 
of God, but also of his dear Son, our Lord and 
Savior, is also vouchsafed to us so long as we faithfully 
maintain our covenant relations with him. 

Should the child of God, the heir of glory, the inheritor 
of all the exceeding great and precious promises, 
and the present companion of Divinity itself which condescends 
to our low estate, ever feel desolate or forsaken 
or alone? or fear that his love will ever forsake or leave 
him to be tossed helplessly upon the billows of misfortune 
at the mercy of the prince of this world who now worketh 
in the hearts of the children of disobedience? Ah, no ! 
Greater is he that is for us than all they that can be against 
us. We are not alone in the world; for we have the blessed 
promise, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee." (Heb. 13:5.) 
Nor is the smallest interest of ours overlooked.— 
Matt. 10:29-31. 

How truly "exceeding great" is this present "reward" 
of the faithful saints who are daily and hourly walking 
with God— going about the Father's business, spreading 
abroad the honor of his name, meekly bearing the reproaches 
of Christ, enduring hardness as good soldiers in 
his service and taking up their cross daily and following 
in the Master's footprints. Truly we can say to the world, 
as did our Lord, "I have meat to eat that ye know not of." 
The world cannot comprehend our joy, nor know the 
sweets of this fellowship with God and with his dear Son; 
for "The secret of the Lord is [only] with them that fear 
him. "-Psa. 25:14. 

This joy in the Lord is, however, also compatible with 
much suffering; for the saints are all to be made perfect 
through suffering, which was true also of those who shall 
constitute the earthly phase of the Kingdom. And, like 



their Lord, Christ Jesus, they will all be considered of the 
world as "smitten of God and afflicted." This is because 
the world cannot comprehend either the plan or methods 
of God for the refining and perfecting of the gold that shall 
by and by shine in the glorious Temple of God. Consequently, 
like faithful Abraham, we must be content to walk 
with God by faith and not by sight, like him hoping to the 
end for the promise, not expecting here to realize aught 
but the earnest of our inheritance, which we have in the 
present reward of the divine presence and approval. 



R1906 : page 288 

THE LAW OF DEVELOPMENT. 



"When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood as 
a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, 
I put away childish things."— 1 Cor. 13:11. 

SPIRITUAL law is as fixed in its principles and operations 

as is physical law. If it were not so the physical 

could not be so frequently used as it is for illustrations of 

spiritual things. Thus, for instance, in spiritual life, as revealed 

in the Scriptures, we have duplicated that principle 

so well known in physical law, of growth and development 

—first the blade, then the ear, and afterward the full corn in 

the ear; first the infant, then the boy, and afterward the full 

grown man; first the babe in Christ, then the growing 

child, the young man, and finally the full stature of a man 

in Christ. (Heb. 5:13,14; 1 John 2:12-14; Eph. 4:13-15.) 

In both cases there is also a marked similarity in the 

process of development. As in nature both plant and 

animal life are sustained by appropriate nourishment, food, 

light, heat, air, etc.,— thus strengthening them to perform 

the various functions of their being, so the spiritual new 

creatures in Christ must have and appropriate proper nourishment 

that they may continue to live and grow. There 

is this difference, however, to be observed between the 

physical and the spiritual life in the processes of development; 

viz., that the former matures quickly, while the latter 

is of slow growth— a plant to bloom in eternity. 

As new creatures in Christ— babes in the family of 
God— we realize our adoption as sons only when we have 
renounced the vain pomp and glory of this world and turned 
fully to God, claiming no righteousness of our own, but 
humbly accepting the imputed righteousness of Christ. 
No one is even a babe in Christ who still cherishes iniquity 
in his heart, or who fails to recognize his need of the 
covering of Christ's righteousness. But having been converted, 

R1906 : page 289 



turned about, from sin to God and righteousness, 

having learned of Christ, having put off the old man (the 

carnal, sinful disposition) and put on the new man, which, 

after God, is created in righteousness and true holiness 

(Eph. 4:24), and having been renewed in the spirit (disposition) 

of our minds, we are reckoned sons of God, babes 

in Christ. And from that infantile standpoint, which has 

in it, undeveloped, all the elements of the man, the duty 

and privilege of such is to grow, to develop as new creatures 

in Christ. We are not to content ourselves with the 

lispings and prattlings of infancy, nor with the milk diet 

suitable to that age, but, making due use of these as stepping-stones, 

we should go on unto perfection. 

It was in view of such considerations that the Apostle 
penned the words of our text. He himself had rapidly 
passed on from the early stages of Christian character to 
higher degrees of development, and yet he was not counting 
that he had attained the perfection which was the mark 
at which he was aiming. (Phil. 3:13,14.) He had, however, 
passed beyond both infancy and boyhood to the 
stature of a young man in Christ. Looking back over the 
pathway of his Christian experience, he recognized these 
different stages, and for our profiting recorded his thought, 
saying, "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I understood 
as a child, I thought as a child; but when I became 
a man, I put away childish things." 

This was true both of his natural life and his spiritual 
life— the reference being specially to the latter, of which 
the former was merely an illustration. By the illustration 
he would draw our attention to the fact that if we have been 

R1907 : page 289 

children of God for some time we should be able, on looking 
backward over our Christian experience, to trace a 
good degree of advancement toward the mark of perfection. 
While as mere babes in Christ our hearts must always 
be loyal to God and true to righteousness, our very 
inexperience causes us often to stumble: our knowledge of 
the right ways of the Lord is very imperfect, and our powers 
of discernment are very unskilled: we have much to learn 
both of revelation and experience. The child in Christ has its 
own childish understanding, thoughts and ways, and his 
brethren in Christ should not expect from him the wisdom 
of the sage. Nor should he himself presume to have such 
wisdom; for only through knowledge and the discipline of 
experience does wisdom come; and then, only when we 
have allowed them to work in us the peaceable fruits of 
righteousness. 

For our growth and development in the Christian 
character God supplies all that is needful in the way of 
nourishment, and it is our part to make use of all the help 
he sends. By study and meditation upon his Word of 
truth, by prayer and communion with God, we partake 
more and more of his spirit, and are led into a closer acquaintance 
both with the Lord himself, and also with his 



works and ways. And by exercise of the strength thus 
gained in active service of the Lord, we are prepared to 
receive more and more of the fulness of his grace, and so to 
go on from grace to grace, and from one degree of advancement 
to another. 

But notwithstanding these recognized principles of 
Christian growth and development, it is a lamentable fact 
that many who can point with exactness to the day and 
hour when first they gave their hearts to the Lord and received 
the holy spirit, the seal of their adoption, are compelled 
to realize, when they consider the matter at all, that, 
instead of advancing toward the stature of men in Christ, 
they have actually retrograded. Often such painfully look 
back to the blessedness of that first experience of the grace 
of God in their hearts, and say: 

"Where is the blessedness I knew 
When first I sought the Lord? 
Where is the soul-refreshing view 
Of Jesus and His Word?" 

It is a thing of the past with them, and its joys have 
fled. Why is this? It is because they have failed to appropriate 
the means of grace which God has supplied, and 
because, instead of striving against the downward tendencies 
of the carnal nature, they have allowed those old dispositions 
to rise up and reassert themselves. In some cases 
a morbid desire for something new and strange has led 
away from the truth into the forbidden paths of human 
speculation— philosophy and science, so called— until the 
mind became bewildered and confused in the labyrinths of 
error— the snares of the wicked one. In other cases the 
measure of truth possessed has been held in unrighteousness. 
The tongue has been permitted to wag in the service 
of sin and uncleanness, manifesting unkindness, lack of 
Christian courtesy and forbearance, evil surmisings, self-exaltation, 
pride, boastfulness, vaunting, etc., etc. And 
these unholy indulgences have been excused and even cultivated; 
they have not been striven against nor repented 
of; hence the spiritual decline. 

It is for these causes that the blessed sense of fellowship 
and communion with God, experienced when first 
the holy spirit set the seal of adoption upon the heart, has 
been lost by many. God cannot dwell in a heart so unfit 
for his presence. And no Christian can look back to the 
time of his first experience as a child of God and recall 
any such evil disposition at that time. Had his heart been 
in such a condition then, God would not have accepted him; 
and it is only as we strive against sin that we can continue 
to abide in his love and favor. 

Who cannot look back to his first experience in the 
Christian life and remember how the love of God filled his 
heart and overflowed toward all his creatures, especially 
to them of the household of faith— a love that could bear 
well the beautiful description of 1 Cor. 13:4-7. "Charity 
[love] suffereth long and is kind, envieth not, vaunteth not 
itself, is not puffed up; doth not behave itself unseemly, 
seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no 



evil, rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth; 

R1907 : page 290 

beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things, 
endureth all things." 

Realizing such to be the will of God, this was the attitude 
of heart which the seeker after God sought to attain. 
And such an attitude he was enabled to realize when 
the spirit of adoption sealed him as an accepted son of 
God. Yet God, who remembers that we are dust, that we 
are morally weak from the fall, knew with what difficulty 
we must endeavor to maintain this condition of heart and 
mind when assailed by temptations, and worn with the 
disappointments and trials of life. Nevertheless, he does 
look for the cultivation of these graces of character in us. 
He does, and has a right to, expect us to strive to live godly, 
and to war a good warfare against the world, the flesh and 
the devil. And, therefore, notwithstanding the facts of 
trials and temptations, the maturer growth of Christian 
character should find our first love deepened into a more 
steady, constant and enduring thing, not characterized, 
perhaps, with so much of the gush and fluster of youth, but 
rather with the mellow benedictions of a more nearly 
ripened character. 

That the Church in this sifting and proving time will 
be individually tested as to character, as well as to faith, 
is certain. The prospective heirs of the Kingdom must, 
like their Lord, be tried and tested in every point; and it 
behooves everyone, therefore, to watch and pray, lest he 
enter into temptation, and diligently to cultivate such a 
character as will stand every test applied to it. But in the 
hour of testing let none mistake love of peace for love of 
righteousness. Let us see to it that the same mind dwells 
in us that is in Christ, our pattern. So shall we be children 
of God, beloved and owned of him. 



R1907 : page 290 

DAVID AND JONATHAN. 

-DEC. 15.-1 SAM. 20:32-42.- 

Golden Text— "There is a friend that sticketh 
closer than a brother."— Prov. 18:24. 

TRUE friendship is a rare flower on our sin-cursed earth, 
and when it is found and proved it should be greatly 
prized. It is an element of the original likeness of God. 
True friendship can never exist in a heart where selfishness 
reigns; for the moment self-interest is crossed, the false 
and fickle friendship begins to decline or proves treacherous. 

The friendship of David and Jonathan was evidently 
of the true kind; for it was proved on the part of both in 



the furnace of trial, and it held fast through years under circumstances 

of temptation which meaner souls could never 

have withstood. It was founded, not upon a mere fanciful 

whim on the part of either, but upon real moral worth in 

each; and those points of moral worth were the attractions 

and bonds of their friendship. Both were devout men of 

God, men of faith and of godly courage and heroism, and 

lovers of truth and righteousness; and it was the discovery 

of these elements of character in each other that knit their 

souls as one. 

Jonathan, the eldest son of King Saul, was the natural 
heir to his throne, and doubtless would have succeeded his 
father had Saul not incurred the divine displeasure and so 
forfeited that privilege for his posterity and cut short his 
own career. (1 Sam. 13:13.) Jonathan was a devoted 
son to his father and a devoted and energetic servant to 
God and to his people. The deep attachment of father 
and son is manifest from several facts: Jonathan could 
undertake his dangerous expedition against the Philistines 
only by keeping his project a secret from his father. (1 Sam. 14:1.) 
The effect of Saul's strange vow was emphasized 
by his affection for his son. (1 Sam. 14:39-44.) 
That dearest object he declared he would sacrifice, if need 
be, in fulfilment of his vow. But the people rescued him, 
declaring the Lord to be on the side of Jonathan. There 
was very marked and intimate confidence between the father 
and son. (1 Sam. 20:2.) "Behold my father will do 
nothing, either great or small, but that he will show it me." 
And Jonathan had great influence with his father (1 Sam. 19:6), 
and was very active in cooperation with him in the 
defence of the Lord's people against their foes and 
oppressors. 

Jonathan loved the Lord and his people, and had strong 
faith in the power of God on their behalf. Like David before 
Goliath, with faith in God he with his armour bearer 
approached the garrison of the Philistines, saying, "It may 
be that the Lord will work for us; for there is no restraint 
to the Lord to save by many or by few."— 1 Sam. 14:6. 

In that beautiful friendship there was no spirit of 
rivalry, no jealousy, no vain glory, although Jonathan was 
the natural heir to the throne of Israel, and David had been 
anointed to take his place; though Jonathan was of the 
royal family and a man of some thirty odd years, while 
David was but a shepherd youth, probably about twenty-three 
years of age. Each in simplicity of heart accepted 
the Lord's appointments as wisest and best, and determined 
nobly to do his part toward the Lord and toward 

R1908 : page 290 

his people and toward each other. And so Jonathan, 
cooperating with his father in the duties of his office to 
Israel so long as the Lord sustained him in power, 
nobly used the privileges of his position for the protection 
and preservation of the one whom he knew to be appointed 
to reign in his stead. 



And while Saul, filled with envy, malice, hatred and 
revenge against this one whom he regarded as his rival and 
the rival of his house, determined, and continually sought, 
to slay him, Jonathan, by every means in his power, protected 
and defended him, even at the risk of his own life. 
-1 Sam. 20:32,33. 

When David first came to the house of Saul to minister 
to him, and Jonathan's soul was knit to that of David, 
"Then Jonathan and David made a covenant because he 
loved him as his own soul; and [in recognition of the fact 
that he was the Lord's anointed— the Lord's choice for the 
kingdom by and by] Jonathan stripped himself of the robe 
that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his garments, 
even to his sword and to his bow and to his girdle." Thus 
they covenanted faithful friendship to each other, being 
subject in all things to the will of God. 

And when David was taking leave of Jonathan to fly 
for his life from the face of Saul, again they covenanted 
perpetual friendship. "And David arose out of his place 

R1908 : page 291 

...and [approaching Jonathan] fell on his face to the 
ground, and bowed himself three times [in token of great 
respect for both the person and office of his friend]; and 
they kissed one another, and wept one with another until 
David exceeded." And Jonathan said, "Go in peace, 
and the Lord be with thee, as he hath been with my father. 
And [when thou comest into the kingdom] thou shalt not 
only while I live show me the kindness of the Lord, that 
I die not; but also thou shalt not cut off thy kindness from 
my house forever [as he foresaw David might be tempted 
to do when later the descendants of Jonathan might urge 
their claims to the throne]; no, not when the Lord hath 
cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of 
the earth.. ..And Jonathan caused David to swear again, 
because he loved him; for he loved him as his own soul." 
-1 Sam. 20:13-17. 

Only once again they met, a year or two later. It was 
under very similar circumstances, in the wilderness of Ziph. 
Saul was still hunting for his rival to slay him, and again 
Jonathan, learning of his situation, sought him out. "And 
Jonathan went to David into the wood, and strengthened 
his hand in God. And he said unto him, Fear not; for 
the hand of Saul, my father, shall not find thee; and thou 
shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next unto thee; 
and that also my father knoweth. And [again] they two 
made a covenant before the Lord."— 1 Sam. 23:16,17. 

In this touching narrative there are valuable lessons 
which we cannot afford to overlook. (1) It shows that 
true and enduring friendship is possible, though it be of 
rare occurrence. 

(2) It suggests that true and lasting friendship can 
exist only between noble and unselfish souls, whose wills are 
fully submitted to the will of God, and who are actuated 
by the fixed principles of truth and righteousness. 



(3) It suggests that if such friendship existed under 
the dim light of the Jewish law, it ought to be of much 
more frequent occurrence under the light of the gospel. 
True, there may not always be just such circumstances to 
make it manifest, but there are many similar circumstances. 
There are always temptations to rivalry, to the ignoring of 
the will and appointments of God and the substituting of 
one's own will and way. 

When tempted thus, let us call to mind the noble examples 
of Jonathan and Samuel— Jonathan strengthened 
the hand of David in God, and saying, "Fear not, 
...thou shalt be king over Israel, and I shall be next 
unto thee;" and Samuel saying of Saul, his rival, "See 
ye him whom the Lord hath chosen, that there is none like 
him among all the people!" So let us "in honor prefer 
one another," and ever rejoice to see the Lord's will and 
the Lord's way prosper. 

The friendship of David and Jonathan seems also to be 
suggestive of that beautiful accord which shall exist between 
the glorified Church and the earthly princes who shall be 
next to them in the Kingdom of God. There will not be 
a note of discord or rivalry or jealousy between them; for 
each will be delighted to fill his honored place in the 
wonderful plan of God, and will love the other as his own 
soul. Though the Gospel Church will receive the first 
place of favor offered in the Abrahamic covenant, and the 
ancient worthies will find themselves next in honor, they 
will rejoice to have it so, because divine wisdom and love 
have so planned it. 

And as David remembered his covenant with Jonathan 
not to cut off his kindness from the house of Jonathan 
(2 Sam. 9:1-13), so the glorified Church will remember 
its covenant to bless the ancient worthies first, and then 
all the families of the earth who will then be under their 
jurisdiction. Their loving ministry through the law and 
prophecies and their noble examples of godly life and 
character, which have been so helpful to us, while Satan 
was hotly pursuing us ("as a roaring lion," 1 Pet. 5:8), 
as Saul pursued David, shall be held in "everlasting 
remembrance." 



R1908 : page 291 

THE BIRTH OF CHRIST. 

-DEC. 22.-Luke 2:8-20.- 



Golden Text— "Behold, I bring you good tidings of 
great joy, which shall be to all people."— Luke 2:10. 

FOR comments on this lesson see our issue of July 1, 
'94; and do not fail to note in the announcement 
of the golden text that the good tidings of great joy shall 
be to all people "in due time" (1 Tim. 2:4-6) and then 



"Whosoever will, let him come and take the water of life 
freely." 

R1908 : page 291 

REVIEW-DECEMBER 29. 

Golden Text— "Thy Kingdom come."— Matt. 6:10. 

WHILE our Lord taught his disciples to go and preach 
"The Kingdom of heaven is at hand;" he also taught them, 
and the Church all through the age, to pray, "Thy Kingdom 
come." Both of these thoughts were true. The Kingdom 
in its incipient, embryo condition was then at hand— 
the Gospel Church in its formative, probationary state was 
about to be organized under the care of the twelve apostles, 
who in turn were supervised and inspired by the 
Lord. But the Kingdom was, and is, yet to come in glory 
and power. 

"The sure word of prophecy" indicates that in 1878 
it began to be established and that the process of establishment 
will be from that date to 1915, when the Kingdom 
in its glory of power and righteousness will have come. 
The true Church, whose names are "written in heaven," 
and which have not been blotted out because of unfaithfulness 
(Luke 10:20; Rev. 3:5) will then be exalted to 
reign with Christ. They shall be like him, and see him as 
he is, they shall reign with him a thousand years, and they 
shall judge the world in righteousness and bless all the 
families of the earth.— 1 John 3:2; Rev. 20:6; Isa. 32:1; 
Gen. 28:14; Gal. 3:16,29. 

This is the Kingdom to which the dying thief referred 
when he said, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into 
thy Kingdom;" to which Jesus referred when he 
said, "Fear not, little flock [the faithful Gospel Church]: 
it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom;" 
and which in the parable of the young nobleman he represented 
himself as going away to receive, and to return 
again to receive his faithful people unto himself as "joint-heirs" 
of that Kingdom. (Luke 23:42; 12:32; 19:12; 
Rom. 8:17.) If we have the witness in ourselves that we 
are now accepted of God as members of the Kingdom in 
its present embryo condition, let us endeavor by faithfulness 
to make our calling and election sure to the Kingdom 
in its completeness and glory and power. 



