Afghan Orphans Who Wanted to See a Farm
AS MODERN society becomes more and more urbanized, millions of children never get to see a farm and its animals. Certainly, children from Afghanistan would normally never get to see an American farm. So imagine the thrill for a small group of such children, orphans, ravaged and maimed by war, to be able to visit Watchtower Farms, located at Wallkill, some two hours north of New York City by car.
Afghan translators came with the group to help them understand all the activity at this unique farming-printing complex operated by Jehovah’s Witnesses and manned by a force of over a thousand volunteer workers, who make up the Watchtower Farms family.
The visit started off with a welcome treat of tea and cookies, after which the group moved on to see the huge full-color printing presses used to produce the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. One guide said: “To my surprise they enjoyed the efficiency and size of the operation, even though their hearts were set on seeing the farm animals.”
He continued: “Then, on to the calves, where the children had a chance to pet and feed the animals. It was a scene to behold​—the children running to get more green leaves to feed the young animals. At the chicken house, all of them got to hold the little chicks. Funny enough, when asked what their favorite American food was, they answered, ‘Kentucky fried chicken!’”
When lunchtime came around, they shared a meal of rice and chicken with the huge farm family in the dining room. Afterward, members of the family flocked to greet these youngsters from so far away. It was obvious that they loved children.
In the afternoon the children enjoyed climbing on the tractors and holding the steering wheel. Of course, they all wanted to ride a horse, and that wish was soon granted. The next big thrill? The Watchtower Farms firehouse, with its big, bright-red fire engine! What excitement! You could see it in their faces as they took turns having a ride and blowing the siren. Children worldwide basically love the same things​—color and noise!
When asked for their reactions to the visit, Ahmad, an older boy, said: “I enjoyed the printing presses, praying before and after the meal​—and everything at the cafeteria!” All of them loved the animals and the horse ride.
This brief experience illustrates that kindness, to orphans or to anyone else, can serve as a fine recommendation of the Christian faith and the loving God, Jehovah. As the Bible states: “The form of worship that is clean and undefiled from the standpoint of our God and Father is this: to look after orphans and widows in their tribulation, and to keep oneself without spot from the world.” (James 1:27)​—Contributed.

