From Our Readers
Receiving Criticism  Earlier today I received some criticism for a project I had been working on for weeks. Although the criticism was beneficial, my supervisor was harsh. I was very upset. When I got home, I read the article “Do You Hate to Receive Criticism?” (February 8, 1991) Needless to say, it changed my whole outlook.
D. B., United States
The article was truly helpful. Having recently been criticized myself, I was feeling depressed and overcome by despair. However, by reading the article over and over again, I was helped to overcome my problem.
N. O., Japan
Drinking and Driving  I was deeply touched by the articles on “Drinking and Driving​—A Deadly Mixture.” (February 8, 1991) My little nine-month-old sister was killed in a car accident some 31 years ago. I still grieve for her. A drunken driver smashed into our car. I can still see my mother covered with blood and my little sister slumped over dead in her seat. I am happy to have faith in the resurrection, but I sincerely hope that the article will cause some to reconsider whether they should drink and drive.
K. N., United States
I am 16 years of age. The article “Victims Face Offenders” contained deeply moving experiences and made tears come to my eyes. I feel sure that this article will help many young ones like me to keep others in mind and not be careless in the use of alcohol.
R. H., Germany
Care for the Elderly  The article on “Caring for the Aged​—A Growing Problem” (March 22, 1991) gave me tremendous encouragement. My 86-year-old father now suffers from Alzheimer’s disease, and I wanted to take care of him at home rather than put him in a hospital. As his condition has worsened, the difficulties and mental strain involved in caring for him have increased. I reached a point of feeling complete hopelessness! But then I read your articles. Deeply comforted, tears came to my eyes. There are many, many more problems and hard times ahead, but my resolve to take care of my father right to the end has received a strong boost.
T. H., Japan
Mexico City  I found the article “Mexico City​—A Growing Monster?” (January 8, 1991) to be in error. You say that having a large family is a cultural heritage. However, this phenomenon takes place only in some parts of the country​—not Mexico City.
S. C., Mexico
We are sorry if the article caused some misunderstanding. However, the statement was made in reference to Mexico as a whole, not simply to Mexico City.​—ED.
Nightclubs  As a music and dance instructor, I was troubled by your article “Young People Ask . . . What About Nightclubs?” (February 8, 1991) There is nothing wrong with music and dancing. But your article stated that music and dancing have been used to lure people into misconduct. I disagree. Your article will only close people’s minds to the arts.
B. M., United States
We did not condemn all forms of music or dancing. Nevertheless, debasing music and sensual dancing played a role in misleading God’s people in Bible times. (Compare Exodus 32:6, 17-19.) It is therefore appropriate to warn youths about some of the extremes being indulged in today.​—ED.

