Response to “Mankind’s Search for God”
ONE of the highlights of the “Pure Language” District Conventions, which Jehovah’s Witnesses held from the middle of 1990 to early 1991, was the release of the book Mankind’s Search for God. It gives a succinct explanation of the origin, history, and beliefs of the major religions of the world, and it tells how the true God can be found. How have readers around the world reacted?
“My sincere commendation for Mankind’s Search for God,” commented E. G., a non-Witness from Germany. “Such a detailed and thorough investigation of individual religions is truly remarkable and makes fascinating reading. Furthermore, the book is not short on logic​—quite the opposite. I can only recommend that people examine their religion on the basis of this book.”
A reader from Flushing, New York, U.S.A., wrote: “I’m a Muslim, and Al-Islaam is my religion. I appreciate your new book Mankind’s Search for God. I particularly appreciate the information you have on my religion.”
In the Netherlands, A. v. D., a 17-year-old, placed a copy of the book with a fellow student, who used it in the preparation of a school assignment. The teacher wanted to know the source of her material. On seeing the book, he ordered three copies. A. v. D. continues: “The next day I handed three new books to the teacher, which he showed to some other teachers right away. A short time later, he told me, ‘It is OK. I have the approval of the school administration to order 35 of these books.’”
From British Columbia, Canada, a couple wrote: “Mankind’s Search for God could quite possibly affect more people from more cultural backgrounds than any other Watch Tower publication has previously.”
From Le Havre, France, M. H. wrote: “I have to say that this book totally surpassed my expectations; it is so clear, precise, and pleasing to the eye. Magnifique!”
H. W. W. from Texas, U.S.A., wrote: “This book was so interesting and absorbing, I just couldn’t put it down. I found myself reading late into the night. The quality of writing is superb. The book discusses the beliefs of other people in a reasonable and respectful way, while encouraging them to continue their search for the true God, Jehovah. And the words come across in a very personable way, almost as if someone were sitting next to you carrying on a conversation.”
A couple from Panama, G. and S., said: “The Spanish-speaking people are readily accepting the book. They are thrilled with the colorphotos of the temples and the idols.”
D. M., a sailor in the U.S. Navy wrote: “I met a lady one day who said, ‘Do you want a spiritual book?’ and I said, ‘Yes,’ not really knowing what kind of book it was. To my surprise it ended up being the book that for some time I had been looking for.”
A professor who has taught on world religion at an American university wrote: “The succinct clarity of expression and the general accuracy of explanation of the central teachings of the various religions is impressive. The citing of numerous recognized writers in the field makes clear that the author is aware of contemporary scholarship and usage. There is complete honesty and no hidden agenda.”
A young girl, N. Y., wrote from Nagoya City, Japan: “I am 12 years old and study history at school. This book deals with Japan’s religions in detail. Also, I thoroughly enjoyed reading about magic and spiritism in chapter 4 and ‘A Return to the True God’ in chapter 15.”
Many other letters of appreciation have been received from Argentina, Colombia, England, Puerto Rico, and Spain as well as other countries. If you would like to obtain a copy of Mankind’s Search for God, now published in 26 languages, see page 32.

