Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
When September 21 arrived​—the day to commence distribution of Kingdom News No 16—​enthusiasm was running high in the congregations everywhere. During the days that followed, it was not only those who were already publishers who turned out for field service. Increasing numbers of persons are convinced that time is running out for unbelieving mankind. Moved by a desire to share with others the good news of God’s kingdom, 512,738 participated in the work and then turned in reports, just here in the forty-eight states! That is 40,076 more than were in the field in August, during which month 54,269 more had already reported than for the preceding August. Isn’t that grand? What a marvelous increase in the number of persons who are indicating their desire to walk in Jehovah’s name!
And they exerted themselves. Hours devoted to the field ministry shot up to nearly 2 million more than for August. Besides that, 30,000 enrolled as temporary pioneers, and there was an increase of 1,549 in the ranks of regular pioneers. Reports show that, all together, 43,320,048 copies of their message “Is Time Running Out for Mankind?” were distributed here in the United States. Many publishers in city territory placed their allotment within a few days; in rural areas more effort was required.
It was not only in this country that increase was evident. During September, France showed an increase of 2,900 publishers; Japan, 1,200; Korea and the Netherlands, 1,000 each; the British Isles, 5,100; Canada, 3,700; Germany, 2,600; Spain, 900. Although the peak for the 1973 service year was 1,758,429 publishers world wide, it is evident that already we have moved up over the 1,810,000 mark.
As we proceeded with our work in September, the dividing effect of the message was evident. Some persons made phone calls to voice their disapproval. Others wanted to learn more. In quite a few cases householders read the tract and then ran down the street after the publisher to request a Bible study. Here in Brooklyn we received 2,995 coupons from the Kingdom News requesting bound books, and 596 asked that someone call on them to discuss the Bible.
Now the time is near for distribution of another Kingdom News. In some parts of the country the weather will not be as favorable as in September. But the importance of the work has not diminished. By boldly and zealously sharing in the distribution of the pointed message “Has Religion Betrayed God and Man?” we can demonstrate to Jehovah our love for him, our desire to see his name cleared of the reproach brought upon it by false religion, and our determination to walk in his name.
Who will share in the work? Will all 512,738 who shared in September be out again, and perhaps even more? May Jehovah richly bless all who thus display that they uphold true worship.
Your fellow servants,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

