Presenting the Good News​—By Offering Subscriptions at Every Opportunity
1 When someone subscribes for The Watchtower or Awake!, what happens? Twice a month for the next twelve months, a message comes to that home that could aid the members of that household to get everlasting life.
2 The articles published in the magazines are specially designed, not only to feed Jehovah’s people spiritually, but also to appeal to and impress right-hearted ones of the public. Do not assume that some articles in The Watchtower will be too difficult for the public. If you go back through the issues we have received during the past year, for instance, how many do you find that the public could not understand? Even the deeper articles are readable and understandable.
3 During the four months of the Watchtower campaign we will look for opportunities for offering subscriptions in every direction, but particular attention will be focused on certain opportunities each month. In January, appropriately we will devote much time to the actual house-to-house work with the subscription offer. Then in February, we will continue with house-to-house work, but we will also focus attention on making return visits where subscriptions might be obtained, including subscription promises and people with whom we conduct studies. In March, we will give special attention to informal witnessing opportunities. And finally in April, we will consider particularly to whom we might send gift subscriptions.
4 Here is something you will want to impress upon your mind so that you will remember it throughout the four-month Watchtower campaign: The majority of issues of The Watchtower will discuss some feature of the “sign” of Jesus’ presence and the end of this system of things. Watch for these articles and bring points from them into your discussions at the door. Use them in helping people to appreciate the value of having a subscription.
5 You will note, too, that the box showing articles to come in the next issue will be expanded to include outstanding articles in several future issues. This you can point to in showing how a Watchtower subscription will benefit one in the months just ahead.
6 We encourage all to be subscription conscious during the four months of the campaign. Subscriptions for both magazines are often taken just as readily as a subscription for just one. Try it and see if this is true in your territory!

