Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 9
12 min: Song 62. Introduction, text and comments. Include discussion of Theocratic News.
15 min: “How is Your Personal Study Program?” Handle as discourse. Receive expressions from audience on things that have threatened to disrupt good study program.
18 min: “Walk in the Name of Jehovah.”
(6 min.) Briefly review with audience contents of Kingdom News No. 17. (Distribute sample copies before meeting.)
(12 min.) Cover front-page “Kingdom Ministry” article with questions and answers; include demonstration of brief presentations in paragraph 6.
15 min: Concluding comments. Discuss arrangements made for tract distribution locally; encourage all who can to share in united effort on December 22 and 23. Encourage temporary pioneering during December. Publishers may obtain tract supplies after meeting. Song 71.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 16
12 min: Song 96. Introduction and brief comments on text. Discuss Branch Letter.
20 min: Jeremiah’s Endurance. Let audience read scriptures, comment and make personal application (as time permits).
Jeremiah was one of the ‘great cloud of witnesses’ from whose course we can draw much encouragement. (Heb. 12:1) First of all, he came to realize that his strength was from Jehovah.​—Jer. 1:6, 18, 19; 20:11.
Jeremiah was bold and fearless in Jehovah’s strength but he also had real concern for the people. He felt compassion and also expressed love for them when they suffered for their sins. (Jer. 8:21–9:1) He declared Jehovah’s warning and judgment message without stint, yet had at heart his commission also “to build and plant.”​—Jer. 1:10; 38:19-23.
Jeremiah became discouraged because of the bitter opposition, but he loved God’s Word and held on to it. He never turned away from his commissioned work. He was encouraged by Jehovah and was delivered.​—Jer. 20:8, 9, 11; 40:2-4.
What are some things we can learn from Jeremiah’s record that apply to our lives?
1. Humility and trust in Jehovah. We must realize that we are doing his work not our own. He loves us and will give us the strength and ability to keep serving faithfully.​—Jas. 4:6, 10; Eph. 6:10; 1 Pet. 4:11.
2. Boldness, courage. God does not want us to tremble before our opponents and fail to sanctify his name. We, in turn, do not want to “water down” God’s message or be timid or hold back in declaring the truth.​—Acts 4:29; Josh. 1:7-9; Ps. 27:14.
3. Love for our brothers and for other people. Our attitude means much. We are like a “clashing cymbal” if we are not motivated by love. We must keep in mind our purpose “to build and to plant”​—to help people.​—1 Cor. 13:1-3.
4. Like Jeremiah, it is not unusual for us to get discouraged at times by opposition, indifference or adverse circumstance. (2 Cor. 1:8-10) We must pray to God, lean on him and confidently look for his help. In the meantime, if we do not forsake our place in his arrangement, we will be able to endure with joy and be delivered.​—Jas. 5:11; Phil. 1:27, 28; 2 Pet. 2:9.
13 min: Field overseer reviews arrangements for tract distribution for coming week. Emphasize special united effort on December 22 and 23. Brief presentations demonstrated. Discuss how to handle situations in local territory to achieve thorough coverage.
15 min: Concluding comments. Discuss arrangements for field service on Tuesday, December 25. If all tracts have been distributed use books or magazines. (Draw attention of publishers to first article in December 22 “Awake!” also opening article in January 1 “Watchtower.”) Song 39.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 23
12 min: Song 12, Introduction, text and comments. (Include appropriate Announcements on page 3.)
20 min: Several elders and/​or ministerial servants discuss the article in the December 1, 1973, issue of “The Watchtower” entitled “Jehovah Brings ‘Sealing’ of His Chosen Ones to a Close.” This discussion should not imply criticism of any who profess to be of the anointed.
18 min: “Sign of World’s End Means Kingdom Blessings Near.” Suggested presentation for “Watchtower” campaign.
(12 min.) Audience discussion of presentation. Most “Watchtower” issues during four-month campaign will have articles taking up different features of “sign” of end. Can build presentation around current article, whichever feature of “sign” is discussed. Might say (using article on “Why Call at My Door?” after introducing self): “I am calling on you and your neighbors​—in fact—​all over the world this home visitation is being made to find people who are disturbed by the bad conditions in the world. There is a lot of fear, particularly because of the increase of crime. They ask, ‘What is this world coming to?’ How do you feel about it? [Let them answer.] We can get the answer and can know where the world is heading. After describing the events of our day, the greatest prophet of all time said: [Read or paraphrase Luke 21:28.] Why could we have such confidence? Jesus went on to say: [Lu 21 verses 31, 32].” (Or, use Matthew chapter 24.)
“[Take out January 1 “Watchtower” and open to page 3.] This article in ‘The Watchtower’ shows the meaning of what is happening, and the marvelous prospect of survival into a righteous earth under God’s Kingdom rule. It is to share this good news that Jehovah’s witnesses call on people in all parts of the earth. [Turn to page 5.] The facts show that the thousand-year reign of God’s kingdom is immediately ahead of us and we urge everyone to examine the evidence. ‘The Watchtower’ is published twice a month. During the coming year it will present much information from the Bible on God’s kingdom​—what kind of government it is, who are its rulers and how it will help earth’s inhabitants to make earth a paradise garden, eliminating all racial and national divisions. Here are some of the subjects to be treated in forthcoming issues.” (Read from box of articles to come.) “During the year you and your family can receive these and much other fine Bible knowledge. The ‘Watchtower’ subscription rate is only $1.50 for the year. I will be happy to arrange for you to have ‘The Watchtower’ come to your home.”
(6 min.) Have the presentation demonstrated. Do not go off into side issues.
10 min: Concluding comments. Discuss the final weekend of work with the tract. If any have more tracts than they can distribute by December 31, ask them to turn these extras in NOW so that others can use them. Comment on arrangements for going back into the same territory with the subscription offer from and after January 1. Carry copies of “Peace and Security” book, which was advertised on tract. Outline arrangements for witnessing on January 1. Song 4.
WEEK STARTING DECEMBER 30
15 min: Song 5. Introduction, text and comments. Include discussion of some points of interest from pages 3-16 of the “1974 Yearbook.” Cover highlights and encourage brothers to read the “Yearbook” regularly.
15 min: Experiences in distributing tracts. Discuss importance of having time set aside regularly each week to share in field service. Offer personal help to newer ones in other features of field ministry.
15 min: Presenting the Good News. Questions and answers.
15 min: Concluding comments. Remind all to turn in field service reports and to include at the bottom note showing how many copies of Kingdom News No. 17 were distributed. Include discussion of Question Box. Song 66.
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 6
15 min: Song 31. Introduction, text and comments. Include discussion of some points of particular interest on pages 17-32 of “1974 Yearbook.”
 4 min: Accounts report.
12 min: “Keep Your Minds Fixed on the Things Above.” (Col. 3:2) Talk based on published material under “Questions from Readers” in the August 15, 1973, issue of “The Watchtower.”
15 min: Presenting Subscription Offer.
(5 min.). Read with publishers left hand column of page 2 of current “Watchtower.” Show how paragraphs 2 and 3 could be used in obtaining subscriptions. The final paragraph could be used to suggest a Bible study.
(10 min.) Demonstrate suggested sermon. (See meeting for week of December 23.) After scripture presentation, pause and state that we could show value of magazine in a number of ways. Publisher continues reading a paragraph from page 2 of magazine.
Then another publisher steps up and, to same householder, demonstrates just the concluding part of the presentation, but tying in the article “Can Those Faithful to God Conceal the Truth?” Show that the preaching of Bible truth is part of the “sign.” Also refer to box listing articles in coming issues.
14 min: Concluding comments. Include discussion of “Do You Leave a Handbill?” Song 32.

