“Walk in the Name of Jehovah”
Kingdom News No. 17 to Be Distributed
1 Most of the people of the world walk in a certain course set by this system of things. Different groups have their own paths. This is because ‘all the peoples, for their part, walk each one in the name of its god.’ These false gods are leading them to one place​—a disastrous fight against Jehovah.
2 “But,” the scripture goes on, making a sharp contrast, “we, for our part, shall walk in the name of Jehovah our God.” (Mic. 4:5) Only people on this path will avoid collision with God. Jehovah’s witnesses, on this path themselves, want as many as possible to find it, so that these may get out of the deadly rut they are in.
3 The only way the people can change paths is for them to see the deadly folly of their ‘gods,’ the falsity of their religion and the peril to which it leads them. Then they must see the true God, Jehovah, and appreciate what walking in his name means. For these reasons, it is recommended that Kingdom News No. 17 be placed in as many homes as possible in each congregation’s territory during the ten days of December 22-31. By our courageously sharing in this work we will give evidence that we really are walking in the name of Jehovah, the God of truth.
4 As its front page indicates, the tract answers the question “Has Religion Betrayed God and Man?” Consider the effect this headline will have: If a person is sighing and groaning over the detestable things done in the name of religion, or if he views himself as an enemy of religion or as merely nonreligious, the headline may arouse his curiosity, and the contents of the tract will be a real eye-opener for him. If the householder is a religious person, the very question raised in the headline may make him think; he may call to mind some doubts about practices in his own church, and so read what the tract says.
5 Of course, not all religion has betrayed God and man. The reader will be presented with this truth and will have an opportunity to see the contrast between the true religion and the false. Readers are encouraged to action, and the positive seeking and practicing of true worship are stressed.
6 A short presentation will be sufficient, such as, “I have volunteered to share in a worldwide distribution of this tract. It is free. We are leaving one in every home. Please read it.” Or, “The reason I am here is to give you a brief printed message. It is free. Please read it.” We want the individual to read the tract rather than listen to a sermon from us on this visit. The less we say, the more likely the person will be to read the tract. However, we should be warm and friendly.
7 The distribution this month takes place during the holiday season when many are free from secular work for a few days and young ones are out of school. We encourage all publishers to have a full share. The elders can assist all by making special arrangements for group witnessing, as the united effort encourages all. New ones who qualify for field service have here an excellent opportunity for an enthusiastic start.
8 Of course, during most of the month we will be offering the Bible and True Peace and Security​—From What Source?, for a contribution of $1.25. If we still have our copy of the folder on “Bibles and Bible Study Aids,” we can use it to show the people the Bibles and aids we can furnish, such as the large-print Bible and The Kingdom Interlinear Translation of the Greek Scriptures. Also, if you have foreign-speaking people in your territory, keep in mind that the Bible is available in various languages.
9 The nations continue to walk in the names of their gods, but not for much longer. Such false worship is leading them into destruction. We rejoice that many continue to come out of Babylon the Great. Before Jehovah’s patience runs out, it is our privilege to help these to join us in pure worship.
[Blurb on page 1]
“We, for Our Part, Shall Walk in the Name of Jehovah.”
[Blurb on page 4]
Widen Out the Witness with Kingdom News No. 17.

