A Debt We Owe to Others
1 The apostle Paul felt an obligation to preach to people. He knew that Jehovah had made it possible for all sorts of men to be saved by means of the precious blood of His Son. (1 Tim. 2:3-6) Therefore, Paul stated: “Both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to wise and to senseless ones I am a debtor.” He eagerly and tirelessly labored to discharge his debt to his fellow humans by sharing the good news with them.​—Rom. 1:14, 15.
2 Like Paul, Christians today seek to share the good news with their neighbors at every opportunity. With the “great tribulation” fast approaching, our search for honesthearted ones is urgent. May genuine love for people move us to be diligent in this lifesaving work.​—Matt. 24:21; Ezek. 33:8.
3 Discharging Our Debt: The principal way in which we reach people is by preaching from door to door. In territories where there are many not-at-homes, keeping accurate records and returning at different times will enable us to contact more people. (1 Cor. 10:33) We can also reach individuals by witnessing in business territory, on the streets, in parks, in parking lots, and over the telephone. We could ask ourselves, ‘Am I doing my best to pursue all avenues of preaching in order to share the message of life?’​—Matt. 10:11.
4 One pioneer felt a keen responsibility to reach all the people in her territory. At one house, the blinds were always shut and no one was ever at home. However, one day when the pioneer was not in service, she noticed a car in front of this perpetual not-at-home. Not wanting the opportunity to slip by, she rang the doorbell. A man answered, and the initial conversation led to several return visits by this sister and her husband. Eventually, the man accepted a Bible study, and he is now a baptized brother. He is grateful that this sister felt a debt of responsibility to preach to others.
5 With time fast running out, now is the time to pay our debt to our fellowman by exerting ourselves vigorously in the preaching work.​—2 Cor. 6:1, 2.

