Part 11​—Conducting Progressive Bible Studies
Helping Students to Make Return Visits
1 When a Bible student begins to share in the preaching work, he will meet people who show interest in the good news. How can we help the new publisher to make effective return visits and to cultivate the interest he finds?
2 Preparation for a return visit begins with the initial call. Encourage the student to take a sincere interest in those with whom he speaks. (Phil. 2:4) Progressively train him to draw them out, to listen to their comments, and to note the things that concern them. When someone shows interest, have the new publisher write down the pertinent information about the call. Use that information to help him plan further discussions.
3 Preparing to Return: Review the initial call, and show the student how to select an aspect of the Kingdom message that will appeal to the householder. (1 Cor. 9:19-23) Prepare together a brief presentation that features one Bible text along with a paragraph in a study publication. In addition, prepare a question that can be raised at the conclusion of the discussion to lay the groundwork for the next visit. Show the new publisher how to add to the person’s knowledge of God’s Word with each successive visit.
4 It is also helpful to provide the student with a simple introduction. After greeting the householder, he might say: “I enjoyed our previous conversation, and I have returned to share further Bible information on [mention the topic].” You may also need to show the new publisher how to respond if a different person answers the door.
5 Follow Up Diligently: Encourage the student to set a good example in returning promptly on all who show interest. Finding people at home may require persistence in calling back. Teach the student how to make appointments to visit again, and help him appreciate the need to return as promised. (Matt. 5:37) Train the new publisher to be kind, considerate, and respectful as he searches for sheeplike ones and cultivates their interest.​—Titus 3:2.

