Reaching as Many People as Possible
 1. What did the early Christians do to reach as many people as possible with the good news?
1 Jesus’ early followers earnestly sought to spread the Kingdom message. They took practical steps to make the good news available to as many people as possible. Christian Bible writers penned their inspired writings in the common Greek, which was the international language of the Roman Empire. Further, zealous preachers of the second and third centuries C.E. on may have pioneered the use of the codex, which was easier to use than a scroll for looking up references.
2, 3. (a) How is Isaiah 60:16 being fulfilled in modern times? (b) How is technology being used to advance pure worship?
2 Use of Technology: Through the prophet Isaiah, Jehovah foretold: “You will actually suck the milk of nations.” (Isa. 60:16) In the modern-day fulfillment of this prophecy, Jehovah’s servants are making use of valuable resources from the nations to advance the preaching work. For example, in 1914, years before talking motion pictures became successful commercially, the Bible Students began showing the “Photo-Drama of Creation.” This eight-hour-long motion picture and slide presentation, complete with color and sound, gave a powerful witness to millions.
3 Today, God’s people make use of high-speed printing presses and computerized tools to publish Bibles and Bible literature in hundreds of languages. Rapid means of transport move Bible literature to distant parts of the earth, reaching people in 235 lands. Through his spirit, Jehovah has impelled his servants to put such technology to practical use, making Bible truth available to more people than ever before in history.
 4. What adjustments have some made in their lives to reach more people with the good news?
4 Personal Adjustments: True worshippers have also been motivated to make personal adjustments so as to reach more people with the good news. Many have simplified their lives in order to have a fuller share in the preaching work. Some have moved to serve where there is a greater need for Kingdom proclaimers. Others have expanded their ministry by learning a foreign language.
5, 6. What can be done to reach as many people as possible in the local territory?
5 In addition, we can reach more people with the good news by preaching when people are at home and where people can be found. If people are often not at home during the day in your territory, could you adjust your schedule to witness during the early evening hours? Are there public places where a witness can be given? Have you tried telephone witnessing and working business territory? Do you look for opportunities to witness informally?
6 How privileged we are to share in the grand witness being given about Jehovah’s name and Kingdom! May we continue to share the life-giving truth from God’s Word with as many people as possible.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

