Service Meeting Schedule
Week Starting July 11
Song 49
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Use the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory) to demonstrate how to present the July 15 Watchtower and the July 22 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In each demonstration, show a different way to handle the potential conversation stopper “I’m busy.”​—See Reasoning book, pp. 19-20.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Reaching as Many People as Possible.”a When discussing paragraph 5, review suggestions in the June 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 4, that apply to the local territory.
Song 88 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 18
Song 173
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly consider the August 15, 2000, Watchtower, page 32. Highlight the benefits of maintaining a regular program of daily Bible reading, even during vacation periods and at other times when we are out of our normal routine.
15 min: “Conducting Progressive Bible Studies​—Part 11.”b Include a demonstration of a study conductor and a new publisher preparing to make a return visit. They review the initial call and select an appropriate point to share on the return visit. They also prepare a simple introduction and a question that can be raised at the conclusion of the visit. The demonstration concludes as they are about to rehearse the presentation they have prepared.
20 min: Assist Others to Appreciate the Bible. Question-and-answer discussion based on the Worship God book, pages 24-5, paragraphs 3-6. Use the study questions provided in the book. Include comments on the brochure A Book for All People, page 32.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting July 25
Song 138
15 min: Local announcements. Read accounts report and donation acknowledgments. Using the suggestions on page 4 (if appropriate for your territory), demonstrate how to present the August 1 Watchtower and the August 8 Awake! Other realistic presentations may be used. In one of the presentations, demonstrate offering the magazines informally at a market or in some other appropriate public setting.
10 min: Inculcate the Truth in Your Child’s Heart. (Deut. 6:7) A talk by an elder based on the August 15, 2002, Watchtower, pages 30-1. Highlight Scriptural principles that provide guidance on child training for a Christian parent who has a non-Witness mate.
20 min: “A Debt We Owe to Others.”c Include comments on the July 1, 2000, Watchtower, page 11, paragraph 13.
Song 82 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting August 1
Song 187
15 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in field service reports for July. Invite audience to open to page 70 of the Ministry School book, and by means of an audience discussion, consider paragraphs 1-2 and the box “How to Comment at Meetings.”
15 min: “Help Your Children Progress in the Ministry.” Talk and audience discussion. Include a demonstration of a parent and child using a simplified presentation. Have the parent conclude the presentation by briefly explaining the donation arrangement.
15 min: Have You Tried a Flexible Approach? Talk and audience discussion based on the January 2005 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 6. Review the suggestions provided, and show how a flexible approach can be used with the literature offer for August. Have one or two presentations demonstrated.
Song 218 and concluding prayer.
[Footnotes]
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.
Limit introductory comments to less than a minute, and follow with a question-and-answer discussion.

