Acts of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Modern Times
Fields of ripened grain, orchards filled with luscious fruit, productive vineyards​—all of these are deeply satisfying. Especially does a bountiful harvest bring great delight to “the hardworking farmer.” (2 Tim. 2:6) Industriously, he engages in the work of planting, watering and cultivating. Then he patiently waits for “the precious fruit of the earth.”​—Jas. 5:7.
Yes, the farmer must wait for “the living God” to give “rains from heaven and fruitful seasons.” (Acts 14:14-17) Jehovah is “the One giving food to all flesh.” (Ps. 136:25) God makes things grow.
The apostle Paul likened the activity of the Christian to a farmer’s planting and watering of seed. Nourishing of the implanted word must be followed by patient waiting for God to make it grow by means of his holy spirit. (1 Cor. 3:5-9) Jehovah is pleased with such efforts and is glorified by spiritual fruit-bearing and proof of discipleship.​—John 15:8.
On the following pages you can read about activities in various parts of God’s worldwide field. For instance, you can “visit” Burma. The “good news” has been spread throughout that picturesque land, and this has been accomplished in the face of various problems.
Bible truth, as declared by Jehovah’s people, has been known in Canada since about 1880. However, the clergy have opposed it intensely. From the stirring account presented in later pages you can ‘look in on’ true Christians in that country and observe their bearing of fruit to God’s glory.
Herein you can also undertake a “voyage” to the Leeward Islands, once renowned for material treasures. You will learn how some of these islanders found much more precious spiritual riches.
Then you can “travel” to Peru, the ancient Land of the Incas. There, Jehovah’s Witnesses have been sharing the “good news” with others in spite of hardships, including those associated with a devastating earthquake of relatively recent times. You can follow their activities in the towering Andes mountains, the vast Amazon jungle and other regions of Peru.
Too, you can “journey” to Africa and watch the planting of seeds of truth in Senegal and neighboring lands. It will be possible to observe how effective Kingdom witnessing has resulted in fine spiritual development in that part of Africa.
Indeed, Jehovah is having a great work done today. Moreover, God is being glorified by this fruit-bearing and disciple-making activity throughout the earth.

