Alaska
SEWARD’S ICEBOX is what Alaska was called in 1867 when the United States purchased it from Russia. The U.S. Secretary of State, William H. Seward, arranged the transaction, and opposers also dubbed it Seward’s Folly. Such uncomplimentary expressions sprang from the mistaken beliefs that snow and cold never leave this remote corner of earth and that it is enshrouded with total darkness six months at a time. Although a land of extremes, Alaska offers enough attractions to prompt residents to look on their part of the earth as paradise.
True, ice and snow are very much a part of the seven-month winter landscape when temperatures may dip to 62 degrees below zero Celsius (-80° F.) But summer heat at Fairbanks has soared to 38 degrees Celsius (100° F.) on occasion. When the summer sun shines for 20 hours a day, locals are infused with greater vigor and enthusiasm to accomplish their daily tasks. Encompassing more than 1,525,000 square kilometers (589,000 sq mi) and spanning four time zones, Alaska is the largest state of the United States, more than double the size of Texas. Despite its claim of being the biggest, nearly one fifth as large as the rest of the nation, it is the least populated state, with only about 425,000 people. Numerous mountains and glaciers have locked within their icy fingers a large portion of the world’s fresh water, and two million of Alaska’s many lakes are larger than eight hectares (20 a.). The Saint Elias Mountain range boasts this hemisphere’s largest glacier, Malaspina, an ice sheet 80 kilometers (50 mi) wide.
Some have described the land as having “five faces.” Treeless tundra with constant winds marks the Aleutian chain of islands. The southeastern panhandle is a dense rain forest with huge Sitka spruce trees and commercial fishing as its claim to fame. South-central Alaska, including Anchorage, the Matanuska Valley and the Kenai Peninsula, houses the majority of the state’s populace and enjoys moderate weather. Around Palmer in the Matanuska Valley is lush farmland capable of producing beef, milk, poultry and some vegetables. Cabbages of more than 30 kilograms (70 lbs) and turnips in excess of 14 kilograms (30 lbs) are not uncommon.
Fairbanks, the “Golden Heart of the North,” experiences extremes in temperature—the hottest in summer and some of the coldest in winter. This is the jumping-off place to the spongy Arctic tundra. And, finally, the north and west coastal areas are dotted with Eskimo and Indian villages; here summer provides only a little warming from the extreme winter cold.
Adding to the wonders of this northern paradise are 13 active volcanoes, as well as majestic Mount McKinley, towering 6,194 meters (20,320 ft) in the clouds as North America’s highest peak. The countryside is rich in wildlife, minerals, timber and oil. Is it any wonder the early Aleutian Islanders called it Alyeska, meaning “the great land”?
It is ironic that this land of great natural wealth, “Seward’s Icebox,” was purchased from Russia in 1867 for only $7,200,000, about five cents per hectare (2 cents per a.)! The Russians had sought riches from the fur-bearing animals. In 1897-98 sourdough prospectors flocked here, searching for the prize of gold along the Klondike trail. Later, commercial fishermen plied the 53,000 kilometers (33,000 mi) of tidal coastline in search of wealth from the sea. Now oil-field workers drill for the precious black gold (petroleum) under the ground. But, Alaska boasts even more valuable treasures than all of these.
TRUE WEALTH COMES TO A RICH LAND
The resurrected Jesus Christ told his disciples that they would be witnesses of him “to the most distant part of the earth.” (Acts 1:8) Perched on the top of the globe, Alaska certainly qualifies as a “distant part of the earth.” Just as Alaska has not given up her physical resources easily, neither has she accepted the wealth of the good news without resistance. It has taken the determination of hardy servants of Jehovah, backed up by his holy spirit, to penetrate this hostile, rugged environment.
The first seeds of truth were scattered along the coastline in 1910 by Captain Beams, the skipper of a whaling ship. Little is known about the details of his activity, except that he spoke the truth and placed literature at his various ports of call.
In the late 1920’s a more concentrated effort was launched by Frank Day, an anointed Witness from Seattle, Washington. Each summer, for more than 12 years, he worked his way through the territory, preaching, and placing literature. To sustain himself, he sold eyeglasses as he traveled from village to village, yet keeping the preaching foremost. Since he worked alone, he depended greatly on Jehovah’s guidance.
Sister Winnie Pearson from the interior city of Fairbanks recalled moving into a house in 1930 and finding copies of Studies in the Scriptures, placed by Brother Day. This brother left a trail of good work that stretched from Ketchikan to Nome, a distance of about 1,900 kilometers (1,200 mi). No little accomplishment when one considers that he had to cover his territory while hobbling on an artificial leg!
In August 1941 Brother Day wrote to the Society’s office at Brooklyn, recommending that a congregation be formed in Anchorage. He recommended that Brother Karl Liebau take the lead. Where the application asked how many others would be witnessing with Brother Liebau, the number “one” was written in. That “one” was Brother O. P. Rees. Thus the first congregation in Alaska’s largest city was made up of two devoted servants.
In those days there was no road connecting the seaport city of Seward with Anchorage. Brother Liebau decided that the section houses along the railroad linking the two cities needed a witness. So, off he went on foot! He would witness to the man or two in each section house, stay the night and march off down the tracks to the next one. He walked the entire distance of more than 160 kilometers (100 mi), witnessing along the way. Brother Liebau continued faithful until his death in 1969.
Efforts to push farther into the Alaskan wilderness were not always met with immediate success. Winnie Pearson recalled when Brother Day came through Fairbanks during his last trip to Alaska in 1942. Loading a canoe with food supplies, literature and his large wooden phonograph with its protruding horn, he pushed off from shore for a grueling trip down the Yukon River. In a short time, however, he showed up at Sister Pearson’s door with sodden literature and a very wet phonograph. His canoe had capsized! This ended his journeys to Alaska.
ASSISTANCE FROM CANADA
During those years several Canadian brothers, working under the direction of the Society’s branch office in Toronto, volunteered to help in the Alaskan field. Using a fishing boat obtained by the Society for preaching the good news, they began to work the coastal cities of Juneau, Skagway, Hoonah and Sitka. This crew of four, including Brother Frank Franske, decided to push farther north. They ran into heavy seas, and after 26 hours of battling the severe weather, they were forced to turn back to Ketchikan. The disappointment of having to turn back was eased when they discovered Sister Anna Hoguewood, who had started Kingdom service in 1911. She remained loyal until her death in Ketchikan in 1949 at the age of 76.
These courageous brothers had a wonderful time distributing literature, as they said, “by the ton.” They were attracted to the Alaskans, whom Brother Franske describes as the “rough-and-ready type; fishermen, loggers, trappers and miners; all with a hospitable and generous nature along with a much-needed sense of humor.”
Just as the early sourdough miners found that they had to sift through a lot of gravel to find the yellow nuggets of gold, so these early Christian “prospectors” found that much effort would be needed to find a few sheeplike people. In 1938 there were five publishers reporting Kingdom service in Alaska. This increased to seven in 1942, but in 1943 and 1944 it dropped back to two or three. Much seed had been planted, though, with the use of Bible literature, but it was obvious that something more was needed for Alaska.
LIKE BALSAM OUT OF GILEAD
Just as highly prized balsam was used in Bible times to heal and cure, Jehovah’s organization sent eight men and women as gifts to provide spiritual healing in the Alaskan territory. (Compare Jeremiah 46:11.) That small population of about 100,000 was not neglected, since Gilead-trained pioneers were sent in 1944 to advance Kingdom interests.
Harold and Claudia Hoffman, Ralph Bachman and Chester Sieradski were sent to Juneau, the capital. John Errichetti and Gordon Rogers took up their work at Ketchikan, one of the several island cities that hug the coastline of the Alaska panhandle. The largest frontier communities of Anchorage and Fairbanks were to be cared for by James E. Odham and Hermon Woodard. Later on, Brothers Errichetti and Woodard teamed up. This pair, affectionately called “the boys” by the Alaskan brothers, were to have a great influence on future growth in Alaska.
Then in 1945 another Gilead graduate, Charles Gauntt, arrived to serve in Juneau. In 1948 he married Sister Ada Anderson, also a Gilead graduate, and they continued to serve in Alaska until October 1954. The Gauntts’ two sons, Charles and Tom, are now in full-time service, Charles in Chile and Tom at Brooklyn Bethel. In 1946 four more missionaries were added to the team that was sent from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
NOT A VERY WARM WELCOME
How would you react if you were asked to go to Alaska to preach? No doubt you would have mixed emotions. Yet eight hardy pioneers volunteered for this unusual assignment. The majority of missionaries who graduated from Gilead School had to face the heat and humidity of parts of Central and South America and Africa. But this assignment would bring challenges of another kind. They were traveling northward! A warm welcome was not anticipated from the hostile climate. Would they put their trust in Jehovah, to meet the rigors of their new assignment?
When the two missionary brothers arrived in Anchorage, they rented a one-room apartment for $35 a month. It was a cubbyhole. Toilet facilities were outside and around the corner. A water faucet with a bucket nearby was the only plumbing available. This was their missionary home and the focal point for scouting out the territory. From this base they would reach Talkeetna, Palmer and Seward, a frontier territory some 320 kilometers (200 mi) long!
At Fairbanks, a wanigan, a small shack on skids, served as their missionary home. With little or no insulation in the walls, these were not the most ideal living quarters. It was common for the brothers to reach for a garment in the closet and find it frozen to the wall. No mystery, however, since the thermometer recorded 45 degrees below zero Celsius (-50° F.) outside!
“NIGHT” WITNESSING DURING THE DAY
The missionaries expected that it would be cold in Alaska. But what was not fully anticipated and was difficult to accept was the lack of sunlight in the wintertime. Brother Woodard remembers that first year: “A long winter was spent in Anchorage. We had about three hours of sunlight, and for many days, ‘murk’ would be a better term.”
In Fairbanks the problem was greater, for the days there are even shorter during the winter period. When the sun rises at almost midmorning and sets only a few hours later, this can have a detrimental effect on a newcomer to Alaska. Winter ice-fog conditions add to the gloom or murk that cuts down visibility on the roads to only a few meters. These dreary winter conditions often contribute to a psychological struggle. In Fairbanks, by 11 o’clock one could expect the daily routine of house-to-house witnessing to be well under way. But in December it is barely daylight at that time. Often, people would sleep until the sun rose, so getting householders out of bed was common. In order to get the good news preached, the missionaries had to engage in “night” witnessing during the day. To avoid getting people out of bed, the brothers decided to call at the homes where the lights were on. This did help somewhat, but it was amazing how many householders they still got out of bed because people simply had not turned their lights off the night before. Undaunted, the missionaries made the best of this situation.
GOING NORTH FOR THE WINTER
They soon learned that winter was really the best time to contact people. In those years good quality lubricants and fuels for machinery were not available, so residents simply stored their automobiles for the winter, because they would only freeze up if driven. This worked to the brothers’ advantage, as it kept most of the people indoors for the winter. When the basic chores were accomplished there were few places to go, and householders usually welcomed any visitors who were brave enough to come to call. What a challenge at 51 degrees below zero Celsius (-60° F.)!
With this in mind, the missionaries found the best strategy for witnessing was for them to go north for the winter and south for the summer. This is opposite to what vacationers do in the northern hemisphere. But it was most practical when it came to spreading the Kingdom message in Alaska. Our brothers were able to conduct more Bible studies with people, since secular work in those days almost came to a standstill during the winter months. In their summer territory, southeastern Alaska, reaching remote villages by boat brought its challenges too.
CABIN FEVER
Another cold climate problem frequently encountered is cabin fever. Long periods of darkness and extreme cold can force a person to remain indoors just about all the time. This affects the disposition, making one feel jumpy and irritable. Every little discomfort or disturbance is magnified, and the walls can appear to move in on you. Clinics have been set up by doctors who specialize in treating those suffering from this ailment. Our brothers, however, quickly adjusted to their assignment. Jehovah’s willing servants found the best medicine for cabin fever—the satisfying activity of helping people learn of the hope found in God’s Word. Getting out of one’s home to cheer up others is the best remedy.
A BRIDE COMES TO ALASKA
In 1947 Brother James Odham took secular work to prepare for marriage. He made arrangements for his bride, Stella, to come to Anchorage. Since there were no plumbing facilities in their primitive “honeymoon cottage,” the former missionary home, taking a bath posed a challenge. The Odhams decided to purchase a portable, rubber-lined bathtub from a mail-order house. Water was heated on the stove, and they enjoyed the luxury of a bath in their tiny, but warm, home. But now, how were they going to dispose of a bathtubful of water? It was 40 degrees below zero (Celsius and Fahrenheit) outside! With no drain in the cabin, they decided to drag the tub through the door and simply dump its contents outside. A surprise was ahead. As quickly as the water left the tub it turned to ice right on the doorstep! This ice-skating pond remained on the doorstep for the rest of the winter, and as visitors came by, Brother Odham would caution, “Be careful of my wife’s bath there!” A sense of humor certainly came to the rescue in those days.
SEVENTEEN FEET OF RAIN!
Contending with snow and sub-zero temperature was one thing. But the newcomers who were eager to spread the good news to the southeastern area of the state were also in for a surprise. They never realized how difficult it could be to put up with simple rain when it continues day after day without letup.
In 1944, prior to reaching Alaska, Brother Errichetti met faithful Brother Day in Seattle, Washington. With a knowing grin, the experienced veteran of Alaska gave Brother Errichetti a rubber raincoat with the warning, “You will need it in Ketchikan!” Brother Errichetti learned the full meaning of those words when he arrived in Ketchikan. It is difficult to explain how overwhelming the storms can be, storms in which the winds drive the rain horizontally day after day, week after week.
Brother Vernor Davis and his wife were assigned to Ketchikan in 1946. When they arrived that bright day of June 13 they smiled at the sun. But it did not take long for the deluge to wash that smile away. They express how they had to cope with the elements:
“One March there was not a 20-minute period during the month when it was not raining. Why not use an umbrella? According to local custom, men do not bother with umbrellas. One simply had to be waterproof. We wore raincoats, of course, and at the doorstep we had to be careful not to tip our heads forward or the water that had collected on our hats would pour into our book bags. Often we carried book bags upside down. Then, when out of the rain we would turn them right side up.”
Rainfall the first year the missionaries were in Ketchikan reached 523 centimeters (206 in.). That is more than 5 meters (17 ft)! This topped the annual average of 381 centimeters (150 in.) or 3.8 meters (12.5 ft). It was necessary to return home several times a day to change into dry clothing before continuing with the preaching work. This perseverance might make us think twice before we decide to forgo field service because of a few drops of rain.
ANOTHER EFFORT BY BOAT
Over the years, witnessing by boat provided opportunities for brothers to reach the people of many isolated communities on the coast. This produced dangers at sea and required constant vigilance and expertise in piloting.
In the fall of 1948 Ava (Nick) Nickles, a Ketchikan fisherman who was interested in the truth, offered to transport Brothers Errichetti and Woodard to the villages not yet reached with the Kingdom hope. In his 12.8-meter (42-ft) fishing boat, the Irene D., they reached many ports. One time, when trying to cross a stretch of water about 40 kilometers (25 mi) wide, the engine quit. The wind was blowing hard and the sea was running high. Upon investigation, they found the batteries had jarred loose, spilled acid on the distributor cap and shorted out the engine. Next, the starter spring broke. Brother Errichetti recalls that evening vividly:
“We began to drift broadside with the heavy seas and to take quite a pounding. We lost steerage. All of us became seasick, with the boat drifting wherever the wind and tide took us. We started to drift at about four in the afternoon, and by the time the searchlight of a Coast Guard boat found us, we had drifted 26 kilometers [16 mi] out to sea! Our prayers had ascended to Jehovah and he heard them.” But these dangers at sea did not stop the brothers as they continued to witness without letup.
Today, Brother Nickles, at the age of 93, is retired from fishing but has not stopped fishing for men. He continues to witness from house to house each week, as possible, and serves as a ministerial servant with the Ketchikan Congregation.
FINDING HEARTS OF GOLD
One can imagine the joy that these early “prospectors” for Jehovah experienced when they located a “find.” These people with humble hearts were like treasures of gold. When they took their stand for Jehovah’s Messianic Kingdom they truly became precious in the sight of God and men.
On Annette Island is the tiny village of Metlakatla. A small population of only a few hundred from the Tsimshian Indian tribe live there. One of these Indian women was Minnie Booth. She was a kind, warmhearted, soft-spoken precious person. With the help of Jehovah she courageously broke away from the influence of tribal pressure. For many years she stood as the lone witness for Jehovah in her village. Sister Booth did not hesitate to offer the truth to everyone she met. Happily, a genuine response was shown by a friend of the Booth family, Louis Fawcett, and he continues to serve faithfully to this day. Yet, at the time of her death in 1971, Sister Booth had no one in her family who accepted the truth.
But Jehovah continued to bless her work even after her death, and years later the seed of truth germinated in the heart of her granddaughter, who brought the truth back to her family members in the village. Today, there is a congregation of 15 to 20 happy Witnesses in Metlakatla, the nucleus of the group being made up of some of the Tsimshian tribe. Results such as this show how Jehovah has blessed the early activity of faithful servants. Imagine Sister Booth’s joy in the earthly resurrection when she is greeted by her offspring that finally benefited from her labors of love!
FIRST ALASKAN ASSEMBLY
Bea Buchanon of Juneau may well have been the most excited one of all as preparations were under way in 1948 for the first assembly in Alaska, a milestone in the work of the missionaries. It was also a special day in the life of Sister Buchanon, for she was among the first ones to accept the truth in Juneau and was anticipating water baptism. Sister Buchanon recalls: “Five of us were baptized in a pool directly in front of Mendenhall Glacier.” It would be difficult for her to forget the time she was submerged in chilly glacial waters. Brothers Nathan Knorr and Lyman Swingle were on hand for that happy occasion, and Sister Rose Hamilton recalled: “Brother Knorr took off his coat and tended some little children while the mothers were being baptized. I couldn’t help but think how different this was from Christendom’s religious leaders that I had known.” With a total attendance of 63, including some who visited from other states, the brothers saw the beginning of a new era—assemblies within the Alaska territory.
Prior to this, anyone who wanted to attend a convention had to arrange to travel to one of the lower 48 states or to Canada. Now, conventions would be enjoyed in our own backyard. But other obstacles remained due to great distances, rugged terrain, lack of roads, and remote island communities, all entailing much time and expense. When a family of four traveled to assemblies within Alaska in good time, the father would have to bear the expense of at least $500 per assembly just for travel. (Today the expense is even greater.) On the other hand, if he decided to use the marine highway or ferry system, the cost would be somewhat reduced, but it would require several days more for travel. Then the family head would have additional expense due to extra days lost from his secular work. Attendances at conventions show the brothers appreciate them and are willing to make the sacrifices. Over the years the number assembling together has been well over the number of publishers associated with the congregations.
THE YUKON TERRITORY
Canada’s Yukon Territory is now cared for by the Alaska branch office. This vast section of Northland covers an area that is more than 518,000 square kilometers (200,000 sq mi), about one third the size of Alaska. Its population of less than 25,000 is mostly Anglican and Roman Catholic. The Yukon’s geographical features are similar to those of interior Alaska, with snowcapped mountains and abundant wildlife. Spiritual awakening in this neighboring land paralleled that of the activity in Alaska.
In 1897-98 practically the whole world was awakened by discovery of gold along the Yukon River. At the height of the Klondike gold rush at that time, tens of thousands flocked to the Yukon Territory. A few gold seekers brought pieces of the Society’s Bible literature with them. One attorney who had gone north during that period told the brothers that he had been given literature as a gift from a fine man and personal friend, J. F. Rutherford.
Other than for one or two isolated cases of informal witnessing, the territory remained virtually untouched until 1951, when the Toronto branch sent pioneers into the Yukon. Brother Allan Crich and his partner, Joseph Hawryluk, trekked the length and breadth of this vast wilderness. Brother Crich recalls days in isolated areas when his diet consisted of only dried fish and prunes.
Brother Sid Drebitt reminisces over the first year of the Whitehorse Congregation when he was baptized in a natural outdoor pool and the temperature was 29 degrees below zero Celsius (-20° F.). He adds with a grin that he was warm and cozy, though, since the pool was a natural hot spring near Whitehorse. This was a landmark event in that his was the first baptism in the Yukon Territory. Brother Drebitt’s mother, once an avid churchgoer, and his father, formerly a communist lecturer, along with his sister, all accepted the truth and symbolized their dedication to Jehovah.
The comments of Brother Drebitt reveal some of the pressures that the brothers had to endure: “While I was doing street work, car gangs would drive by and swear at me, calling me names and throwing things at me. Some would threaten to beat me up if I did not get off the street, but I stood firm and remained faithful, feeling stronger than ever.”
What about the effects of isolation? Brother Drebitt continues: “In those days we would see the circuit overseer only once a year. There wasn’t much bus service or transportation of any kind, and the air service was mostly for the military. So we had to study hard and keep the work going by ourselves, as the closest congregation was 918 miles [1,477 km] away. Sometimes our mail would take months to reach us.” The loneliness that resulted from this isolation required a strong relationship with Jehovah.
SERVING WHERE THE NEED IS GREATER
Alaska was about to receive personal attention from another resource of Jehovah’s organization. Serving where the need is greater became an avenue of service for pioneers as well as those who could not take up the full-time work. In 1959 several families and individuals responded to the invitation to settle in Alaska. Now that the trail had been blazed for spiritual progress, these devoted praisers of Jehovah would provide the needed stability and steady training for the newly baptized brothers. Down to this day several of these families continue to strengthen the brothers and have made Alaska their home.
BRANCH OFFICE ESTABLISHED
The decade of the 1960’s began with a winding down of the missionaries’ role in Alaska and the Yukon. Strong groups of spiritually minded brothers and sisters had been organized. In 1961 “the faithful and discreet slave” recognized the need to draw these far-flung groups closer together. A branch office in Anchorage would accomplish this. Arrangements were made when Brother Milton Henschel visited, and in September 1961 Andrew K. Wagner arrived to take up his new duties as branch overseer. The Yukon Territory of Canada would be cared for by the Alaska branch office, providing circuit assemblies with international flavor as brothers and sisters from two countries would assemble together. Brother Tom Didur, circuit overseer from Canada, had served all of northern Alberta, British Columbia, the Yukon and northern Alaska for several years. Under the newly formed branch his assignment centered on Alaska and the Yukon.
The immediate benefits of an Alaskan branch are related by Brother Wagner in his report to the Society: “Much of the increase this year [1962] has come as a result of better shepherding made possible by the closer oversight of the work that the local branch is able to provide. There is also evidence of greater maturity on the part of many who have felt weak because of isolation.” One overseer remarked: “Up to that time we had felt somewhat like orphans, due to the distance from other congregations and the headquarters.”
When Brother Woodard left Alaska in 1963, only one of the original missionaries remained. In 1964 Brother Knorr wrote to Brother Errichetti and invited him to go to Brooklyn Bethel, where he is continuing to serve down to this day. A man who stuck faithfully to his assignment, Brother Errichetti said: “Alaska was my assignment for 20 years and I enjoyed it very much. Brother Woodard and I had some hard times, but Jehovah, our loving God, always pulled us through.” How true those words! These two brothers especially displayed an outstanding resourcefulness all the years they served in Alaska. There was hardly anything they did not know about living off the land, and they were ideal servants for the untamed and inhospitable territory of those years. They gained the respect of the people and did much to encourage the brothers, who followed their zeal in Kingdom activity in spite of hardships. These two certainly showed by their zealous service that these last days are no time to take one’s ease.
BUILDING KINGDOM HALLS
The permanence of the congregations established by the missionaries now manifested itself in the new Kingdom Halls that were springing up throughout Alaska. After a goat shed in Fairbanks, a Quonset hut in Whitehorse and a cabin in Kodiak, came the bright new look of inviting meeting places. These Kingdom Halls were proof that Jehovah’s people were here to stay! Brothers with ability in the construction trades were especially busy during those years of building Kingdom Halls. Brother R. C. Daily, one of the “fifty-niners” who arrived that year (1959) to serve where the need is greater, supervised at least eight of these projects. This period was climaxed by the construction of a most attractive branch facility in Anchorage, including an office, apartment and a Kingdom Hall that seats 250. Today there are 13 Kingdom Halls in the Alaska branch territory.
THE QUAKING OF ALASKA
During those years our brothers worked diligently to offer proof to people in the territory that we are living in the last days. Often the householders manifested skepticism and doubt. Suddenly, Jesus’ words regarding “earthquakes in one place after another” were driven home with vivid realism here in the north country. (Mark 13:8) On March 27, 1964, Alaska shook as never before! An earthquake that some scientists measured as being 8.6 on the Richter scale struck with a jolt stronger than had ever been recorded in North America. It moved more earth than any other earthquake known. Major portions of Anchorage, Seward, Cordova, Valdez and Kodiak were destroyed, and 115 Alaskans died. Although the Kingdom Hall in Kodiak was carried out to sea, limited damage was done to the property of the brothers. After that event residents had little difficulty understanding the part of Jesus’ sign describing earthquakes.
PERSONNEL CHANGE
It was in that same year of the earthquake that the brothers were saddened to hear of the death of Brother Wagner. His kind and fatherly manner was replaced in 1965 with the vigor and zeal of Brother James A. Miller. The Millers continued in full-time service until 1969 when they began to raise a family. Then the Society assigned Brother P. Gerald Ronco to the branch office where he continues to serve as Branch Committee coordinator, supported by the other two members of the Branch Committee, Ralph Ring and Paul Thiessen.
Brother and Sister Ronco have played a fine part in the expansion of the Kingdom work in Alaska. They have served there some 14 years now and have been very effective in helping new ones. Between the two of them they have aided 33 persons into the truth. Their lives are truly wrapped up with people in Jehovah’s service and they take great interest in everyone. An outstanding quality displayed by Brother Ronco is his being always available for anyone with a problem. He has spent hundreds of hours hearing the individual and congregational problems of any who would approach him. He has a very warm, cheerful, inviting personality that makes others feel they can approach him with their needs.
CIRCUIT TRAVELS
The steady assistance from traveling overseers has done much to build up the brothers and to provide training. From 1963 to 1979 Brother Robert L. Hartman faithfully visited the congregations in Alaska and the Yukon Territory. Brother Hartman recalls: “When I took up the circuit work in February 1963, in Alaska and the Yukon there were 428 publishers scattered among ten congregations. Reaching the congregations and isolated ones by various means of transportation posed an interesting challenge. I used the auto, commercial jet plane, small bush aircraft, ferryboats and fishing boats to visit our dear brothers and sisters needing to be built up by the circuit overseer.”
He tells of Sister Alma Laughlin and her teenage son, who were the only Witnesses in the tough logging-fishing town of Wrangell. To visit them required expensive travel by bush plane or long hours by ferryboat plus being housed in an old rooming house. He accompanied Sister Laughlin and her son in preaching from house to house, on return visits and Bible studies, all on foot and often in the soaking rain. But just as the larger congregations did, the two of them needed the visits. On one visit he recalls taking off by bush plane from Sitka, headed for Wrangell:
“Midway on the trip, with rugged mountains and islands on each side and the salt water of the Inside Passage below us, we suddenly ran head-on into a brisk rainstorm. The pilot made a quick about-face and headed back toward our place of origin, the strong winds and rain pounding at our tail. Our turnabout was so abrupt that we seemed like characters in a cartoon drama being pursued by a ‘monster’ storm. But Alaskan bush pilots do not give up easily. He made a wide circle to the west around several islands, searching for a pass where the storm was not so fierce.
“As we followed this circuitous route, the storm forced us down closer and closer to the surface of the water below. But the pilot forged ahead, skimming 200 feet [60 m] above the water. When he opened the window on his side to see how near we were to the mountain shoreline a few yards away, I couldn’t help but wonder if we would reach Wrangell safely. Before long, through the haze ahead, I could barely make out three dim figures waiting with an auto on the shore. Sister Laughlin had hired the lone taxi to meet the plane at the rural landing spot. For the rest of the week we trudged around in the rain in our field service, but at least we were safe on land.”
Brother Hartman continues: “Everyone in that small town was used to seeing Sister Laughlin making her rounds on foot in her Bible teaching work. She continued faithful, living in this isolated town for several years until her husband finally moved them nearer to a congregation. Being able to serve such faithful brothers and sisters for over 16 years in Alaska was an indescribable privilege for me. Although I traveled well over 250,000 miles [400,000 km], many times in storms and with temperatures as low as 60 degrees below zero Fahrenheit [-51° C.], to reach the brothers in the circuit, to share the faith and integrity like that of Sister Laughlin is one of the greatest blessings a person could enjoy. And what a pleasure to have seen the number of publishers of the good news reach more than 1,240 in 23 congregations by the time I left Alaska in 1979!” Today Brother Hartman continues to work as a traveling overseer under the United States branch.
REACHING DISTANT TERRITORY
It is a pleasure to report that 80 percent of the Yukon Territory and the Alaskan field is witnessed to regularly. With more than half of the total population of the branch residing in Anchorage and Fairbanks and the balance in a handful of other towns, the 26 congregations now formed are keeping Jehovah’s name before the people. Witnessing does not slow down summer or winter. When the temperature drops lower than 45 degrees below zero Celsius (-50° F.), most of the brothers will write letters or conduct Bible studies and make return visits.
The Alaskan brothers have not lost sight of the 20 percent of the population who live in the distant outlying villages, and their concern is to see to it that these people are contacted with the Kingdom hope. This is very difficult and costly, since no road system connects them with the major cities. In 1970 the branch office divided the unassigned territory among the congregations with the request that they arrange locally to reach the remote areas. In response to that request, in September 1970, two industrious sisters wanted to do their part to reach the isolated inhabitants in the interior of Alaska. One of these sisters had already pioneered in the Eskimo village of Bethel. Depending on her limited knowledge of the Eskimo language, they departed on a commercial barge up the Kuskokwim River. They traded literature for fresh or dried fish along the way. At first they chose to sleep in a tent outdoors, but the cold forced them to seek shelter indoors.
With such a zealous effort they succeeded in witnessing to more than 15 villages. This required that they work their way up the river by barge for more than 800 kilometers (500 mi). They placed much literature and gave a fine witness during this trip of more than 1,600 kilometers (1,000 mi).
In 1973 one of these sisters and her husband took their sleeping bags and tent to spend three weeks offering the Kingdom message to more of the Eskimo population. They were warmly welcomed by many of the villagers who shared their dried fish, fish head soup and duck soup. More than 500 magazines were placed, and well over 100 subscriptions were obtained. Such zeal is exemplary, but where did this sister get such drive? Her family had learned the truth from those early missionaries.
Another push into the outlying villages was made by airplane. The brothers knew that the best time to find people in the bush was during the winter when the fishing season is almost at a standstill. Nevertheless, winter storms make flying hazardous. One of these pilots explains:
“The area near Nome and along the Bering Sea is notorious for severe icing and whiteouts. The whiteout is a dreaded foe because it can come with little warning, often beginning with a light overcast and then snow. But soon everything becomes white. A pilot must strain his eyes, peering into the snow. He may lose his orientation, not knowing which way is up or down. Then dizziness sets in and one could easily fly right into a mountain or into the ground. More pilots are lost in this area than anywhere else in Alaska.” In spite of these dangers, over a two-year period the brothers covered about 844,000 square kilometers (326,000 sq mi) while visiting more than 200 villages.
In order to help care for the expenses of the 11 Witnesses who went into the bush territory with three airplanes, the local brothers donated more than $14,000! What a generous spirit in support of preaching the good news and trying to reach all who are desirous of serving Jehovah!
In another project to reach all Alaska in the work of making disciples, the branch office arranged to mail out sample copies of the Awake! and The Watchtower. In one year the United States branch mailed out for the Alaska branch almost 18,000 magazines to the villages. Every village has been reached with the Kingdom message, either by mail or by personal visits.
Early in 1983 the Alaska branch embarked once again on an extensive witnessing project into the isolated bush villages. With more than ten private airplanes available, plans were made to reach 63 villages with the good news. What a fine opportunity for more than 23,000 people of the Eskimo, Indian and Aleut population to learn of the hope for everlasting life under God’s Kingdom! Since the Alaskan territory embraces some 1,525,000 square kilometers (589,000 sq mi) of land with the largest portion unreachable by roads, witnessing in the bush is no small task. For instance, during the month of May 1983, the brothers flew to 17 villages, traveling over 7,720 kilometers (4,800 mi)!
Yet, over the years the brothers have found that they were most productive in making disciples when they concentrated on the densely populated cities and towns. Newcomers who share in the preaching work here no longer have to contend with the primitive living conditions that the old-timers had to endure. Instead, they can now enjoy the benefits of a modern way of life, while carrying out their witnessing work.
A “GREAT CROWD” OUT OF ALL NATIONS, TRIBES, PEOPLES
We are overjoyed to see that at least a sprinkling of the native Indians and Eskimo have responded to the truth. In harmony with Revelation 7:9 these come in from all nations, tribes, peoples and tongues—in Alaska and the Yukon too. The native population are gentle, peace-loving people. They are not complicated in personality and are generally content with the basic needs of life. Here, as in other parts of the earth, the churches of Christendom have produced thousands of rice Christians. The clergy permit the Eskimo and Indians, while embracing so-called Christianity, to cling to superstitions and customs that are not in harmony with God’s Word. As for the majority of intensely religious persons, the doctrine of “Once saved, always saved” has made them complacent. A great number of other residents have simply fallen victim to alcohol and drug abuse and claim no religious inclination. But what a pleasure it is to see the various tribes represented among our brothers and sisters and to see their genuine appreciation and zeal for the truth! What evidence of Jehovah’s spirit as these are enabled to break free from tribal customs!
Not only have our brothers placed much literature but the example of true Christianity by Jehovah’s Witnesses has done much to help others come into God’s organization. We recall the work of those early pioneers who placed literature “by the ton,” and we appreciate how the symbolic “horses” of Revelation 9:16-19 have penetrated into every corner of this vast land. In the past ten years more than two and a half million copies of The Watchtower and Awake! have been distributed here, and over 14,000 subscriptions were obtained!
Since the establishing of the Alaska branch office in 1961, the number of praisers has increased over fourfold to a peak in April 1983 of 1,574. These are cared for by 26 congregations divided into two circuits. The 134 regular and auxiliary pioneers in February 1983 represented 9 percent of the total peak of publishers. With a ratio of one publisher for every 292 people, a grand shout of praise to Jehovah is being sounded. Our 1983 Memorial attendance reached 4,033!
People continue to trek north to Alaska to fulfill their dreams of a better life. Many are disillusioned when the “great land” does not meet their expectations. Others, though, have struck it rich here! They have discovered the spiritual paradise of Jehovah’s making that is found among his people. In the past ten years, 1,017 have dedicated themselves to Jehovah here in territory under the Alaska branch. Many have returned to homes in the lower 48 states, happy to share their newfound wealth of spiritual blessings with family and friends.
Like others who have made the journey north, Jehovah’s people are seeking treasures, but not the yellow or black gold lying beneath the surface of the ground. They have learned that the true wealth is in the lives of people. The prophet Haggai shows that Jehovah views people who take up true worship as “the desirable things of all the nations.” The brothers in this distant corner of the earth thank Jehovah for the privilege of caring for this valuable treasure from all nations and pray that many more from the land of Alaska and the Yukon will come in to fill his house with glory.—Hag. 2:7.
[Map on page 131]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
  Alaska
Nome
Yukon River
Kuskokwim River
Bethel
Fairbanks
Mt. McKinley
Talkeetna
Palmer
Anchorage
Valdez
Cordova
KENAI PENINSULA
Seward
MALASPINA GLACIER
St. Elias Range
Skagway
MENDENHALL GLACIER
Hoonah
Juneau
Sitka
Wrangell
Ketchikan
Metlakatla
ANNETTE ISLAND
KODIAK ISLAND
Kodiak
BERING SEA
ALEUTIAN ISLANDS
Yukon Territory
Whitehorse
[Picture on page 132]
Brother Knorr visits with missionaries serving in Alaska in 1948: (from left to right) Mary Tetzlaff, Abe Tetzlaff, Hermon Woodard, Charles Gauntt, Ralph Bachman, James Odham, John Errichetti, Nathan Knorr, Stella Odham, Ada Gauntt, Lorraine Davis, Vernor Davis, Claudia Hoffman, Harold Hoffman
[Picture on page 134]
Hermon Woodard and John Errichetti at Ketchikan; they were affectionately called “the boys”
[Picture on page 141]
Ava (Nick) Nickles, a retired Ketchikan fisherman, continues to fish for men at the age of 93
[Picture on page 142]
First baptism in Alaska—performed in 1948 in front of Mendenhall Glacier
[Picture on page 147]
Branch facility in Anchorage, including an office, apartment and a Kingdom Hall that seats 250
[Picture on page 148]
The first branch overseer of Alaska, Andrew K. Wagner, and his wife, Vera
[Picture on page 150]
Gerald Ronco, present Branch Committee coordinator, and his wife, Lucy
[Picture on page 155]
For over 16 years Robert L. Hartman served the Alaskan brothers as circuit overseer, traveling extensively by all types of vehicles in all kinds of weather
[Picture on page 156]
Preparing to work bush territory by airplane

