Fiji and Neighboring Islands
ALMOST lost in the vastness of the South Pacific Ocean are numerous island countries. Between the continents of Australia and South America hundreds of tiny islands push their heads above the ocean surface. Isolated, peaceful, warm and inviting, clothed with lush vegetation including the ever-present coconut palm, the islands of the South Pacific have often been described by visitors as “a piece of paradise.”
Some of these islands are mere atolls only a few feet above sea level. Larger islands, thrust up from the ocean floor by volcanic or seismic disturbances, have mountains over 1,800 meters high (6,000 ft) and fairly large rivers flowing across them. Small native villages, ranging in size from a few families to hundreds of inhabitants, lie scattered around the sheltered coastal areas, usually beside rivers or streams, and there are also some larger towns and cities.
Religiously, the Methodist, London Missionary Society, Roman Catholic and Anglican organizations predominate in the islands. Christendom’s missionaries arrived in the 1800’s, and in more recent years many smaller Protestant groups started to be active here.
THE SOUTH PACIFIC ISLANDERS
Years ago the islands were very much isolated from the rest of the world. No airplane services here then! Links with the outside world were confined to infrequent calls by passenger and cargo ships, perhaps once a month or less.
The islanders come from different backgrounds, such as Melanesian, Micronesian and Polynesian. But mostly they have similar basic attitudes. Friendly, easygoing and casual in their approach to life, they enjoy each day, being content with few of this world’s goods. Often the native way of viewing life frustrates those of European background, most of whom are conditioned to get ahead materially.
COORDINATING THE WORK IN A FAR-FLUNG FIELD
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society’s branch in Australia, from its formation in 1904, directed the work throughout the South Pacific, and this oversight continued until 1958, when a branch office was formed in Suva, the capital of Fiji.
The countries that came under the new branch were Fiji, New Caledonia, Vanuatu (formerly New Hebrides), Western Samoa, American Samoa, Tonga, Niue, Tahiti, Tuvalu (formerly the Ellice Islands), Kiribati (formerly the Gilbert Islands), Tokelau and the Cook Islands.
One thing that has hampered the progress of the Kingdom work in the South Pacific is the isolation of the various island territories. Fiji, situated in a central position in relation to the other islands in the branch territory, serves as a hublike center with the other islands radiating outward from it like the spokes of a giant wheel. Thus if one was to travel from Fiji in an easterly direction, one would reach Tonga after about 700 kilometers (430 mi), Niue after 960 kilometers (600 mi) and Tahiti after 3,540 kilometers (2,200 mi).
Traveling northeast from Fiji, after 1,350 kilometers (840 mi), one would arrive at the Samoa Islands. Then, about 1,100 kilometers (680 mi) to the north of Fiji is the Tuvalu group of islands and about the same distance again to the north from Tuvalu is the main group of the islands of Kiribati. Just over 960 kilometers (600 mi) in a westerly direction from Fiji brings the traveler to Vanuatu, and 1,120 kilometers (700 mi) brings him to New Caledonia. From east to west the territory stretches over some 4,800 kilometers (3,000 mi) of ocean! Due to the location of the international date line, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Fiji are among the first each year to celebrate the Memorial of Jesus’ death, and those in Samoa are among the last, some 23 hours later.
The Fiji branch at one time supervised the Kingdom work in 12 countries, the greatest number of countries under any one branch. The office handled 13 major languages. Circuit and district overseers traveled as much as 4,800 kilometers (3,000 mi) between the extremities of the territory, constantly coping with immigration regulations.
To give us some insight into the work of preaching the good news in these island groups, let us look a little into each of their backgrounds. Then we will see how the good news got started and how it has progressed to the present day under Jehovah’s guiding hand. We will start with Fiji, the largest of them all.
FIJI ISLANDS GROUP
In the Fiji Islands group there are more than 300 islands, about one third of which are inhabited. This makes up a total land area of 18,275 square kilometers (7,056 sq mi). Formerly a British Crown Colony, it has been a self-governing nation since 1970. The islands are beautiful, with mountains and rich soil.
The original inhabitants, called Fijians, make up about 40 percent of the population. They are a dark-skinned race of Melanesian descent. Previously fierce, warlike cannibals (at one time Fiji was known as the Cannibal Islands), they are now civilized and most are converted to nominal Christianity.
About 50 percent of the population are descended from laborers brought from India to work on the sugar plantations. Though many Indians still work in the cane fields, a large number of them are now shopkeepers and business people. There is also a dwindling population of Europeans, as well as a small number of Chinese, and there are groups from almost all the other islands of the South Pacific. This makes Fiji a real melting pot.
Suva, the capital, is a fast-developing city with an estimated population of more than 100,000. Fiji now has a total population of more than 600,000. About half the inhabitants are either Hindus or Muslims, with the rest belonging to 20 sects of Christendom.
FIJI HEARS THE GOOD NEWS
How did the good news come to these islands? It seems that some of the Watch Tower Society’s publications reached Fiji as early as the first decade of this century. The first active witness of Jehovah arrived in 1913. He was transferred here from Sri Lanka by his employer. When on leave, this brother went to the United States and attended a convention of the Bible Students. He brought back with him the Photo-Drama of Creation and showed it to packed audiences in Fiji. Lectures were translated into Fijian, and showings were held in large towns and country areas.
Reporting on one of the showings, the Fiji Times of June 28, 1915, commented: “The second part of this series of religious pictures was screened at the Universal Theatre last night. From about 6.30 p.m. hundreds lined the Post Office verandah and pavement or stood in groups under the ivi tree [native chestnut]. The doors were opened at 7.30 p.m. and five minutes after the hall was packed.” After this no preaching was reported for about 15 years.
TWO PIONEERS DISTRIBUTE MUCH LITERATURE
In 1930 Andy Auchterlonie and A. L. McGregor arrived in the islands. After doing house-to-house work in Suva, they traveled by boat around the coast from Suva to the western side of the main island, Viti Levu (Big Fiji). They left a great quantity of Bible literature with people throughout the island, witnessing to all they could talk to.
With the aid of a Fijian guide and a dugout canoe they traveled into the interior of Viti Levu, placing hundreds of copies of booklets in the Fijian language. They also carried out preaching on the island of Vanua Levu (Big Land), the second largest of the Fiji Islands. Using a boat, they contacted most of the villagers there and distributed much literature.
FRUITAGE RESULTS
One contact that bore fruit was the family of Leonard Heatley. He tells us: “Being part Fijian, my father, Edward, had an excellent knowledge of both the English and Fijian languages and had done translating work for various organizations. He accepted a cash offer to translate the booklet entitled Hell. But no cash was ever paid for the work, since my father had accepted the truth by the time he finished the translation of the booklet! He resigned from the Catholic Church and till the day of his death in 1959 was a staunch supporter of the Kingdom work.
“He translated six booklets, the book Deliverance and many transcription record Bible talks by Brother Rutherford into Fijian. These were made into records in the Fijian language and played to thousands of Fijians in scores of villages, using a transcription machine.” Leonard Heatley himself became Fiji’s first Gilead graduate.
Further fruitage resulted when Harry and Louisa Scott (now both deceased) accepted the good news. Said Sister Scott: “A friend of my husband, Ted Heatley, called on us one evening and played one of Brother Rutherford’s recorded Bible talks. The simplicity and clearness of the message appealed to us. We accepted it as the truth.” The third family that took up the truth at the same time was the Marriott family, all three families (Heatleys, Scotts and Marriotts) were the fruitage of those two early pioneers.
OTHER PIONEERS COME TO FIJI
After Brothers Auchterlonie and McGregor returned home, the Australia branch assigned other pioneers to work in Fiji. Around 1933 a pioneer brother walked, cycled, rode and boated over most of Fiji, placing thousands of pieces of literature. Unfortunately this brother later left the truth, but seeds of truth had been widely sown.
Brother Eric Ewins tells of his first contact with the message of truth from that pioneer: “It was the most difficult time of my life: My wife had recently died and I had a 12-month-old son to care for. I recall having asked a clergyman the reason for such happenings, and he replied that God wanted her in heaven, so he took her. The situation distressed me so much that I asked God to let me die, as I could see no sense in life under such conditions.
“Just a few days later a stranger walked into my office and, after introducing himself, opened up like this: ‘In 1914 there was war in heaven and Satan and his demons were cast down to the earth. Since then they have been preparing all nations to fight against God at the battle of Armageddon, when they will be destroyed, and God’s Kingdom under Christ will rule the earth forever.’ I was immediately struck by the dynamic nature of the message, so different from what the churches handed out.
“I invited the Witness to stay with me for a few days. This he did, and we discussed the message into the wee hours of the morning. It didn’t take me many days to be convinced that this was the truth and that it was God’s answer to my desperate prayer.” Brother Ewins joined in association with the original three local Witness families.
A SOUND CAR IS PUT TO USE
During 1937 a sound car was introduced into the islands and operated for about six months on the island of Viti Levu. Years later, brothers met people who still remembered that sound car. A native village elder in the 1950’s said: “They were courageous. They used to come and park their car on the bank of the river and the message blared across to all of us here in the village. We heard everything: ‘The Devil leads them all. The religious leaders teach lies. The Bible teaches the truth. God’s Kingdom is man’s hope. No hellfire.’ Yes, in both languages, English and Fijian!”
J. F. RUTHERFORD VISITS FIJI
In May 1938 the Society’s president at that time, J. F. Rutherford, spent one day in Fiji while on a tour of Australia, New Zealand and the Pacific. The Town Hall in Suva had been booked weeks in advance and extensive publicity had been given to the public talk to be delivered by Brother Rutherford. But on the day of his arrival, the authorities closed the hall to the brothers. Unable to use the Town Hall, Brother Rutherford nonetheless held meetings with the few local brothers, and about 40 people were present for his talk in a private home. Though the police closely followed Brother Rutherford wherever he went that day, he succeeded in greatly encouraging the brothers in Fiji.
BAN IMPOSED ON BIBLE LITERATURE
In 1936 Fiji had passed legislation prohibiting the importation of some of the Society’s Bible literature. Then, with the outbreak of World War II, the colonial government imposed a ban on all the Society’s literature. The ban resulted in some books being destroyed. For example, in January 1939 the Comptroller of Customs destroyed the entire shipment of the book Deliverance in Fijian. The brothers, however, still managed to get some literature into the country and remain spiritually well fed. Sister Scott related one way this was done:
“Brother Ashcroft worked as a doctor’s assistant on a passenger ship traveling between Australia and Canada. He would pick up a supply of literature in Sydney, and when the ship called at Suva, some of the brothers would go on board with coats on, stuff booklets in their inside pockets and then walk down the gangway to a waiting car. After a while the brothers made other trips up the gangway until all Brother Ashcroft’s stock was exhausted.
“Once, Brother Ashcroft arrived with a large shipment, and we could not get it ashore by the usual method. So Sister Tupe Marriott borrowed a Chinese market gardener’s rowboat and rowed across the harbor at night to the wharf where the Niagara was berthed. She pretended to fish and then said in a loud voice to her young son who was with her, ‘Let’s move over to this side (away from the wharf), there seem to be more fish here.’ This was the signal for Brother Ashcroft to lower a number of cartons of literature down the side of the ship. Sister Marriott then rowed back across the harbor with a full load of ‘fish.’”
The Australian branch office made repeated efforts to have the restrictions removed. In 1940 Harold E. Gill was sent to Fiji, and he made a forthright appeal to the governor. However, the work soon came under a complete ban, as in most of the British Commonwealth at that time.
RESTRICTIONS REMOVED
In 1945, as a result of the brothers’ petitioning the government, the ban on the preaching activity was lifted, and the publications could enter Fiji subject to prior scrutiny and acceptance by the governor-in-council. Then, in 1959, a further easing of the restriction took place. Literature was allowed in, as long as a copy of any new publication entering the islands was supplied to the commissioner of police. In 1970 the prime minister lifted all restrictions.
ARRIVAL OF GILEAD GRADUATES
Though some work was done during the years up to World War II, during the war the work came to a virtual standstill. In 1946 the Society’s president, N. H. Knorr, and his secretary, M. G. Henschel, stopped at Fiji and each gave a talk to the small group of brothers. Brother Knorr disclosed that the Society would be sending missionaries from the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead. On April 5, 1947, William Checksfield, a rugged English brother, and Cecil Bruhn, an Australian, both graduates of Gilead’s eighth class, arrived in Fiji. “To welcome us,” Brother Bruhn recalls, “were members of three families who were the only Witnesses in the islands.” Brother Ewins, now remarried and raising a family, had also returned to Fiji after an absence of eight years.
FIRST CONGREGATION FORMED
In September 1947 the first congregation in Fiji was officially formed in Suva. It was made up of the two missionaries, Sister Connie Clark and members of the Ewins, Heatley, Marriott and Scott families.
With the help of the missionaries, the congregation gradually increased from 9 to 37 publishers over the next five years. One of the new ones was a man from Tuvalu, Foua Tofinga, who became the first Tuvaluan to accept the truth and be baptized. He is still serving Jehovah faithfully, now being one of the three members of the Fiji Branch Committee.
Brother Bruhn recalls that it was impossible at that time for the missionaries to spread the good news to the other islands, but Brother Harry Scott filled the need and spread the message far and wide. How was this possible? Sister Scott explained: “My husband was the captain of the Adi Beti (Lady Betty), the official yacht of Fiji’s governors. So wherever the yacht went, there went Bible literature! On many of Fiji’s widely scattered islands the only contact people had with the truth was the literature placed this way.”
Unfortunately Brother Bruhn was forced to return to Australia in 1949 due to health problems. Brother Checksfield continued on and became very well known throughout the main island of Viti Levu. He was able to help and train the brothers, including youngsters Len Heatley and Eunice Marriott, who was only 12 years old when the missionaries arrived.
In March 1951 Brothers Knorr and Henschel again visited Suva and encouraged the brothers. That same month saw 30 out in the field—a new peak of publishers.
FIJI’S FIRST REGULAR PIONEER
Eunice Marriott was much affected by this visit and was to become Fiji’s first regular pioneer. She tells us: “Numerous youngsters who were reared in the truth by God-fearing parents often need an outstanding experience to move them to respond to what the truth is all about. In 1951 I was very interested in obtaining advanced secular education, and like many here, desirous of moving from this small island country to a larger one. So my sister and brother-in-law in New Zealand were making arrangements for me to go there for more advanced studies. While I was waiting to finalize arrangements for the trip, Brothers Knorr and Henschel visited Fiji.
“Brother Knorr gave a discourse in which he discussed the courageous Bible character Daniel whose life really impressed me. Being young, I remember sliding farther and farther down into my seat so as not to be seen by Brother Knorr with his authoritative manner and, as it seemed to me, piercing eyes. After the talk Brother Henschel personally and encouragingly discussed with me the pioneer and missionary service. ‘Brother Henschel,’ I said, ‘if I went to Gilead, I would not want to be assigned to tiny islands, such as Fiji.’ He took me to a wall map of the world and said that they might send me to Brazil, where millions of people live. So encouraged was I to make pioneering my goal in life that I canceled the arrangements to go to New Zealand and began to pioneer.
“I did not ever get to go to Gilead School since pioneers were and still are needed in Fiji, but I have enjoyed every minute of my service here. After being in the pioneer service for 27 years, I was privileged to accompany my husband [Don Clare] to Brooklyn in 1978 while he attended the special Gilead course for Branch Committee members. We wives were overjoyed to be permitted to sit in for two hours of Bible discussions each day.”
Others followed her example, and the next year (1952) Lydia Pedro and Len Heatley began pioneering. These three young pioneers, Lydia, Len and Eunice, labored alongside Brother Checksfield in building up the Suva Congregation. From these 3 the pioneer ranks have increased until there are now 90 pioneers in Fiji alone and 130 in the whole branch territory. Two of the first three pioneers are still in full-time work. The third, Sister Lydia Pedro, died in New Zealand in 1969.
MORE MISSIONARIES ARRIVE
Don Clare, the present Branch Committee coordinator, first sighted Fiji in 1952 on his way to Gilead School by ship with 16 other students from Australia. Said Brother Clare: “I remember standing on the deck of an ocean liner and viewing, for the first time, Suva harbor, surrounded by beautiful hills and clothed in deep, many-hued greens. I thought: ‘What a lovely place for a missionary to work!’ We spent that day with a small band of about 20 local publishers and one lone missionary, Brother Bill Checksfield. It was a most enjoyable day. All 17 of us expressed our thoughts that Fiji would be a grand missionary assignment.”
What happened? Brother Clare continues: “As our course of study drew to a close in July of 1952, we anxiously awaited announcement of our missionary assignments. What a delightful surprise it was for four of us, Harold and Lena Cater, Clive Taylor and me, to learn that we had been assigned to Fiji! And what a bigger surprise we received when we were asked to take up secular work in order to get into the colony of Fiji.”
Why was this necessary? Well, for a number of years the Society had made applications for missionaries to enter Fiji. The government continued to reject them. So a new method had to be used to get these four Gilead graduates into Fiji. They were to enter as tourists and then endeavor to obtain secular work. This they did in March 1953. They were instructed not to attend meetings for some months and to witness only out of town to avoid drawing attention to themselves. Eventually, though, they began to increase their theocratic activity and were able to assist the sole missionary, Brother Checksfield.
“I have always been convinced that the Society’s sending us to Fiji at that time was directed by Jehovah,” Brother Clare recalls. “For us to obtain residency so we could take up missionary service, we had to remain exclusively in Fiji, doing full-time secular work for five years. In later years brothers from Australia, Canada and England came to Fiji to serve where the need is greater, but they all had trouble with the Immigration Department once it was learned they were Witnesses. The result was that they had to leave the colony when their permits expired.”
WITNESSING IN FIJI
Brother Cater describes the work at that time: “The people were friendly and had the underlying island-style philosophy of malua or ‘tomorrow will do.’ Most of the year the climate was hot and humid. Rural areas up to that time had received very little attention, so this is where we started our preaching. It was difficult at first, for here most of the people spoke little English and we were still attending Fijian language classes. Soon, though, I was able to give short talks in Fijian. The public meeting work in the villages grew, and we were able to encourage a Fijian brother to accompany us. The procedure was to contact the village headman, witness to him and arrange through him for a place to give the public talk. After the talk it was thatched-hut-to-thatched-hut work. No doorbells here! Instead of chairs, mats on the floor were offered.”
MISSIONARIES GAIN RESIDENCY
After five years of doing secular work, the four Gilead graduates who had arrived in 1953 gained residency, and Brothers Clare and Taylor took up the full-time preaching work again. Brother and Sister Cater stayed on for some years, helping the brothers to maturity. They then had to return to Australia in 1960 after the birth of their son.
SERVING WHERE THE NEED IS GREATER
In the early 1950’s the call went out for brothers to serve where the need was greater—in the islands. Over the next few years many brothers from Australia responded to this invitation. They influenced the growth of the work a great deal. At one time 120 such brothers and sisters were in Fiji. Many of them learned the Fijian language so they could help the people to the greatest extent possible. Thus a number of congregations were started with such families as a nucleus. The second congregation was formed at Lautoka in 1956. Later on one was formed at Navua and in 1958 one at Mba (Ba). Today there are 24 congregations throughout Fiji as well as isolated publishers on some of the more distant islands.
It was not easy for these brothers to serve where the need was greater. Not only did they have the problems associated with moving to a new land, but the immigration authorities would deport them if they found out that they were Witnesses. Thus the brothers had to remain inconspicuous for some months. Then, when they got established in their secular work, they would gradually begin associating with the local Witnesses and eventually get into a full witnessing schedule.
Learning to understand the island people was another challenge. Here life is relaxed. A Bible student may make an appointment for a study but often fail to keep it. Why? It is just the island way. They live very much for the present; the past is forgotten, the future blissfully ignored. Whatever comes along on the spur of the moment gets attention, regardless of its relative importance.
The politeness of the islanders can also pose a problem for outsiders. Showing respect is still basic in the islanders’ way of life. Hence, at times an islander will tell you what he thinks you want to hear, rather than what he feels. This means that one has to be a good teacher, having insight and being full of discernment.
When circuit overseers work country territory, they may ask: “How far do we have to walk to the next village?” The island brother knows it is, say, eight kilometers (5 mi). But the European circuit overseer is tired. So, rather than see a look of downheartedness on his brother’s face, out of the sheer goodness of his heart, sincerely wanting to be helpful and encouraging, the island brother will say: “About one mile [1.5 km].” Many are the overseas brothers who have walked the longest “mile” in their lives because of this!
FIRST CIRCUIT VISITS
In 1955 the Australia branch assigned Len Helberg to be Fiji’s first circuit overseer. He also visited brothers in Western Samoa, American Samoa and New Caledonia, and he was able to get the work going in Tonga and Tahiti.
Circuit work in the islands involved much travel in small vessels sometimes called pig-and-chicken boats because of the variety of cargo they carried. The passengers fitted in wherever they could among the livestock, timber and foodstuffs. Some vessels were better than others, but they did not hold to set schedules. Thus the circuit overseer could find himself isolated for a month or more on some island waiting for the next boat.
When serving cities, the circuit overseer may stay in a modern home with all the comforts of hot and cold running water, flush toilets and a bed. The following week he may be in a village where he sleeps on a mat on the floor and where bathing facilities may be a creek or a bucket of water poured over himself out in the open.
FIJI’S FIRST DISTRICT CONVENTION
Fiji’s first district convention was the Triumphant Kingdom Convention, held in Suva in 1956. Two days before the convention, Suva was given a cyclone warning. Homes and buildings were battened down, roads were flooded and impassable, and all plane service was suspended as the cyclone drew closer. But the night before the convention the cyclone swung away from Suva, and calm weather greeted the opening day.
The plane bringing Brother Don Adams from the Society’s headquarters to Fiji was delayed due to the bad weather. When it arrived, the brothers brought him to Suva by a four-wheel drive vehicle and, after wading across a flooded river in chest-high water, delivered him to the convention site just one hour before he was to give the public talk!
From then on, the brothers have had fairly regular conventions, which have contributed overwhelmingly to the growth of the work and the spiritual upbuilding of Jehovah’s people.
USING THE FIJIAN LANGUAGE IN MEETINGS
Up until this time English was used in all the meetings. But it was not easy for some of the brothers to give talks in English. So in 1957 the zone overseer recommended the use of Fijian in the congregations, and this was done the following year. Also, a Fijian supplement to the Australian edition of Our Kingdom Ministry was published each month. This proved to be very helpful.
A NEW BRANCH IS FORMED
On September 1, 1958, supervision of the Kingdom interests in the South Pacific was turned over to a new branch in Suva, Fiji. Len Helberg, a graduate of Gilead School’s 31st class, became the first branch overseer. Len Heatley, who became the first local Gilead graduate, assisted him and shared in the traveling work. To start with, the branch office was located in a room at Brother Eric Ewins’ home in Suva. Later a small two-bedroom house in Suva was rented.
In 1960 Don Clare, who in 1954 had married Eunice Marriott, Fiji’s first local pioneer, became the branch overseer and continues today as Branch Committee coordinator. Len Helberg had to return to Australia, and Len Heatley has continued until now in various avenues of full-time service.
PROBLEMS FACING THE NEW BRANCH OFFICE
Imagine the problems that faced the new branch office. There were then eight different island territories to administer. They used different currencies, spoke many different languages and were divided by the international date line. Moreover, each island group was under a different government. Further aggravating the problems was the slowness of the mail services. It would take up to ten weeks to receive a reply to a letter from some areas of the branch territory.
Nevertheless, the direct administration of the whole island field by the new branch office, under the guiding influence of Jehovah’s spirit, greatly accelerated the work. In the first year of its operation, the number of publishers in Fiji alone rose from 111 to 176.
TRUTH OVERCOMES DEMONISM
Though most of the Fijian population belong to one of the churches of Christendom, some still follow their old ways that involve demonism, such as religious fire walking.
Seremaia Raibe became involved with demonism after he left school, joining a group known as the Vukea (Helper). This group believed they would be given power over death. He would take part in drinking kava (a native drink that numbs the mind and body) until the early hours of the morning in order to contact the demons and receive power to overcome death.
One day in 1957 Brother Checksfield called on him. The missionary used the Bible to explain the reasons for critical world conditions. Seremaia became so interested that he began reading the Bible even though the Vukea had tried to discredit it. When he read at John 5:28 that the resurrection would be through Jesus Christ, he realized that the teachings of the Vukea were wrong. When the head of the sect died—something Seremaia had thought impossible—he left the group and abandoned demonism. He was baptized in 1958, began pioneering and helped to start the work on Niue. Today he is an elder in New Zealand.
INGATHERING AIDED BY USE OF FIJIAN LANGUAGE
As a result of the use of the Fijian language at the meetings, more Fijians came into the truth. A monthly edition of The Watchtower began to be published in Fijian in July 1961. A number of booklets were also made available in the vernacular.
Taking a lead in this translation work was Brother Aminiasi Cakau. Though he had a large family, he often translated into the early hours of the morning. In the last few years of his life he served as a member of the Branch Committee until his death in December 1980.
A present member of the Branch Committee is Brother Emosi Laucala, who learned the truth from his aunt. In 1960 this Fijian woman started studying the Bible while in Suva and then returned to her village. When her father died, she was put to some spiritual tests by the people of the village because of her new faith and because she no longer feared the dead. Several others, observing her faith, began to listen to what she told them from the Bible. One of these was her nephew, Emosi, who was a Seventh-Day Adventist. He followed her to Suva after she returned and wanted to look into her “church.” He had a Bible study every day during the week he was in town, started attending meetings and then went home with publications. He was baptized in 1962.
LOSS OF FIJI’S FIRST MISSIONARY
Also in 1962, during the district convention in Lautoka, Fiji’s first missionary, Brother Checksfield, died. He had served faithfully in the Fijian field for 15 years and had seen Jehovah bless his efforts. At times he had conducted more than 20 Bible studies each week.
Over the years the Fijian brothers had been concerned that Brother Checksfield would return to England, but he always replied that he had no desire to return, for there was no better place on earth for him than Fiji. A fine example of a missionary’s sticking to his assignment!
CONVENTIONS BRING THE BROTHERS TOGETHER
Occasionally an interisland convention is held, bringing brothers together from all over the South Pacific. In 1963 the first large international convention was held in Suva, as one of the 24 different lands represented in the chain of around-the-world conventions bearing the theme “Everlasting Good News.” Many from other countries under the branch came and joined with the brothers in Fiji. What a joy it was to meet face to face for the first time, after having heard so much about one another!
In their friendly way, the island brothers fellowshipped for the five days of the convention. How thrilled, too, they were to associate with brothers from the Society’s headquarters, including Brothers F. W. Franz and Grant Suiter. The public talk, given by Brother Franz, was attended by 1,080 people, almost double the number at any previous convention in Fiji. Twenty-five were baptized, the fruitage of the ministry in a number of different countries. Sessions were held in four languages, English, Fijian, French and Samoan. The convention was an outstanding event in the early days of theocratic progress in Fiji.
THOSE FROM CHIEFLY FAMILIES ACCEPT THE TRUTH
In Fijian society, some families are of a chiefly background, having earned that distinction many years ago through deeds in war. They bear names such as Ratu and Ro for men and Adi and Bulo for women. These names are passed on from parents to children through the male line, and persons bearing them are highly regarded.
When those from chiefly families learn the truth, they make many changes in order to live in harmony with Jesus’ words: “All you are brothers.” (Matt. 23:8) Often much opposition comes their way as the experience of Sister Alisi Dranidalo shows:
“My family, from the village of Lovoni on the island of Ovalau, opposed me. My father was especially opposed since he bears a chiefly title and was very involved in the village religious life. When I left my secular work in 1962 to go pioneering in the Ellice Islands [now Tuvalu], he disowned me. For nearly eight years he did not even open letters that I sent to him. During one vacation I went home, but throughout my two-week stay I just viewed myself as a stranger, not as his daughter, doing all things with deep respect (as is the Fijian custom when one is a stranger).
“However, due to my Christian conduct, not because of my witnessing to him, my father in time asked me to come and study with the family. One of my brothers and one sister are now in the truth, and my father is very favorably disposed. He has broken his ties with the church and attends meetings and assemblies.”
Sister Alisi Dranidalo is now a special pioneer, doing much fine work both in the field and in translation work.
NEW BRANCH FACILITY
In 1965 Brother Knorr visited Fiji and served at the “Fruitage of the Spirit” District Convention. At that time he approved the purchase of some property in Suva with a view to building a branch office and Kingdom Hall. Steps were taken to register the work legally, and this was done in 1966 under the name of the International Bible Students Association.
Suitable property was difficult to find, but eventually land was purchased near the business section of Suva. When the building was completed in May 1969, it became a fine witness to all. At the dedication 632 were present, squeezing into the Kingdom Hall designed for only 250 persons. The local brothers were deeply moved upon learning that the money for the land came from brothers in New Zealand and that the funds for the building itself came from the brothers in Australia. The branch building is a split-level, three-story structure. The top story is office and Bethel home, and the Kingdom Hall was below that. The ground floor was for literature storage and a garage.
CONSTRUCTING AN ASSEMBLY FACILITY
Over the years assemblies have been held in various public buildings, but many times it has been necessary for the brothers to construct the entire assembly facilities. For example, in 1970 at the “Men of Goodwill” District Convention the brothers in Fiji’s western districts built the entire assembly facilities at the town of Mba. Working mostly on the weekends, they built two large thatched-roof auditoriums with bamboo seating, as well as six other smaller buildings. It took them three months, but they were well rewarded when 842 attended the public talk and 22 were baptized.
INDEPENDENCE FOR FIJI
On October 10, 1970, after 96 years as a British Crown Colony, Fiji became an independent nation. This event affected the work in Fiji, since the new government’s aim was to have local people occupy the secular positions then being held by foreigners. Many of the brothers who had come here to serve where the need is greater and had obtained secular work returned home, as local people took over their positions.
Some of the brothers who had been serving in Fiji for many years had to decide whether they would become Fijian citizens or not. That is what some of the brothers did. Among such was a Gilead graduate, Brother Clare, who continues serving in the branch office.
GROWTH IN MORE RECENT YEARS
In 1970 Memorial attendance was 1,226, but in 1983 it rose to 3,061. Up until the end of the 1970’s, about ten congregations had been formed in Suva and the larger towns. But with more native Fijians accepting the truth, the next ten years saw another 11 congregations formed.
During 1977 the work spread out to more of the untouched villages and islands. Special pioneers opened up four new areas and established three congregations. But it is difficult to spread the work throughout Fiji’s 106 inhabited islands. Once Fijian special pioneers leave their own villages, they are not usually welcomed in other villages unless someone from that village invites them.
On one occasion an elderly man called at the branch office requesting that a minister of Jehovah’s Witnesses be assigned to his island. He was a former Methodist minister but was dissatisfied with his religion and others he had encountered. Having had contact with the Witnesses on the main island, he thought they had the best religion he had found so far. Since he offered accommodations, a special pioneer couple were assigned to visit the island. They witnessed in eight villages, spending two weeks there. It turned out that the elderly man was the paramount chief of the island, and he told his people to listen to Jehovah’s Witnesses.
FAITHFUL STAND BRINGS RESULTS
The village communal system has a tight hold on people in Fiji. Previously it was virtually impossible for a person to become a Witness unless he moved out of the village. The situation is now changing. In the past, people used to run into the bush when they saw the Witnesses approaching a village. But the brothers’ high moral standards, their clean living habits and their persistent preaching are now causing many to respond.
Illustrating this is the experience of Sister Losavati Rokomarama. She learned the truth in Suva. Her husband did not share her new belief, and shortly thereafter he returned to his village on the island of Ngau. There the family lives in the largest village on the island.
In the years that followed, Losavati remained firm in her belief and through informal witnessing continued to spread the good news. Each month she mailed her report to the branch office. Every Sunday she had the Watchtower study with her young children despite the taunts of the rest of the village, as they all went to the Methodist church. As time passed, her husband joined her in the Watchtower study and slowly accepted the truth. Then, through her informal witnessing, her brother-in-law and sister-in-law also left the church, and along with the children in the families, the four of them gathered each week for the study.
At one time two special pioneer brothers were assigned to that area, and they stayed with Sister Losavati Rokomarama and her husband. As a result of their zealous witnessing, the village became stirred up against them, and the minister called a meeting of all the villagers at the church. The minister ordered the newly interested husband of Sister Rokomarama to turn the special pioneers out of his house. This he refused to do, boldly telling all of them that the pioneers were invited by him and they would continue to stay with him!
Though special pioneers are no longer assigned to that island, the small group are still meeting regularly and six are reporting field service each month.
CARING FOR AN OUTER ISLAND
Three isolated publishers live on a large island about 120 kilometers (75 mi) from the main island of Viti Levu. Circuit overseers regularly visit these publishers even though getting there may take more than a day. The circuit overseer has to take a small cargo boat to get to the island, which has virtually no roads and no electricity. When he arrives at one end of the island, he has to wait for many hours as the boat goes into numerous bays along the coast, unloading and loading produce and people. At his destination, he gets into a small dinghy that takes him to the water’s edge. Then he struggles through the mud flats, carrying his baggage. After walking several miles through the bush, he finally reaches the home of one of the brothers.
However, the effort is well rewarded, as he sees the brothers’ appreciation and joy when they talk together, share in the witnessing work and hold meetings. One circuit overseer fondly recalls a departure from the island when a Witness family stood in the sea, up to their waists in the water, waving good-bye until his boat was out of sight.
So, by various means the good news is being spread far and wide throughout the islands, even though circumstances make it impossible to assign pioneers to all the places where they are needed.
CYCLONES AFFECT THE BROTHERS
From about November to April each year, Fiji is the target of tropical storms (hurricanes) known locally as cyclones. Over the years these have caused much damage and loss of life, and the brothers have naturally been affected.
Many are the times that relief supplies have been distributed to brothers who lost home and crops from flooding and landslides. The local brothers have learned to care for one another during such disasters.
FIRST MISSIONARY PERMIT SINCE 1947
The year 1978 was a big one for the small branch. Due to several changes and the death of one of the circuit overseers, Brother Manoa Baro, a great need arose for traveling overseers. No local brothers were trained for this work. So it was decided to apply to the government for a permit to allow an experienced circuit overseer to come from overseas. The branch had applied many times before, but no permits for missionaries had been granted for over 30 years!
Great was the gratitude to Jehovah when it was learned that permission had been granted for a brother, Vaughan Guy, along with his wife, Jeanne, to enter Fiji for a three-year period to serve as a traveling overseer. Now the local brothers have been given much training, and some new circuit overseers have taken up the work.
WITNESSING TO INDIANS
Many of the Indians who came to Fiji as laborers remained here and have raised large families. The majority of them practice the Hindu religion, and the remainder are Muslims. Throughout Fiji the Indians run most of the businesses, and many of them have leased land and grow sugarcane. Only a few of the Indians, by comparison, have accepted the truth, and the publishers are made up almost entirely of local Fijians and those from nearby islands.
The Indian, however, is very hospitable. When witnessing to one, especially in the rural areas, the publisher will be invited inside the home. Invariably he will be offered either a cool drink or warm, milky, sweet tea. The Indian householder will almost always accept literature, as it is part of his belief never to be rude to anyone who is speaking about God. He is hardworking, ambitious and usually maintains a close-knit family arrangement. This is another reason that it is very difficult for young Indians to accept the truth.
The Hindu religion, to which most Indians belong, also makes it difficult for them to learn the truth. It is common to hear them say: “All religions are good and pleasing to God.” However, some from this background, such as Hari Narain who is now an elder, have learned the truth and are serving faithfully in the congregations.
In the western district town of Tavua a brother, formerly a Muslim, and his wife are having a fine time studying with Indian people. At the 1980 district convention in Lautoka a married couple, both former Hindus, were baptized. Thus, progress is being made in reaching the Indian population, so that Hindi, in addition to English and Fijian, has been featured on the program of the last two district conventions; and 255 attended the Hindi-language public talk at the “Kingdom Truth” District Convention.
JEHOVAH’S BLESSING MANIFEST
The evidence of Jehovah’s blessing on the preaching and teaching work over the years is clearly manifest. From the 12 publishers in 1947, when the first Gilead graduates arrived, the truth has spread so that in June 1983 an all-time peak of 819 was reached. The “Kingdom Truth” District Convention was our largest convention ever, with an attendance of 2,905, and 47 were baptized, compared with 50 for the entire 1982 service year. Great potential is seen in the fact that the 1983 Memorial attendance of 3,061 was more than three and a half times the number of peak publishers!
To keep pace with expansion, the congregations moved out of the Kingdom Hall at the Suva branch office, and the hall was converted in 1983 into three private offices and a literature and shipping department. The former shipping department now serves as a reception and translation office.
This fine increase and the developments can be attributed to our Heavenly Father, Jehovah God, who has imbued strength and courage in those sent forth to preach the Word.
Let us now turn our attention to another part of the South Pacific, the islands of Samoa.
WESTERN SAMOA
The islands of Samoa are among the most beautiful of the South Pacific. During the past two centuries, however, they have seen their share of troubles as the world powers competed for possession of them. This has left them in an economic and social condition unlike that expected in a true paradise.
Although Western Samoa is only a few miles from American Samoa and the people are related, they operate under separate governments. Since 1962 Western Samoa has been an independent nation, one of the smallest in the world.
The two large islands (Upolu and Savai’i) have an area of only 2,934 square kilometers (1,133 sq mi), but they have a population of about 160,000. They are mountainous, yet very fertile, covered with dense bush interspersed with food plantations and groves of coconut. Villages are picturesque; the houses, known as fales, have rounded thatched roofs and open sides because of the country’s warm climate. When it rains, the people let down palm-leaf blinds. The capital town of Apia has some 35,000 inhabitants.
Predominant religions here are the Congregational Christian Church (stemming from the London Missionary Society), Methodist, Roman Catholic, Mormon, Seventh-Day Adventist and Pentecostal groups.
The Samoans are Polynesians; they are friendly and hospitable. Their complexion is light brown and their features are almost Caucasian. In their village way of life, they follow a social system in which a number of families form a clan; the head of the clan is called a matai. There are a number of matais in each village. Their positions vary in importance and authority. Matais who are orators and chiefs are high ranking, and usually there is a paramount chief who is the final authority in the village.
As can be imagined, when all the members of a clan are of one religious belief, they can make things very difficult for one who is trying to break away from Babylon the Great.
WITNESSING IN WESTERN SAMOA
Nevertheless, visitors receive a friendly reception in almost any Samoan village. As a publisher of the good news approaches a house he pauses respectfully at the surrounding low platform of stones on which the fale stands and waits for a sign of welcome. There it is—a girl is spreading a mat inside. Now the publisher goes in without a word, removing his shoes before entering. When he is comfortably seated, legs crossed on the mat, he waits politely.
Now it is the householder’s turn. She says how glad she is that the visitor has come to her home, that she hopes the publisher’s work will be blessed, that her house is humble, but the sun is hot, and so, she concludes, the publisher is welcome. He then thanks her and inquires about the health of the family. Only then is he free to proceed with the Kingdom message.
EARLY KINGDOM WORK
It was in 1952 that the good news of Jehovah’s Kingdom began to take root in Western Samoa. A brother from England, John Croxford, organized a small study group of interested people. He was employed by T.E.A.L. Airlines (now Air New Zealand) and worked in an office on Beach Road in Apia. There he met an office worker named Fuaiupolu Pele.
According to Pele, Brother Croxford was “the friendliest man I had ever met.” Pele said that Brother Croxford told him later that when he saw all the people going to church on Sunday, dressed in white, with Bibles in their hands, he had no idea just where to start! But, start he did, with fine results. Pele tells us how he felt at that time:
“I knew he [Brother Croxford] wanted to talk with me, but I put him off because I had no time for it then. As chairman of the Ex-Pupils’ Association of Government Schools, I was very busy. One Saturday evening, however, he came to my home for a meal, and we talked until the wee hours of Sunday morning. I asked him many questions, and every answer he gave was read from the Bible. I was convinced beyond any doubt that this was the truth I had been looking for.”
Though happy to learn the truth, Pele had misgivings about the consequences. He and his family were prominent in the church, some being pastors. He was fairly well known because of his school, sports and church activities. In his mind was the question, What would the Ex-Pupils’ Association think about this new religion he had embraced? What might the patrons of the Association, their Highnesses Malietoa Tanumafili II and Tupua Tamasese III, think and say about him?
In Samoan custom, matais with high titles exert much influence. It is almost unthinkable for a Samoan, especially one without a title or high standing, to oppose the customs and religion of his forefathers. This was Pele’s position when he accepted the truth.
PELE MEETS WITH THE HIGH-RANKING ONES
Pele tells us what happened: “I prayed as I never had before, asking Jehovah to direct me in the way that I should go. In the few months that followed I studied incessantly and until late at night. One day I received a letter from the high chief of our family, calling me to an evening meeting at Faleasiu to discuss this ‘new church.’ Taime Solomona, another family member interested in the truth, was there too. As soon as I got there the high chief opened the meeting. In the family assembly were six chiefs, three orators, ten pastors, two theological teachers, the high chief who was presiding and older men and women of the family. They cursed and condemned us for disgracing the name of the family and the church of our forefathers.
“Then the chairman said: ‘It would be better to have a debate. You give your doctrines and beliefs; we give ours, and we will see who is right.’ I felt like Jeremiah, burning up inside, eager to talk. Even though some yelled, ‘Take that Bible away! Leave off that Bible!’ I answered all their questions from the Bible and disproved their arguments. How thankful I was that I had studied God’s Word as never before!
“It went on all night, until four in the morning. Finally, neither word nor sound was forthcoming from them. Their heads were bent down. Then the high chief said in a weak voice: ‘You won, Pele.’ I replied: ‘Pardon me, Sir, I did not win. This night you heard the message of the Kingdom. It is my sincere hope you will heed it.’ After departing, we looked for a bus to go home, tired but happy for the victory of God’s truth. The seed of truth had taken root on Upolu.”
THE STUDY GROUP GROWS
One afternoon in July a young man named Maatusi Leauanae overheard two men talking about the “new truth.” Maatusi asked: “Where is this new truth?” One of the men worked at the hospital and he explained that there was a Bible study group that met each week, on this day, at the hospital. Maatusi was very interested in hearing about this “new truth.” So he went to the hospital and looked in. Seeing a large group assembled, he became shy and turned away to leave. At the gate he met John Croxford just arriving to conduct the study. Brother Croxford urged him to join the study, which he did. There he was introduced to Fuaiupolu Pele and several others, two or three doctors, a customs official, several office workers and a man from the agriculture department. Then followed an hour’s study in the book “Let God Be True.”
In 1952 Pele and his wife, Ailua, symbolized their dedication to Jehovah by water immersion. Maatusi Leauanae liked what he was learning but for some months was irregular in attendance. When he returned for regular study, the love and interest the group showed him, along with the truth he had heard, convinced him that he had found the true religion. Another young government employee, Siemu Taase, soon joined the group. He and Maatusi were baptized in 1956.
John Croxford left Western Samoa in 1953, but he had planted seeds of truth in good soil. Many already mentioned are still serving loyally in Jehovah’s work. More were to come.
FIRST CONGREGATION FORMED
The Society approved the formation of the first congregation in Western Samoa in early 1953. A special pioneer couple from Australia, Ronald and Olive (Dolly) Sellars, arrived in May 1953, and they helped to get the congregation organized. The authorities would not extend their permit to reside in the country, so in January 1954 they moved to American Samoa.
Brother Pele tells us: “When Brother Croxford left, everybody thought that was the end of the ‘new church.’ But our attendance was more than 40. Brother Ted Jaracz stopped to see us on his way back to Australia from the New York convention in 1953. We gathered at my house in the evening, and he gave us some talks that I translated.”
Soon thereafter, Brother Pele named his newborn son after the three brothers who had come to Western Samoa, John Croxford, Ron Sellars and Ted Jaracz. His name is Uitinesesioneronitete in Samoan, or in English, Witness-John-Ron-Ted.
SERVING WHERE THE NEED IS GREATER
A number of Witnesses from Australia came to Western Samoa to serve where the need was greater. Richard and Gloria Jenkins, Bill and “Girlie” Moss, and others did much fine work. Time and again, applications for the Society’s missionaries to enter the country were refused, so the brothers serving where the need was greater helped supply stability and mature oversight that the local brothers lacked at the time.
One brother, a native Western Samoan who had learned the truth in New Zealand, decided to help his brothers at “home” for a while. So in 1960 Charles Pritchard and his wife, Judy, moved back to Western Samoa with their two children. They stayed for five years and were able to give much aid, since he was Samoan himself and knew what the brothers needed and how to convey it to them in their language. Then they returned to New Zealand for 15 years. Since April 1981 Charles and Judy Pritchard have been serving in Western Samoa as missionaries, along with their son, Paul.
GILEAD GRADUATE GAINS ENTRY
In 1958 Sister Tia Aluni, a native Western Samoan who had been living in New Zealand, graduated from Gilead School and was assigned to nearby American Samoa. Since she could gain entry to Western Samoa, the Society invited her to choose between staying in missionary work in American Samoa and going to Western Samoa as a special pioneer. She chose the latter and spent three years (1961-64) on the largest island, Savai’i, working with a local special pioneer. Thus the work on Savai’i was opened up.
A missionary couple were serving there with a small congregation at Fogapoa but now visit the congregation once each month from the island of Upolu. The work has progressed slowly because of customs, traditions and religious beliefs, people being fearful of leaving old ways. The local publishers report faithfully each month.
THE GATHERING GOES ON
Fagalima Tuatagaloa, a crippled man with poor eyesight, recognized the truth. He was baptized in 1953 and right away started vacation pioneering (now called auxiliary pioneering). He learned the truth so well that he knew many scriptures from memory. One circuit overseer, working from house to house with him, noticed that he was accurately reading scriptures without glasses and asked if his eyesight was improving. Fagalima replied that he had lost his glasses and that he was only appearing to read the Bible. He was actually quoting from memory.
Fagalima went into the full-time service and served many years as a special pioneer. For a long time he stayed with Brother Pele’s family. When he became seriously ill with cancer in 1977, they cared for him right down to his death in 1979.
CIRCUIT VISITS DESPITE OBSTACLES
When Len Helberg, Fiji’s first circuit overseer, left in 1957 for Gilead School, Paul Evans took over the circuit. At that time it stretched from Tahiti in the east, through the Samoas, Niue, Tonga and Fiji, to New Caledonia in the west. A second circuit was created in 1958 with Don Clare as circuit overseer. In 1960 a third circuit was added. These covered the 12 countries under the Fiji branch. For 13 years Brother Evans, accompanied by his wife, served some of these countries in circuit work. When not traveling, they worked as missionaries in American Samoa.
It was not easy to get into Western Samoa, even for brief circuit visits. Brother Evans recalls: “Twice we served the congregation when passing through on boats. The first trip we had only three nights and two days with the brothers. The next time we fared better. We got passage on a small island freighter from Fiji, arriving in Western Samoa early on a Tuesday morning. Since the ship we were traveling on was chartered to make a seven-day trip for the Western Samoan government to other islands and was not permitted to take us, we had to wait out the seven days on land in Apia. This was just right for us, and we had a spiritually profitable ‘wait’ serving the congregation.” In 1959 Brother Evans had to make three attempts before being granted a permit to enter Western Samoa.
FACTORS IN SLOW PROGRESS
Though it is pleasant to witness to Samoans in field service, it is difficult to get results. Bible studies can be started, but conducting them regularly and achieving progress is another matter. The brothers, however, have done well considering that they were for many years without help from missionaries. Another factor in the slow progress is the limited number of publications in their language.
CLEANSING THE CONGREGATION
One thing that hindered progress in earlier years was the fact that some of the brothers did not readily accept the theocratic arrangement, perhaps because of pride. There were those who would not humble themselves, and in 1958 a sifting started. For some time a handful of rebellious ones had been trying to divide the congregation, setting up their own little organization. This climaxed several years of constant disturbance by them, and in their intense pride they left the congregation.
The refining resulted in the loss of a quarter of the publishers, some of whom were disfellowshipped. Jehovah unfailingly proved that he backed his own organization, blessing those who placed their integrity above personal pride. The congregation went on growing and enjoyed an increase of 35 percent in 1959, as a truly warm spirit of love and cooperation prevailed. Brother Pele, along with his wife and several family members, stood loyal and is still going as strong as age and health will allow. The family is now associated with a Samoan congregation in Hawaii.
But more was involved in cleansing the congregation. A large number of brothers and sisters had to be disfellowshipped for sexual immorality. In Western Samoa such immorality is freely practiced, and a number of special pioneers and servants had to be removed for such misconduct.
WHOLEHEARTED SERVICE
Although the people of Western Samoa have an abundance of material food, they are poor financially. But the brothers there have used what they have in pressing forward in the Kingdom work, and Jehovah has blessed them accordingly. Consider, for example, the efforts put forth by Brother Fagalima Tuatagaloa to attend a convention in Fiji. He was not young, but old; not strong, but sickly; not sound of limb, but had a clubfoot; not endowed with good vision, but blind in one eye. To get to the convention he needed money, and to obtain it he had to gather coconuts. He carried about 15 of them at a time two miles to where he would husk them, cut out the meat and spread it out to dry, after which he sold the coconut meat, or copra.
For four weeks he worked alone on the far side of the island. Then he went to pay his fare, only to discover that it had gone up in price. He did not complain and was not discouraged; he did not ask for help. He went back to work and produced more copra, earning the extra money. He did all of this to attend the convention to be held in two languages that he did not know. Upon arrival, what a reward for him to find that the Society had made provision for having most of the program also presented in his own language!
Because of such whole-souled service and Jehovah’s blessing, the publishers increased from 37 in 1958 to a peak of 109 in 1971. They reached an all-time peak of 161 in March 1983. Surely there is a great increase yet ahead for Western Samoa, as indicated by the 1983 Memorial attendance of 594.
MISSIONARIES GAIN ENTRY
For years missionaries from outside Western Samoa were not permitted to reside in the country. But in 1970 there were some changes in government personnel. So the Apia Congregation wrote to the prime minister, under whose direction the Immigration Department operates, and applied for Paul and Frances Evans to enter Western Samoa as missionaries and stay for a period of three years, with the opportunity to obtain an extension when that expired. What a thrill the brothers received when the application was approved—after 19 years of trying!
Brother Evans was at that very time serving Western Samoa in the circuit work. So he stepped right out of the circuit work and, along with his wife, took up missionary service. They are still in Western Samoa, now working hard translating publications into the Samoan language.
That was not the end of the missionary story. Brother M. G. Henschel of the Governing Body visited Western Samoa in January 1977, surveying the situation. As a result, more missionaries were sent into the Samoan field.
PROPERTY PURCHASED
In November 1977 Robert Kawasaki from Hawaii served Western Samoa as zone overseer. He inquired if there was any land for sale on which the Society might build, and he was told there was some in the Sinamoga area about three kilometers (2 mi) inland from the main city of Apia. It was about an acre in size with three houses and an old cement-block building on it, and he recommended to the Governing Body that the Society purchase it. By October 1978 the purchase was completed, and the missionaries moved into temporary quarters in one of the houses. In 1979 two buildings were demolished and a large two-story house was renovated to serve as missionary quarters. In 1981 a brand-new missionary home was built on land leased from a brother at Faleasiu, 19 kilometers (12 mi) from Apia. Brothers traveled at their own expense from Australia, Hawaii, New Zealand and the United States to share with local brothers in building these missionary homes.
LITERATURE IN SAMOAN
In December 1957 Brother Earl Stewart from the Philippines branch served Samoa as zone overseer. He recommended to the Society that The Watchtower should be printed in Samoan. Brother Pele took the lead in the translation work, and the first issue appeared in May 1958 in mimeograph form.
Earlier, some tracts and the booklet “This Good News of the Kingdom” were translated into Samoan. Other booklets followed. Then the Samoan edition of the book The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life arrived early in 1972. Many thousands of copies of the Truth book have been distributed over the years and are being used for Bible studies wherever Samoan people are found. The translation of You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth into Samoan is well under way, and it will be a wonderful instrument for use in the Samoan field.
For several years the Samoan Watchtower was printed in Brooklyn, New York, in a 16-page edition. Beginning with the January 1981 issue it was enlarged to 24 pages. Copies are sent to New Zealand, Hawaii and the west coast of the United States where congregations are found among large populations of Samoan people.
PROGRESS OVER THE YEARS
The work of Jehovah’s people in Western Samoa has advanced slowly but surely under his direction. The number of publishers has grown from one in 1952 to 161 now. Ten missionaries, five regular and special pioneers, plus the congregation publishers, are now working in the field, and many people are hearing the Kingdom message. About 270 people regularly gather at the meetings, showing the potential for new servants of Jehovah.
But, let us not leave the Samoas entirely; rather, let us cross over to American Samoa and learn of the advancement of the Kingdom work there.
AMERICAN SAMOA
Only about 80 kilometers (50 mi) separate the two Samoas. American Samoa has been a territory of the United States ever since the colonial powers divided the Samoas in the year 1899. It has a population of some 32,000 who live on six small islands. The largest, Tutuila, has almost 30,000.
The harbor on Tutuila, known as Pago Pago, is the best-known landmark of American Samoa. It lies in the crater of an extinct volcano with a depth of up to 122 meters (400 ft). It is a beautiful sight, the green-decked sides rising steeply to peaks about 550 meters (1,800 ft) above the blue-green waters. Over a 50-year period, this bay area has averaged more than five meters (16 ft) of rain each year! The humidity is high, averaging about 84 percent, though the temperature does not usually exceed 32° Celsius (90° F.).
As with Western Samoa, the people here are churchgoing and adhere to one of the various branches of Christendom. It is quite common for the village matais to sound a gong in the evening as the signal for all in the village to go indoors for prayers. During this period no one is allowed to walk around outside. After 10 or 15 minutes the gong is sounded again, signaling the end of prayer time.
THE TRUTH REACHES THE ISLAND OF TUTUILA
In 1938, when the Watch Tower Society’s president, J. F. Rutherford, and his party were returning from Australia, they put into port at American Samoa, bringing ashore some of the Society’s literature. There is no record, though, of anyone accepting the Kingdom message at that time, and many years were to pass before the work moved ahead in this South Pacific field.
In 1952 Sister Lydia Pedro came to American Samoa to visit relatives, telling them about the good news. As a result of this trip, her cousin, Uaealesi (Wallace) Pedro, learned the truth.
GETTING A SOLID FOOTING
On January 5, 1954, Australian-born Ronald and Olive (Dolly) Sellars set foot on the island; they had been granted a one-month trial visa to enter as missionaries. After noting that they had been refused permission to stay in Western Samoa, the attorney-general said: “We have religious freedom in American Samoa, and I am going to see you get the benefit of this freedom just the same as any other religion.”
Finally, the attorney-general’s office sent a letter stating that there was no objection to the Watch Tower Society’s establishing an organization in American Samoa. Brother and Sister Sellars were given visas for an indefinite stay. Later, other missionaries were given permission to enter the islands. Over the years, in all the territory under the Fiji branch, this has been the only country that freely granted entry to new missionaries.
A YOUNG MAN TAKES HIS STAND FOR THE TRUTH
The arrival of the missionaries was what stimulated Wallace Pedro to progress in the truth. He tells us his experience: “At the time the missionaries arrived, I could see the need to associate with Jehovah’s people. There were only seven of us who attended the meetings held at the missionary home. On April 30, 1955, I became the first person to be baptized in American Samoa. My family was not very pleased with this, especially when I became very active in the preaching work.
“One day when I returned from the Congregation Book Study, I found my family in conference. The choice was put before me: Stop associating with Jehovah’s Witnesses or get out of the home! Even though I had one more year of high school left and had no means of financial support, my decision was firm for the truth. My family then disowned me and put me out with nothing but the clothes I was wearing! Jehovah lovingly provided a place for me to stay—the missionary home; and brothers in the United States sent me clothing.”
Wallace stayed with the missionaries for some time and finished his schooling; he then became a pioneer and later a special pioneer. He served up until about 1960 before immigrating to the United States. In 1979 Brother Pedro and his wife and four children went back to American Samoa. And what about his family who disowned him? One of his brothers, his sister and one of his nieces are Witnesses. Then, in 1980, at the age of 72, his mother was baptized! Even his father was studying the Bible before his death. This young man’s stand for Jehovah and the truth certainly brought him and his family blessings.
FIRST CIRCUIT OVERSEER VISIT
In 1955 fine help was given to the small group when Brother Len Helberg arrived as the first circuit overseer in American Samoa. During his visit the Society’s film The New World Society in Action was shown throughout the island; a total of 3,227 people were at these showings. This was a marvelous witness, for it helped people discern that Jehovah’s Witnesses are doing a worldwide work.
Two months after these film showings, a congregation was officially started with three publishers and the six missionaries.
Though many more people in American Samoa understand English than is the case in Western Samoa, the basic language is still Samoan. Thus the new congregation was greatly aided when it received a shipment of 16,000 copies of the booklet “This Good News of the Kingdom” in Samoan.
MORE PIONEERS AND MISSIONARIES ARRIVE
Many publishers, pioneers and missionaries have served in the islands and have given faithful, loving assistance to build up the brothers. At one time the small island of Tutuila had nine missionaries and three regular pioneers. This brought results—118 were at the Memorial in 1960.
FAITHFUL ATTENDANCE AT DISTRICT CONVENTIONS
In 1960 the brothers had the thrill of being hosts to some of the Witnesses from Fiji, as well as to their brothers from Western Samoa. This was at the Peace-pursuing District Assembly. In 1966 another district convention drew almost 300 delegates from eight countries under the branch as well as from Australia and New Zealand. At that time there were only 26 publishers in all of American Samoa, so what a witness it was to see such a crowd!
The brothers in American Samoa have attended some district conventions in Fiji and some in Western Samoa. Though there is usually some travel involved, it is fine to see that the conventions have been held consistently for over 20 years, and the brothers have always been in attendance to receive the spiritual food with appreciation.
POOR HEALTH NO BARRIER
In 1962 Tafia Pula, then 66 years old, accepted the truth. Though he was almost housebound because of filariasis, a disease that affected both his arms and his legs, he still spent many hours in Jehovah’s service. Because his limbs were so swollen and heavy, he could hardly walk, even with the aid of a cane, but still his zeal for Jehovah moved him to do more preaching than some who were younger.
He wanted to be baptized, but his family feared that his going into the sea and being submerged might kill him. So he replied to them: “If I die being baptized, then I’m happy because I will die doing God’s will.” He was baptized and did not die!
In 1972, the last year of his life, he was out in the service with one of the brothers and said to him: “You go on because I’m holding you back. I think it is best for me to return to the pickup and witness to whoever comes along the road.” As the brother looked back, there was Brother Tafia Pula talking to passersby. He had a message to give, and he gave it, right up to the end. When he was in the hospital for the last two days of his life, he called his daughter to bring his witnessing bag so he could keep it at his bedside for ready use.
FACTORS AFFECTING PROGRESS
During the 1960’s the work moved ahead slowly, with the average number of publishers increasing from 22 in 1961 to 44 in 1970. Many times there were setbacks as some, including even special pioneers, would fall prey to immorality and have to be removed from the congregation. This is an ongoing problem in the islands, as in many other parts of the world.
Another reason that growth has seemed slow is the easy access that Samoans have to the United States. Often, just as new ones get into the preaching work, they move to the United States. Many such ones have associated with the Samoan congregations in Hawaii and on the west coast of the United States and are serving Jehovah there.
THE GOOD NEWS HAS BEEN PREACHED
With a congregation firmly established on the main island of American Samoa, the Kingdom work has reached the ears of almost all the people of this territory. Whereas the ratio of publishers of the good news to population in Western Samoa is still one to about 1,000, this is not so in smaller American Samoa, where it is one to about 400.
The group of three islands known as the Manua Islands, the islands of Tau, Ofu and Olosega, have also heard the message. For example, in 1980 the circuit overseer, John Rhodes, his wife, Helen, and five other publishers spent five days witnessing in this small group of islands. They worked their way through all the villages and placed 159 books, 126 booklets, 268 magazines and obtained 66 subscriptions. Now twice a year the congregation on Tutuila makes calls on these distant islands.
With a peak of 81 publishers for the last service year and with meeting attendance averaging 167 at the public talks, prospects of further growth are good. All thanks go to Jehovah God for his blessing on the activity of establishing the true Christian congregation in these beautiful islands of the South Pacific.
From the eastern extremity of the branch territory, let us move north toward the equator to the island groups of Kiribati and Tuvalu (formerly Gilbert and Ellice Islands) and learn of the development of the Kingdom work there.
KIRIBATI AND TUVALU
These two groups of islands were originally under one colonial administration, with headquarters at Tarawa in the Gilbert Islands since the end of World War II. Because the islanders originate from two different races and have two different languages, the groups were separated during 1975 and 1976. They subsequently received their independence from Great Britain, and the Gilbert Islands became the Republic of Kiribati and the Ellice Islands the nation of Tuvalu.
Kiribati, the larger of the two island countries, consists of 33 islands scattered over about five million square kilometers (2 million sq mi). This includes the 16 Gilbert Islands, the 8 Phoenix Islands, 8 of the Line Islands and Ocean Island. When added to the 9 islands of Tuvalu, the land area totals only about 745 square kilometers (288 sq mi). Most of the islands of Tuvalu are ring-shaped coral reefs that surround lagoons.
The islands are usually very small and barely protrude out of the sea; in fact, within Tuvalu nowhere does the land rise to more than 4.6 meters (15 ft) above sea level. Due to the poor quality of the soil, very few varieties of food grow except for coconut, pandanus and breadfruit trees, along with staple root crops known as pulaka and taro.
Among the most densely populated in the Pacific, these islands have a total of over 60,000 people. Tuvalu has a population of 8,000 people with about 2,300 living on the island of Funafuti, the capital of the country. Most of the Tuvaluans are Polynesians who speak the Tuvaluan language, with many also knowing English. The majority of the islanders of Kiribati are Micronesians who speak Gilbertese, although many of them also speak English.
RELIGION AND CUSTOMS
By the mid-1850’s some Protestant missions were established and later a Catholic mission. At first the people were not very receptive, but the missionaries began to win them over by making gifts of cloth and tobacco.
Eventually the churches managed to get a hold over the people and to obtain land. The book Kiribati, Aspects of History reports: “Some people who wanted tobacco gave the missionaries land in exchange for a few sticks. This is how the Catholic mission in Nonouti got land on which to build its station.” The LMS (London Missionary Society) and the Catholic mission controlled different parts of Kiribati, but Tuvalu came solely under the control of the LMS group.
The missions’ control over the islanders can be seen by what happened in Tuvalu. The Samoan pastors arrived and started to impose the Samoan language and customs on the people. So by the mid-1940’s the churches had a strong hold on most aspects of island life. Every village of thatched huts was built around an impressive church building. Some pastors attained so much power that they could forbid the consumption of alcohol and outlaw bicycle riding on Sundays.
KINGDOM WORK STARTS IN KIRIBATI AND TUVALU
Little did Bill Checksfield, witnessing in Suva, Fiji, realize the implications of his making a return visit on a Tuvaluan man named Foua Tofinga. After studying the Bible for four years, Tofinga was baptized in 1951—the first Tuvaluan to come into the truth. His wife, Selepa, was baptized in 1957. Eventually Tofinga became an elder in the Suva Congregation and is presently a member of the Fiji Branch Committee.
Although Tofinga was not able to return to Tuvalu, it was from his home in Suva that the truth started to spread to Kiribati and Tuvalu. Both Tofinga’s father and father-in-law were pastors in the LMS Church, so when Tofinga and his wife accepted the truth, it caused quite a stir in the Tuvaluan community.
According to island custom nearly every Tuvaluan that has come to Fiji has also visited the family of Brother Tofinga. Naturally, this has led to many opportunities for them to witness to Tuvaluans. Thus, more and more the Kingdom message started to filter back into Kiribati and Tuvalu.
To illustrate how this happened, consider the experience of a Tuvaluan, Saulo Teasi. While working on a ship, Saulo came to Fiji in the late 1940’s and found that he had a week to spare in Suva. He visited Sister Tofinga’s mother, who by now had started to show an interest in the truth. When Brother Checksfield also visited this home, Saulo sat quietly in the background during a Bible discussion. He was impressed with the fact that Brother Checksfield always used the Bible to answer any questions. When Saulo heard that this missionary was going to return in a few days, he made it a point to be there. Saulo left the second discussion with a copy of the book “Let God Be True” and was sure that he had found the true religion.
Meanwhile, others, including Sister Tofinga’s sister, Lise, showed interest in the truth. By this time these interested persons had moved to Tarawa, in Kiribati, and soon a little study group with about ten people was started in Tarawa. Although none of them were baptized, they carried on in spite of constant opposition. Thus they proved to be the basis for the start of the work in Kiribati and Tuvalu.
In the mid-1950’s, after completing a work contract, Saulo arrived in Tarawa, and while awaiting transportation to Tuvalu he stayed at Lise’s home. He and his family had many opportunities to talk to Lise about Bible-related subjects, and he soon decided to stay in Tarawa and work there. Saulo was delighted to find that what he was learning was the same as what he had heard in Fiji from Brother Checksfield. Soon Saulo and his wife, Uto, were meeting with the little group.
THE KIRIBATI GROUP RECEIVES HELP
This group received great help in 1961 when a family of four from New Zealand arrived. Brother Huia Paxton was employed as a chemist by the Kiribati government. For three years he and his family greatly encouraged the local brothers. They even studied Gilbertese and learned to speak it fluently. Not only did they correspond with interested people, including some on Ocean Island, but they also bought a small yacht to visit others on nearby islands. By 1965, when circuit overseer Fred Wegener visited them, four families of interested persons, 15 adults and their children, were associating with them.
When his work contract expired in 1967, Brother Paxton and his family returned to New Zealand. On the way back their ship made a call at Ocean Island where they were able to meet some of the ones with whom they had corresponded and to encourage them. Six months later when the circuit overseer visited Tarawa he found the group had increased in number and was meeting together regularly, using the English-language book “Make Sure of All Things.” At that time there were no publications in the Gilbertese language.
Although these brothers do not have the help of any missionaries or pioneers, a small congregation of Jehovah’s people continues to spread the good news from the capital, Tarawa. Since September 1, 1980, Kiribati has been under the new branch in Guam, which is supervising the work in all Micronesia.
PROGRESS IN TUVALU
When Saulo Teasi returned to Funafuti, the capital of Tuvalu, in the early 1960’s, he was surprised to find that there was a small group of people that were meeting together to study The Watchtower. This group was being cared for by a former doctor, Uili Opetaia (Willy O’Brien). Uili, who had heard the truth in Suva while at medical college, had been baptized in Samoa and was now spreading what he had learned. Soon this group was joined by Apelu Teagai and his wife, Lumepa. Like Saulo, Apelu had learned the truth while in Suva.
At this time Saulo’s wife, Uto, began to oppose him strongly even though at first she had manifested an interest. Every Sunday there seemed to be an argument when Saulo would not join her in going to the church service. However, an unexpected blessing was about to occur.
This came in May 1962 when Sisters Lydia Pedro and Alisi Dranidalo, both special pioneers from Fiji, were assigned to Tuvalu. Sister Pedro was born in Tuvalu and Sister Dranidalo was a native Fijian. The local government was opposed to these two sisters staying, so in January 1963 they had to leave Tuvalu. During their stay the sisters conducted a number of Bible studies even though they were not allowed to preach from house to house. Especially did the two special pioneers help Uto, Saulo’s wife, to take her stand for the truth. As a result of their work, when the circuit overseer came to Tuvalu in 1964 he found that Saulo and Apelu were ready for baptism. Then the following year Uto was baptized, along with Uili’s wife, Melapa.
CIRCUIT OVERSEERS VISIT TUVALU
From the mid-1960’s to the late 1970’s this little congregation continued on despite much opposition. In time it became easier to get circuit overseers into the country. This provision from Jehovah was something that the brothers greatly appreciated.
It has not been easy for these traveling overseers to settle into the island way of life. One of the brothers that was visiting Funafuti was recovering from a bout of dengue fever when he decided to go swimming in the beautiful lagoon. After a while he noticed a foreign object floating past and then thought to himself, ‘No, it couldn’t be!’ Then later when he saw more of these, he noticed the toilets on stilts over the water! Needless to say, that was the last swim he had in the lagoon!
Another brother and sister, while staying in Kiribati, were sleeping on a gravel floor under a mosquito net when a strange noise startled them. The brother turned on his flashlight and found that they were being invaded by crabs trying to get through the mosquito net! Later, when they arrived in Tuvalu, they found that most of the homes had been destroyed by hurricane Bebe. So they stayed with a brother and his family in a small shack. Here they were kept awake at night by rats playing on top of the temporary ceiling.
These brothers have learned to adjust to many different circumstances. For instance, during a time of water shortage in Kiribati, there came a sudden downpour and one of the circuit overseers was seen taking a shower in his bathing suit under a leaking gutter. He was making good use of that shower of rain!
So, though it was not always easy for the brothers who came to serve the congregations in these islands, their efforts were certainly blessed.
MAINTAINING INTEGRITY AND PURITY
The test of whether or not the truth is really established in any country is that the brothers remain steadfast in the truth despite the strongest opposition. Consider the example of Sister Lumepa, who died in March 1970. She had been suffering from internal bleeding for two years and needed an operation but was told that it could not be performed without a blood transfusion. For two years doctors, the hospital staff, friends and close relatives tried to persuade her to take blood transfusions, but she remained steadfast to Jehovah’s laws and died a faithful Witness. Even on an isolated island Jehovah’s spirit is there to strengthen those who put faith in him.
As has already been mentioned, Christendom’s missions helped to popularize smoking in these islands, so that nearly all the islanders have become enslaved to the tobacco habit. There have been some fine examples of those who, upon learning Jehovah’s requirements, have immediately given up the habit.—2 Cor. 7:1.
BROTHERS FROM OVERSEAS ARRIVE
October 1978 was a turning point in the activities of Jehovah’s people in Tuvalu. Two important things happened. First, an Australian brother, Lon Bowman, who had been serving in Papua New Guinea, obtained secular work in Tuvalu. Second, the Tuvaluan government granted permission for two Australian missionaries to live in Tuvalu for two years, and they are still serving there.
Brother Bowman helped the brothers to get into a better routine with their meetings and Bible study work. When the missionaries, Geoffrey and Jeanette Jackson, arrived a couple of months later, they found that the small congregation was operating in an orderly manner.
Within a short time this small band of brothers and sisters were conducting over 40 Bible studies. By the time Brother Bowman and his family left, there were 12 publishers of the good news. In 1982 the publishers reached a peak of 22.
ATTENDING ASSEMBLIES
Due to their isolation and the high cost of travel, very few of the Tuvaluan brothers have been able to attend a convention of Jehovah’s people. During 1979, however, the brothers and sisters put forth special effort to attend the district convention in Fiji. They worked at everything from making and selling chocolate to carting sand, and with some help from their spiritual brothers overseas, they were pleased to have a delegation of eight brothers and sisters attend the convention. Among these was Sister Uto Teasi who, although she was baptized in 1965, had never been to a convention. Even though she could not speak English or Fijian (the languages in which the program was presented), she was thrilled to be with over 1,300 gathered at that convention. Another of her joys was to meet again with Sister Alisi Dranidalo who had helped her learn the truth back in 1962.
REACHING OTHER ISLANDS
During the past few years, not only has the capital, Funafuti, received a thorough witness but the missionaries, along with others in the congregation, have regularly visited the outer islands in the Tuvalu group. Many interested ones on the outer islands now have Bible studies through correspondence.
There are times when the Funafuti Congregation puts on a 15-minute radio program that can be heard in all the Tuvaluan islands. As the missionaries visit the outer islands, they hear many express appreciation for the Bible truths that they are learning from the radio broadcasts.
The clergy, however, put pressure on the government to stop the programs. At the invitation of the radio station manager, Brother Jackson attended a meeting where he heard one of the pastors angrily exclaim: “The people are asking too many questions after listening to these programs. We can’t have that!” The pastors requested that a church committee review all programs before they are broadcast. But later, a new manager and a new program organizer were appointed, and they were not afraid of the clergy. So the good news still reaches the outer islands by means of the radio programs.
PROGRESS WITH TUVALUAN LITERATURE
Over the years the brothers in Funafuti have been using the Samoan-language literature in their meetings. Some of the older ones understand Samoan, but for most in the congregation this has been difficult. So a concerted effort was put forth to translate some of the publications for local use, and the Governing Body has approved the printing of this literature in the Tuvaluan language.
So, the Witnesses on these islands are continuing to declare the good news, and as they do so they look forward to further increase, especially in view of their 1983 Memorial, with 155 attending, 68 of whom attended on the island of Funafuti. This was about one out of every 34 persons on the entire island of Funafuti, the capital.
Now let us turn our attention to the only kingdom remaining in the South Pacific islands of Polynesia—Tonga.
TONGA
The Kingdom of Tonga is a country made up of about 200 small islands, only a few of which are inhabited. There are three main island groups: Tongatapu, Haapai (low-lying groups of coral reefs) and Vavau, which is mountainous. The land area is 670 square kilometers (260 sq mi). Nukualofa is the capital and is situated on the largest island, Tongatapu, which is located about 700 kilometers (430 mi) southeast of Suva, Fiji.
British explorer Captain James Cook visited the islands in 1773 and called them the Friendly Islands. And, indeed, the people, most of whom are Polynesians, are friendly. Their language is Tongan, but today most schoolchildren also learn English. More than 90,000 people live on these islands and most of them are very religious.
Tonga was a protectorate of Great Britain until it became fully independent in 1970. Its government is a constitutional monarchy, and the king rules with the advice of a cabinet, a parliament and a privy council.
RESPONSE TO THE TRUTH
It was through one of the early pioneers sent out by the Australian branch that the truth first came to Tonga. The pioneer working in Fiji distributed booklets to all whom he met. A Tongan who was a skipper of a sailing clipper accepted the booklet Where Are the Dead? On his return to Tonga he gave the booklet to a friend by the name of Charles Vete, a worker with the telecommunications department. This was in 1932. Charles read the booklet and was convinced that he had found the truth. Until that time he was a member of the Methodist Church, but from then on, though not having any association with Jehovah’s Witnesses, he withdrew from the church and declared the message of the Bible.
Charles wrote to the Society’s headquarters in Brooklyn, asking for more information. Back came sets of books. Moreover, the Society’s president at that time, J. F. Rutherford, asked Charles if he would translate the booklet Where Are the Dead? into Tongan. He accepted the assignment, and in due course a shipment of 1,000 booklets arrived. Charles was moved to send a contribution for them and then began to distribute them. Many civil servants with whom he worked heard the truth in this way. Thus in 1933 the first witnessing work began in the Kingdom of Tonga.
For about 25 years Charles Vete was on his own in declaring the good news in Tonga. His work took him north from the main island of Tongatapu with the capital of Nukualofa, to the islands of Vavau and Niuatoputapu. He distributed many booklets in these islands. Though a number of people showed interest, not much progress was made, as there was no congregation with which to associate. But the booklet Where Are the Dead? received wide distribution. Even today as a publisher goes from house to house, he meets people who remember this booklet and its distribution by Charles Vete. Through his preaching over the years, he became known as one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, though he did not get baptized until 1964.
Beginning in March 1955 circuit overseers made brief visits to these islands, but because of the strong influence of the Methodist and Roman Catholic religions, no Witness missionaries were allowed to enter the country, and no brothers from other places could get into the country to help the local publishers. So the Witnesses in Tonga have had to develop largely on their own.
TAKING THE INITIATIVE
By taking the initiative, the brothers have progressed. Here is an example of their zeal: In 1964 the script of a special public talk was sent to them. Though the brother caring for the group had never given a talk, he prepared and delivered it; Jehovah blessed his earnest effort with an attendance of 22 persons.
Another indication of the brothers’ desire to progress in the truth has been their efforts to provide translations of Watchtower study articles. Brother Charles Vete translated them into the Tongan language; copies were made by hand and then used by the group as their study material. The same thing was done with the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained.
In 1965 when circuit overseer Fred Wegener and district overseer Donald Clare visited Nukualofa, they were impressed by the diligent efforts put forth to keep the organization going without outside assistance. A year later the brothers there were thrilled when they could write to the Society and say that they had just built a Kingdom Hall on land offered by Brother Osaiasi Tovi within his allotment; it is large enough to accommodate up to 30 people.
HELP FROM THE OUTSIDE
Over the years some government officials have been replaced by men with a more favorable attitude toward the Witnesses. Thus after almost 14 years the Tongan immigration officials announced in 1969 that the Society’s traveling representatives would be allowed to stay for six months. So the Society sent in circuit overseer Len Helberg and his wife, Rita, for two months, and what a joyful time of training that was!
Several days a week the brothers gathered at Brother Vete’s home to learn congregation organization. The visit was climaxed with the Memorial, attended by 53, and a circuit assembly, which helped to develop a stronger spirit of love and unity. The brothers cooked the day’s food on hot stones buried in a ground oven and ate under a large tarpaulin hung from trees behind the Kingdom Hall. Spread on mats on the ground were low feasting tables lent to Brother Tovi by the king of Tonga, for whom Brother Tovi works as chauffeur. That month Tonga reached a new peak of 18 publishers.
CONGREGATION FORMED
With a peak of 20 publishers reporting in 1970, the Nukualofa Congregation was formed. Since then each circuit overseer has given the brothers training in theocratic procedures as well as working with them in the field. There has been growth, with the number of publishers reaching a peak of 41 in April 1983.
At present, missionaries are still not allowed to enter Tonga. Though recognizing that Jehovah’s Witnesses are not a new religion in the islands, some government officials are not keen to encourage the growth of the truth.
KINGDOM MESSAGE REACHING THE PEOPLE
Since the majority of the Tongan people live on the main island of Tongatapu, where the Nukualofa Congregation is located, the Kingdom message is reaching many. The first local sister to take up the special pioneer work started this service in 1978, and now there are four special pioneers. Even in Haapai to the north, a small group is declaring the good news. The brothers and sisters there make a real effort to come down to Nukualofa for the circuit overseer’s visit, and this is combined with a one-congregation circuit assembly.
During the 1970’s a few brothers came to Tonga to serve where the need is greater. David Wolfgramm and his family from New Zealand spent a few years here working with the congregation. Since he is a Tongan citizen, he could gain entry into the country. The need is surely great in the Tonga Islands, for the ratio of Witnesses to population is one to 2,198.
If it be Jehovah’s will, however, more will be done there before the “great tribulation” brings an end to Jehovah’s “day of salvation.” (Matt. 24:21, 29; 2 Cor. 6:1, 2) New ones are listening to the Kingdom message. The prospects for increase are good with 164 in attendance at the 1983 Memorial. Brother and Sister David Wolfgramm returned in May 1983, to settle on Vavau to open up the work there. Two special pioneers have been assigned to work with them. It is the fervent hope of Jehovah’s Witnesses in this country that renewed efforts to have missionaries enter Tonga may succeed. Whether or not this happens, the faithful band of brothers and sisters will continue to make Jehovah’s Word known to the friendly people of the Kingdom of Tonga.
About 480 kilometers (300 mi) northeast of Tonga is a most unusual island by the name of Niue.
NIUE
This country is just one small island, about 19 kilometers (12 mi) long and about 16 kilometers (10 mi) wide, making a total area of only 259 square kilometers (100 sq mi). In all the South Pacific, Niue is considered unique. It is limestone in composition, and wherever one goes on the island one can see evidence in the limestone rocks of shells and coral that once were under the ocean. Unlike other islands, it has no beaches. High cliffs rise abruptly out of the ocean; then the land surface is an almost flat plateau. Honeycombed with caves, Niue is an amateur explorer’s paradise.
While Niue was granted self-government by New Zealand in 1974, the people remain protected as New Zealand citizens. The Constitution provides for free association with New Zealand and a Legislative Assembly of 20 members, 14 elected from village constituencies and 6 from a common roll. Direction and control of the island is in the hands of a four-member Cabinet. Local government takes the form of village councils of which there are 14, councillors being elected for a three-year term. Elders of each community have a voice in matters affecting each village.
Niueans are a mixture of Samoans, Tongans and Cook Islanders who migrated there hundreds of years ago; they have blended into one ethnic group. Their language is a mixture of Samoan and Tongan. Unlike most other Pacific islanders, Niueans have no hereditary chiefs, and the head of each family gives directions.
About 9,000 Niueans have moved to New Zealand in recent years, so there are many empty houses in the villages. The predominant religious group is the Ekalesia Niue, which developed from the London Missionary Society.
THE TRUTH REACHES NIUE
Theocratic history began in Niue in February 1960 when Sisters Tia Aluni and Ivy Kawhe, missionaries serving in American Samoa, were requested to spend a month in Niue. At that time an interisland ship made only a monthly call, so if a person disembarked he had to wait a month for the next ship. Since Witness missionaries were not allowed into Niue, the sisters asked to enter the country to visit relatives. Sister Aluni had an aunt on the island, and they stayed with her.
The sisters placed more literature in one month than they did for a whole year in their own territory! A great deal of interest, as well as opposition, was stirred up. One of the persons to whom they witnessed was Samuel Makatongia. He was a member of the LMS Church, but he showed a deep interest in the truth; for some years he had been subscribing for The Watchtower. Although the sisters had to cycle about 20 kilometers (12 mi) to find him, they were well rewarded. What a blessing it turned out to be for the work in Niue, for this brother has been the mainstay of the work there and is the presiding overseer of the local congregation!
A FIJIAN PIONEER HELPS OUT
Not long after the sisters left the island, the branch office arranged for Seremaia Raibe, a native Fijian pioneer, to go there on a work contract with the Public Works Department. He used evenings and weekends to help the local brothers.
After Brother Raibe had been there for a few months, the resident commissioner, under pressure from the religious leaders, summoned him to appear for an interview. Brother Raibe, a big, husky Fijian, was asked by the commissioner why he had come to the island as a “worker,” when actually he had come to preach. Brother Raibe replied that everyone on the island seemed to know that he was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, and if the commissioner had asked him the day he arrived, he would have acknowledged that he was a Witness. Then the commissioner told the Witness that for the sake of peace on the island, it would be best if he did not go from house to house, even though the Constitution guarantees freedom of worship. Not long after this, Brother Raibe’s permit to stay on the island was revoked and he returned to Fiji. In September 1961 the Legislative Assembly of Niue adopted the policy of not allowing any Witnesses into the country.
While he was still on the island, however, Brother Raibe organized regular meetings. The Devil, using his old trick of intimidation, stirred up the local villagers to stone the house where the meetings were held; but these tactics failed when the principal stone throwers became interested in the truth and started attending the meetings themselves!
MORE HELP ARRIVES
Meantime, a married Niuean brother, William Lovini, was living in New Zealand, where he learned the truth. In 1961 Brother Lovini went back to Niue to serve where the need was greater. He was employed by the government of Niue, and for a number of years he took the lead in the congregation. The number of publishers rose to 34.
Circuit overseer Paul Evans spent part of a day on Niue when the monthly interisland ship made a call. He spoke to the brothers, discussed their problems, analyzed their activity and made suggestions—all in the space of about six hours before the ship left. Then in 1966 Brother Evans and his wife, Frances, were allowed to enter Niue for six weeks—provided they did not engage in house-to-house work. It was a fine time for building up the brothers.
CARRYING ON DESPITE EMIGRATION OF BROTHERS
From 1965 onward the number of publishers declined, dropping to a low of nine publishers. Why was this? Most of the brothers, including Brother Lovini, left for New Zealand for various reasons.
Those left behind had little experience in congregational matters and had only a limited knowledge of English. They still continued to meet, however, and regularly reported their field service to the branch office. Then in February 1967 they received a one-month visit from circuit overseer Len Heatley. A condensed Kingdom Ministry School was conducted, and on the last weekend of the visit they held a small assembly.
In 1968 the brothers were again blessed with a one-month circuit visit, and thereafter they have had regular yearly visits. Each has concluded with a mini circuit assembly, encouraging the brothers to press on with the Kingdom work. When the circuit overseer visited in 1970, the brothers were thrilled to have 92 attend the public talk and to see 111 attend the Memorial.
Since then the situation has remained virtually unchanged. With about 3,200 Niueans left on the island, the local brothers are giving the witness, and the ratio is one publisher to 359.
Far more well known than Niue is Tahiti. Let us see how the Kingdom work began in this largest island of French Polynesia.
TAHITI
Tahiti is the best-known island in the group known as the Society Islands in French Polynesia, about 3,540 kilometers (2,200 mi) east of Fiji. Shaped like the figure eight, Tahiti is mountainous, with peaks rising to 2,237 meters (7,339 ft). The island, well watered by rain and streams, has spectacular scenery. Its only large town is Papeete, and it has an interesting, mixed population, speaking Tahitian, French, Chinese and, increasingly, English. Religiously, the people adhere mainly to the Roman Catholic and French Protestant churches.
THE TRUTH COMES TO TAHITI
Two traveling overseers started the preaching work in Tahiti. The first, Len Helberg, spent two months there in 1956-57. He called on people who had written for subscriptions for the Society’s magazines. He also showed the film The New World Society in Action five times, with the attendance totaling 618. The second was Paul Evans. In 1957 he placed over 70 books and Bibles. But it was not until the following year that a basis for a congregation was laid.
Agnes Schenck, a citizen of Tahiti, was living with her husband and son in the United States when the family came into the truth. In 1957, while at a convention, they heard Brother Knorr announce that Tahiti, a country where the Kingdom work was banned and missionaries were denied entry, was one of the lands where the need was greater. Earl and Agnes Schenck with their 11-year-old son decided to go there. They sailed from California in May 1958.
One of the brothers who had encouraged this family to go to Tahiti was Clyde Neill, and after the 1958 Divine Will International Assembly in New York, he and his family, as well as David Carano and his family, entered Tahiti that same year on three-month tourist visas. To avoid attracting the attention of the authorities, the brothers changed the location of the Watchtower Study each week. The hospitable Tahitians served refreshments afterward, which added to the impression that the brothers were tourists.
Soon several Bible studies were started even though the language barrier was a problem. The brothers coped with this by using two books, one in French and one in English. On many occasions Sister Schenck helped the others out with French and Tahitian.
Many times, as one of the Witnesses was walking along with an interested Tahitian, friends or relatives would stop them and inquire about this new religion. Once, a friend of a Tahitian spied him with a Witness, so he stopped his bus in the middle of the street and let his passengers sit there while he got out and talked with the two of them. Arrangements were made right then and there for a home Bible study!
NEW ONES BAPTIZED
The climax of these brothers’ stay in Tahiti came just before they had to leave the island after three spiritually uplifting months. This was the baptism of eight persons, the firstfruits of Tahiti! Then the Neills and Caranos had to return to the United States, leaving the Schencks and the new ones to carry on the Kingdom work.
In 1959 a congregation was formed in Papeete, and although missionaries were banned, Don Clare entered Tahiti as the district overseer and held a circuit assembly during each visit. By 1960 there were 28 publishers.
The year 1960 was a memorable one for the reason that the government granted recognition to a locally organized association of Jehovah’s Witnesses. This gave the work legal standing and allowed for the association to buy property.
A TIME OF TESTING
As 1 John 2:19 indicates, there are those who “were not of our sort.” Tahiti did not prove to be any exception to this, as was proved by events in 1961. A French pioneer, Claude Bonhomme, was assigned by the Society to serve in Tahiti. Because of his maturity and experience, he was assigned as overseer to replace the local brother who had been serving up to that time. The local man became jealous, and as a result, dissension arose in the congregation. Some were disfellowshipped, others stopped associating. Although this had a dampening effect, the work never stopped, and by 1963 the number of publishers had climbed to 68.
FURTHER EXPANSION
The highlight of 1963 was the completion of an island-style Kingdom Hall, and the Witnesses had the joy of seeing 198 seated in it for the Memorial. The following year the 78 publishers held their circuit assembly in it with 220 in attendance.
Big changes had to be made in the lives of these lovable island folk for them to conform to the Bible’s requirements for Christians. Consider, for example, a 42-year-old woman who had given birth to 14 children out of wedlock before finding the truth. She was living with a man to whom she was not married. She decided to straighten out her life even though difficulties arose because her children did not all have the same surname. The matter had to be taken to court, and this process consumed a year’s time.
When it was finally settled, she married the man. One month later she and one of her daughters were baptized. Now her other children and grandchildren are also proclaiming the good news.
The only congregation in all French Polynesia at the time was in Papeete, and it was growing rapidly. The Society sent two special pioneers to help the congregation. They were Brother and Sister Inaudi, who had been special pioneers in France. It was not long before Brother Inaudi became a traveling overseer, visiting French Polynesia, New Caledonia and New Hebrides (now Vanuatu).
Tahitians are noted for the giving of leis to visitors—floral leis on arrival, and nonperishable shell leis for a permanent remembrance on departure. This custom has led to opportunities to witness. For example, Brother Don Clare relates: “During my visits to Tahiti up to a hundred brothers and interested persons welcomed us on arrival and farewelled us on departure. On each occasion we received a hundred flower or shell leis. Seeing us boarding planes with seashell leis piled so high we could hardly see where we were going, tourists on the same flight, with only one lei, would inquire if I was the governor of the island. This led to many fine discussions.”
IMPACT OF FIRST INTERNATIONAL CONVENTION
The “Peace on Earth” International Assembly in November 1969 marked a turning point. At the time there were only 124 local publishers, and what a joy it was for them to meet with 210 delegates from 16 different countries! The attendance of 488 at the public talk thrilled the brothers. This was also the first time that the local newspaper made mention of Jehovah’s Witnesses.
Brother F. W. Franz’ presence at the convention proved to be most stimulating, and his remarks motivated the brothers to carry on the Kingdom work that lay ahead in the 62 inhabited islands in French Polynesia. Brother Franz was the first member of the Governing Body to visit Tahiti, and the benefit of this visit and the convention is seen in the 15-percent increase in publishers for 1970. In 1971 a new congregation was formed.
MORE HELP ARRIVES
In 1971 Brother Sicari in France wrote the Fiji branch office regarding serving where the need was greater. The office encouraged him to move to Tahiti. It took some months to prepare for the trip, and the family sold their furniture and auto to pay for the tickets. Thus in May 1972 Brother and Sister Sicari arrived in Tahiti with their two daughters, nine-year-old Elizabeth and six-year-old Helene. Brother Sicari, who now serves on the Branch Committee, has been happy to do his part in helping the local brothers to progress. Sister Sicari went back into the regular pioneer service, though having two children. This incited the local sisters to follow her example. She is still in the pioneer work, and her older daughter, Elizabeth, has joined her as a regular pioneer.
NEW KINGDOM HALLS AND FURTHER PROGRESS
The Papeete Kingdom Hall, built in the Tahitian style with its coconut-leaf roof, needed rebuilding and, above all, to have closed-in sidewalls to prevent the neighborhood chickens from spending the night there. So, in February 1973 the new Papeete Kingdom Hall was dedicated. In September of that year the Punaauia Congregation dedicated their Kingdom Hall. With a view to future growth, this hall was built to accommodate 500, and circuit assemblies could be held there too.
In 1973 two Tahitian families who had learned the truth in France decided to return to Tahiti. Brother Colson Dean’s family settled in Tahiti, while Brother and Sister Jamet, former special pioneers in France, went to the island of Raiatéa where the congregation of 24 publishers had only one elder. Soon Brother Jamet was appointed to replace Brother Inaudi as a circuit overseer because the Inaudis were expecting a child.
By 1973 the number of congregations grew to four, and in 1974 another congregation was formed with the help of a Tahitian family that moved to the island of Bora-Bora. For the 1974 Memorial 740 attended, a remarkable number compared with the total of 199 publishers.
BROTHERS KNORR AND FRANZ VISIT TAHITI
Then, the brothers joyously learned that Brothers Knorr and Franz would be visiting Tahiti as part of their 1975 world service tour. This was Brother Knorr’s first trip to Tahiti. More than 700 people were present to hear their encouraging talks. Brothers Knorr and Franz invited the overseers to meet with them and informed them that the Society was considering the opening of a branch office in French Polynesia! The surprised elders unanimously agreed that a local branch office was much needed, considering the extent of the territory. At the same meeting, Brother Alain Jamet was recommended to serve as overseer for the new branch office that was to open April 1, 1975. So from that time, oversight of the work in this part of the Pacific was transferred from the Fiji branch to the branch in Tahiti.
Jehovah has indeed blessed the brothers’ activity in this remote area, so that today Tahiti has more than 500 publishers. But the story of Tahiti’s thrilling progress as a separate branch of the Society will be told on another occasion.
Now let us consider another French-speaking territory that has been blessed with theocratic progress—New Caledonia.
NEW CALEDONIA
New Caledonia, an overseas territory of France, consists of about 25 islands located some 1,120 kilometers (700 mi) east of the north Australian coast. Its name is taken from New Caledonia, the territory’s main island, which is one of the largest islands in the Pacific. It is about 400 kilometers (250 mi) long and 50 kilometers (30 mi) wide. The population is about 145,000. New Caledonians are French citizens, and half of them live in the area of the modern French-style city of Nouméa, the territorial capital.
The native New Caledonians are Melanesians, but now there are almost as many Europeans. As elsewhere in the islands, there is a great mixture of island people in New Caledonia, and on the main island about 35 different languages are spoken. However, everyone uses French to communicate.
Cannibalism was common until the end of the 19th century. When Christendom’s missionaries arrived about 1840, the reaction of the natives was quite violent—several missionaries were killed and eaten. But with the support of the French army, Catholic missions were set up on the main island, where they predominate today. The London Missionary Society established missions on the islands of Maré and Lifou, and this led to much bloodshed, as religious wars broke out, with Catholics attempting to drive out Protestants and vice versa. Today, around 90,000 persons adhere to the Catholic religion and about 34,000 belong to the Protestant churches.
QUIET BEGINNINGS TO THE KINGDOM WORK
In 1954 John and Ellen Hubler arrived from Australia to serve where the need was greater. “We set out with a tourist visa for one month,” relates Brother Hubler, “and with the utmost trust in Jehovah to aid us.”
The Australian branch advised Brother Hubler to get a job as quickly as possible, hoping that his employer would assist them to get visa extensions. He got a job, but by this time their one-month visa was expiring. So he approached his employer, who arranged to provide bond for them; thus they were able to get a six-month extension. Brother Hubler recalls: “At the end of the first month, when the ship sailed back to Australia, we had the greatest joy, standing on the wharf, watching it sail without us, happy in the knowledge that we had successfully carried out the first part of our instructions.”
They started the second stage of their work—visiting outer areas of the island and speaking the truth to the people. They had no literature and used their English Bibles. They soon noticed that what they preached was received with eager interest, and thus plans were made for return visits.
Since they had no literature to place with interested people, Brother Hubler requested some from the Australian branch. They were advised that an engineer on a cargo ship was bringing a parcel and that this interested New Caledonian would deliver it to them. Thus the first supply of French literature arrived. Later an orchestra leader on a tourist ship brought more literature. On this occasion the ship’s orchestra was playing one night at the Town Hall, so the Hublers had to go to the ball to get the literature. Finally, Brother Hubler ordered some literature to be sent through post office channels, and he got it through customs with no problem.
OTHERS ARRIVE AND A CONGREGATION GROWS
After their celebrating the first Memorial in New Caledonia with just the two of them present, others gradually arrived to serve where the need was greater. Some families from Australia could remain for only a few months, but others stayed on for a couple of years. These zealous brothers did a wonderful work in laying the foundation for a congregation.
In 1956 the branch directed that the Hublers start to preach in Nouméa itself, while the other brothers worked in the outlying areas. Soon interested persons in Nouméa began coming to the meetings held by the congregation formed in August that year. The new congregation started with 9 publishers, grew rapidly to 14, then to 21 and 26, and ended the year with 32.
In 1957 the circuit overseer visited the congregation for the first time, staying for one month. Soon after the visit the brothers were instructed to concentrate their efforts in Nouméa. April 1958 saw the first of the local people start out in the field service and then get baptized.
On September 1, 1958, the oversight of the work in New Caledonia came under the new branch in Fiji. The brothers were thrilled that same year to have their first circuit assembly, even though they were a small group with a peak of 41 publishers.
BACK INTO FULL-TIME SERVICE
When Brother Hubler went to New Caledonia, he had to give up the pioneer work, but he had always wanted to resume full-time service. So he applied for permission to stay as a full-time minister. He went to see an official who was favorable to the truth, the secretary to the governor, and Brother Hubler was told to go ahead. Thus in 1959 he started out in the special pioneer work.
“One day the secretary called me into his office and asked me when my visa was to be renewed,” Brother Hubler recalls. “I told him I had five months left. He then said that he was being sent away on a mission but expected to be back before then, and in the meantime, his assistant had instructions to give us all the help that we needed. But things did not turn out as he expected. He never did return. Instead, his place was taken by a man who was a member of Catholic Action. Then the authorities began to refuse visa renewals for the Australian brothers.”
When the time came for the Hublers to renew their visas, they received a quick reply—no renewal! So, after five years in the country, they had to leave, the last of 31 brothers and sisters who had gone to serve where the need was greater. Brother Hubler is still in the full-time service as a traveling overseer in New Zealand.
OPPOSITION PLANS THWARTED
With the Australians gone, the clergy thought that the Witnesses were finished. They even announced from their pulpits that the local Witnesses would now come back to church. They were disappointed. Instead, the Kingdom work increased.
In 1960 all the Society’s publications were banned, but the brothers carried on, using just the Bible. Then the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained was printed showing the publisher’s name as being the International Bible Students Association, and it was used in the preaching work. Some magazines still arrived, though many times postal officials destroyed them. To get around the ban on The Watchtower, the brothers had the magazines printed with blank covers, and then they could be distributed with no trouble.
Meantime, efforts were made to have the ban lifted on the publications, and in 1963 the Society won the case. So the Privy Council removed the ban from all the publications except The Watchtower and Awake! The ban on Awake! was lifted in 1969, but the brothers had to wait until 1975 before the ban on The Watchtower was removed.
THE KINGDOM WORK MOVES AHEAD
During 1962 the work moved ahead, and 37 reported sharing in the preaching work. In 1966 the number of publishers increased to 104, and the work spread out around the island with some of the local brothers being assigned as special pioneers. In 1975 the brothers were delighted to welcome their first Gilead graduates, Brother and Sister Fosset.
For some years the congregation meetings were held in Brother Jonvaux’s garage, which was an aircraft hangar from World War II. Until 1975 this was also used as the location for circuit assemblies. Then in 1975 the Anse Vata Congregation in Nouméa bought a piece of land and started to build the first real Kingdom Hall in New Caledonia. It was completed within a year and was dedicated in June 1976.
In that same month the Society opened up a branch office in New Caledonia, and this new branch now took oversight of Vanuatu and Wallis and Futuna Islands. The number of publishers in New Caledonia had grown from the 2 Australians in 1954 to 315 in 1975. Presently New Caledonia has over 500 publishers, with the number gathering for the Memorial in 1983 reaching 1,456. Thus, in another part of the Pacific, the Kingdom good news is being preached vigorously.
But now let us turn our attention to Vanuatu (formerly the New Hebrides) and see how the preaching work got started there.
VANUATU
Vanuatu forms a Y-shaped chain of about 80 islands stretching for more than 800 kilometers (500 mi) in the southwest Pacific Ocean. However, 90 percent of the land area is made up of only the ten largest islands. Vanuatu is situated about 960 kilometers (600 mi) west of Fiji. Half the islands are islets and rocky outcrops; the other half are mountainous, and those in the northern and central regions are covered with lush, tropical forests. Heavy rainfall and a humid, tropical climate characterize the country. The people are of Melanesian origin, and most of them live in villages.
Since the 125,000 inhabitants of the country speak more than a hundred languages, the need for good communication has led to the development of a lingua franca called Bislama, which combines mainly English words with Melanesian grammar. Most of the people of Vanuatu use Bislama, along with French and English. Both French and English were introduced as a result of the New Hebrides’ being jointly ruled by France and Great Britain. This ended on July 30, 1980, when the New Hebrides was declared independent and renamed Vanuatu.
Over the years workers came in from Malaysia, Vietnam, China, Wallis Island and Kiribati, as well as from Tonga and Fiji. Thus, many races can be seen in the streets of the two main cities, Vila, the capital (on the island of Efate), and Santo on the island of Espíritu Santo.
CUSTOMS AND RELIGION
The life of the Ni-Vanuatu was and still is to a certain extent centered around the worship of ancestors. People live with the fear of the spirits of their ancestors. Spiritism thus greatly affected their beliefs, and this even led to cannibalism. For example, on the island of Ambrim, to enter a spiritistic community, the entrant had to kill and eat a man.
Though some of Christendom’s early missionaries were killed, the churches gradually gained influence and power, and they apportioned the islands among themselves, the Anglicans taking the north and the Presbyterians the south. Today the churches are much involved in politics and thus strengthen their hold over the people. Presbyterians number about 50,000, Roman Catholics some 20,000 and Anglicans 17,500.
Considering this background, one can understand why the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses has developed slowly in this part of the world.
LIGHT OF TRUTH STARTS TO SHINE
In the 1930’s Brother George Winton sailed through the islands, spreading the first seeds of truth. Even though his boat was wrecked on the island of Paama, this did not stop him. Evidently he was deported around 1940 for preaching the good news. Another brother, Alfred Rice, worked among the people, but he died on Paama from malaria.
In 1958 Lewis Newton and his wife arrived from Australia to serve where the need was greater. “When we sailed into the port of Vila we were struck by the beauty of the bay with the houses visible here and there among the luxuriant foliage,” Brother Newton remembers. “Everywhere there were the bright colors of hibiscus, bougainvillea and variegated leaves. The town consisted of about a dozen tiny stores and two larger stores.”
Brother Newton obtained work for six months with a copra-plantation owner and thus he and his wife traveled to their new home on the other side of the island. The Newtons worked with caution, trying to get the preaching started. Though not knowing it then, they were to spend about 25 years there before returning to Australia in 1983.
After attending a convention in Fiji in 1959, the Newtons arrived home and found that the plantation owner had turned against them because of the truth and had dismissed them from his employ. They had used all their money to go to the convention and could not pay the money for bond to remain in the country. However, two planters whom they barely knew offered to lend them the money, and a week later, on the other side of the island, Brother Newton found another job with a French planter.
ENCOURAGEMENT FROM CIRCUIT OVERSEER AND OTHERS
With this move they were now only some 20 kilometers (12 mi) from Vila, and with the aid of a borrowed, dilapidated car, they did a little witnessing in the town. “We were very encouraged” says Brother Newton, “when the circuit overseer, Len Helberg, visited us in April 1960.”
During 1961 a Canadian couple, Brother and Sister Robert Hinsche, arrived and were able to stay for a few months until the Immigration Department forced them to leave. During all the time that the brothers had been on this island they had been placing many copies of the book From Paradise Lost to Paradise Regained, and the native folk took them back to their islands. Thus the seeds of truth were being sown. On one occasion Audrey Newton was surrounded in the car by what appeared to be a threatening group of native people. How relieved she was to find out that all they wanted were copies of the book!
In 1963 the Newtons were thrilled when the five members of the Bates family, of whom four were publishers, arrived from England. For the first time in five years, the Newtons had others with them for the Memorial. Now six publishers were working on the island of Efate.
FIRST NATIVE PUBLISHER
One day Sister Jeanne Bates was witnessing to people living on Roman Catholic Mission land. One of the Bible studies started there was with Helen Pita, a native woman, who could neither read nor write. It required much patience and ingenuity to study with her, not only because she was illiterate but also because she lived under difficult conditions. Her husband drank away their money, and she had to raise ten children. She made slow but steady progress, though, and became the first local publisher, baptized in 1967. She is still serving Jehovah loyally to the best of her ability.
A definite step forward was taken in 1964 with the organizing of all the meetings in a downtown location. Regularly between 10 and 20 persons attended. But the government refused to renew Brother Bates’ contract, so in 1966, after three years in Vanuatu, the family returned to England.
CIRCUIT ASSEMBLIES AND GROWTH
The small band in Vanuatu rejoiced in their first circuit assembly in August 1967. This was held in the front yard of the Newtons’ home. (By now they had moved into town.) Len Helberg, the circuit overseer, showed the film The New World Society in Action to about 40 people.
In 1970 Brother Allan Taylor and his family from Australia joined the brothers, bringing the total number of publishers for the 1971 service year to 15. They stayed on and worked faithfully with the others until 1975, when they moved to Fiji. About the time this family arrived, the branch encouraged French-speaking brothers to move there, and a number of families came from France.
For the circuit assembly scheduled for March 1971, the few local brothers were greatly encouraged to greet about 40 brothers from New Caledonia. The carport they used for meetings was bursting at the seams with 147 attending the showing of one of the Society’s films, the commentary for which was given simultaneously in French and Bislama.
In 1972 the brothers were able to purchase some land on the outskirts of town and started construction on a Kingdom Hall. With just the posts and the roof, and coconut leaves for walls, they used it for the next circuit assembly. To help finance the hall, local brothers made money by carving small boats that were then sold to the tourists.
LITERATURE AND MISSIONARIES TO MEET THE NEED
When the new branch started in New Caledonia in June 1976, Vanuatu came under its oversight. The Governing Body approved the sending of missionaries into Vanuatu, but all efforts to get permission for British missionaries to enter failed. The first ones who were allowed to enter were Brother and Sister Casteran from France. This was in 1977. That year also saw the translation of the Watchtower magazine into Bislama, and since then all the meetings have been conducted mainly in this language.
While at Vila, Brother Casteran witnessed to an old man called Jonah Sak-Sak. He studied for three months, attended the district convention in 1978 and then returned to his island of Ambrim. The Watchtower in Bislama was sent to him by mail. Later, some brothers decided to visit Jonah. How surprised they were to find that he held meetings regularly in a nice Kingdom Hall, one that he had built! Just by reading The Watchtower, he understood the need to hold meetings regularly and to be active in the preaching work. At this writing a group of 19 people meet for the Watchtower Study in his village, and another group started by him meets on another part of the island. Though in poor health and not yet baptized, Jonah conducts 40 Bible studies.
The 38 publishers who reported in 1975 grew to 57 in four years. During one month in 1979 a peak of 64 reported field service, and 159 attended the Memorial that year.
INDEPENDENCE AND ITS EFFECT
The brothers were delighted to receive the Truth book in Bislama early in 1980. This was certainly a timely provision. Why so? Because with independence from Great Britain and France close at hand, the country was entering a new period. Independence came July 30, 1980, and with it many Europeans, including many of the brothers, had to go back to their home countries. Then in November the government refused to grant visas to all the missionaries of Jehovah’s Witnesses working in Vanuatu, and by the end of January 1981, they had all gone to other assignments. Thus the Ni-Vanuatu brothers were on their own, apart from just a few European brothers who were granted visas to stay.
After independence just 34 publishers remained in two well-established congregations. But Jehovah’s work moved ahead, and today there are over 50 publishers who rejoiced when 211 attended the 1983 Memorial.
SOUTH PACIFIC HEARS THE GOOD NEWS
Though unique in the world for isolation, the islands of the Pacific have heard and continue hearing the message of God’s Kingdom. Brothers and sisters serving where the need is greater, mostly from Australia, have contributed immensely to the present spiritual prosperity. By now six different branches have oversight of the South Pacific field: Australia, Fiji, Guam, New Caledonia, New Zealand and Tahiti. This has not been easy. With so many different governments, persistent efforts by officials to hinder the work, plus travel and communication problems, it has been only through Jehovah’s power that the Kingdom work has prospered.
Due to the vastness of the Pacific Ocean, contact with the brothers has been limited, and traveling overseers have played an especially important role by keeping the brothers in touch with one another and with God’s organization. One year a district overseer logged some 48,000 kilometers (30,000 mi), visiting the scattered groups. This has been done at considerable financial expense, and the brothers in that part of the world, generally poor in material possessions, are grateful to the brothers elsewhere for their generous support in making the preaching work possible there. As the apostle Paul said, there has been “an equalizing.”—2 Cor. 8:14.
The result of this activity is now evident with a “great crowd” sharing in the lifesaving preaching and teaching work. All sorts of men and women, from different races, speaking many languages and from various countries, have accepted God’s way of salvation. (Rev. 7:9, 10) Eagerly the Witnesses there, as everywhere, look forward to the time under Jehovah’s Kingdom when they will be able to sit each one in the shade of his stately palm tree, enjoying in fullness Kingdom blessings, including the physical beauty of the islands of the South Pacific.
[Map on page 162]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
South Pacific
SCALE AT EQUATOR
MI 0  300   600
KM 0  500  1000
EQUATOR
OCEAN ISLAND
KIRIBATI
PHOENIX ISLANDS
TUVALU
TOKELAU ISLANDS
WALLIS AND FUTUNA ISLANDS
WESTERN SAMOA
AMERICAN SAMOA
COOK ISLANDS
TAHITI
NIUE
TONGA
FIJI
VANUATU
NEW CALEDONIA
[Picture on page 170]
William Checksfield stuck to his missionary assignment in Fiji until his death in 1962
[Pictures on page 175]
Foua Tofinga, one of Brother Checksfield’s early Bible students. He is now a member of the Fiji Branch Committee
A group of early publishers in Fiji (about 1956)
[Picture on page 176]
Donald Clare, present Branch Committee coordinator, and his wife, Eunice, who was Fiji’s first pioneer
[Picture on page 183]
Leonard Heatley and his wife, Clara. He was Fiji’s first Gilead graduate and is still pioneering
[Picture on page 188]
Fiji branch office at 66 Robertson Road, Suva
[Picture on page 199]
Fuaiupolu Pele and his wife were among the first Samoan-born Witnesses in Western Samoa
[Picture on page 202]
Kingdom Hall in Apia with open sides
[Picture on page 207]
Paul Evans, accompanied by his wife, Frances, did circuit work over a vast area of the South Pacific, encouraging the brothers
[Picture on page 215]
Missionaries serving in American Samoa in 1961
[Picture on page 223]
Saulo Teasi (shown here with his wife and son) helped start the Kingdom work in Kiribati and Tuvalu
[Picture on page 229]
The first Kingdom Hall built at Nukualofa, Tonga, with a group of Tongan brothers
[Picture on page 237]
The spiritual paradise is expanding in Tahiti and neighboring islands

