Kingdom Proclaimers Report
Helping People of All Sorts in the Netherlands
ABRAHAM was a man of uncommon faith. “When he was called,” said the apostle Paul, Abraham obeyed God’s voice and “went out, although not knowing where he was going.” After moving his entire family, Abraham “resided as an alien in the land of the promise” for the remaining one hundred years of his life.—Hebrews 11:8, 9.
Likewise today, many of Jehovah’s Witnesses have accepted the challenge of moving to another country in order to serve where the need is greater. Others have learned a different language so that they can give a witness to foreigners who have immigrated to their country. As the following examples show, this fine spirit has opened “a large door that leads to activity” in the Netherlands, where one million of the 15 million inhabitants are from other lands.—1 Corinthians 16:9.
□ Bahram, a former Kung Fu instructor, came from a country in the Middle East. He obtained a copy of the Bible and some Watch Tower publications. Within a month, Bahram realized that he had found the truth. A study was started with him and his wife, but there was a problem—their Bible teacher did not speak their language. They communicated with gestures, speaking “with hands and feet,” as they recalled. In time, Bahram and his wife were able to locate a congregation where their native tongue was spoken, and thereafter they made swift progress. Bahram is now a baptized Witness.
□ A Dutch pioneer couple approached an Indonesian man who was standing in front of a supermarket. He was pleasantly surprised when the couple spoke to him in his own language. Arrangements were then made to call on him at his home. It was discovered that he had lived in Russia for more than 20 years, during which time he became a gynecologist. He claimed to be an atheist, but he admitted that each time he delivered a baby, he could not help but marvel, “How perfect the human body is! What a miracle!” He agreed to study the Bible and soon came to believe that there is a Creator who cares about mankind. (1 Peter 5:6, 7) Now he is a baptized brother and serves with the Indonesian congregation in Amsterdam.
□ In Rotterdam, one of the world’s largest shipping ports, a group of pioneers have become proficient in preaching to various language groups that put to shore daily. As a result of the activity of this enthusiastic group of preachers, several seamen, including a captain, a marine officer, and a former bodyguard, have accepted the truth. Now they too help to spread the good news of God’s Kingdom worldwide.—Matthew 24:14.
 As in other parts of the world, Jehovah’s Witnesses in the Netherlands are determined to do their part in declaring the everlasting good news to every nation, tribe, tongue, and people.—Revelation 14:6.

