A Full Day in Field Service
1 It takes effort as well as planning to share in the field service. There are work schedules, the home, family and similar details of life that need attention. Our territory for witnessing may be widespread, involving considerable time and expense in travel. With all that is involved we want to keep in mind the words of Paul: “Therefore, the way I am running is not uncertainly; the way I am directing my blows is so as not to be striking the air.” (1 Cor. 9:26) So, once out, why not stay out in the field.
2 A number of things can be done to get the most out of the effort put forth. For example, meetings for field service can be kept brief and on time. Although some may not have arrived, the one taking the lead could begin the discussion with those on hand at the scheduled time, usually spending no more than ten to fifteen minutes, then leaving immediately after the prayer. Some leave a note so that latecomers can find the group in the territory. If meetings for field service are held following a meeting in the Kingdom Hall, they can be especially brief.
3 When you make a special effort to reach distant parts of your territory, give particular thought to making the time count. Try to line up the groups so that when the territory is reached, all will be able to stay for about the same length of time rather than having the whole group return because one person has to come home early. Those whose time is more limited could witness in closer territory. It may be appropriate to take a lunch along so that a maximum amount of time may be spent in this distant territory.
4 Making return visits requires careful thought too. Groups should be kept as small as practical and those with calls in the same area could be in the same car. Making return visits on the way to and from the territory will save time. Another time-saver is making personal field service arrangements with those in similar circumstances. These private arrangements give us the flexibility we need in order to fit our personal situation.
5 With all the planning and effort involved in preparing for the public witnessing work, why not stay out as long as possible? When the weather and other circumstances are favorable, take advantage of the situation to do more than usual. The more time we spend in talking the truth to others, the more opportunities we will have for finding honest-hearted ones. Thus, more praise goes to Jehovah and we will experience greater joy from our sacred service.

