Demonstrating a Superior Way of Life
1 “When we can demonstrate to others that our way of life is superior, then people will listen to what we recommend.” So said an elder who has been in the truth for years and has successfully raised a large family. What do you think were some of the things he had in mind? There are, indeed, many ways in which the Christian way of life is superior, and which, when followed closely, not only will be pleasing to Jehovah but will make a favorable impression on honest-hearted ones who observe. We recommend to others not only the truth, but also our way of life.
CLEAN AND RESPECTFUL
2 True Christians follow the Bible’s counsel to be clean both on the inside, in mind and heart, and on the outside. Paul says: “Let us cleanse ourselves of every defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in God’s fear.” (2 Cor. 7:1) So we should endeavor to be clean not only spiritually, but also personally, in our homes, surroundings and possessions. Our personal appearance is important whether we are at home, at work or in the field service. The favorable comments we hear following our conventions prove this to be true.
3 Christians should be respectful. We ought to respect the authority of Caesar and be quick to obey law-enforcement officers and others who benefit the community in helping to make things more safe for all. (Rom. 13:1, 2) We should show respect for others in the community, appreciating that they have rights such as those involving property and personal privacy. Our children are taught to appreciate their schools, striving to learn and supporting the teachers. (1 Pet. 3:15) Older persons both within and outside the congregation should receive due respect.—Lev. 19:32.
GOOD FAMILIES, HONEST
4 Genuine Christians work to make marriage a success, the husband shouldering his responsibilities of oversight and providing life’s necessities, and the wife giving loving cooperation and loyal support. They also strive for a happy atmosphere within the entire family circle. (Col. 3:18-21) Children are taught to be obedient, helpful and kind and thus are protected from the rebellious, defiant spirit often seen in worldly children. (2 Tim. 3:1-3) What a blessing for congregations that have many such examples!
5 Christians must be honest. This is true in little as well as big things. One who is dishonest is soon thus identified wherever he is. Borrowed things should be returned and this is best done promptly. Honesty also requires giving secular employers a full day’s work. Jesus said we should ‘pay back Caesar’s things to Caesar,’ and this would include paying taxes even though at times we might think they are exorbitant.—Matt. 22:21; Rom. 13:7.
6 We are not concerned primarily with making an impression on others. We are anxious to please Jehovah. So we remember that we have other important work to do too, namely, to act as illuminators in the world, speaking the good news to those in our territory and teaching those who will hear.
7 But we are fully aware that the life one leads constitutes a witness in itself. We must be sure that our way of life is different—that we are indeed conforming to this superior way. Then people will more readily listen to what we recommend.—Gal. 5:22-25.

