Is Your Bible Handy?
1 “While I was eating lunch with another businessman, the subject turned to worsening world conditions. I always carry a Bible in my pocket and so I read 2 Timothy 3:1-5 and asked him if he thought it applied today. This led to a long interesting discussion and the reading of more scriptures. When we parted company I knew he was interested and told him I would be glad to arrange for someone in his part of the city to call at his home. ‘No,’ he said, ‘I want you to come. You read all the answers right from the Bible.’” This was not an unusual experience for this brother. It had happened a number of times before. He has been in the truth for many years, and has made it a point to be able to witness right from the Bible. He always has it handy.
2 Is your Bible always handy? Note what Psalm 1:2 indicates in this regard: “But his delight is in the law of Jehovah, and in his law he reads in an undertone day and night.” Any craftsman will tell you that the tools of his trade are indispensable; he wouldn’t think of going to work without them. The Bible is our principal tool. It equips us for every good work. (2 Tim. 3:16, 17) It should be nearby.
HAVE IT HANDY AT HOME
3 Some efficiency experts say that those who accomplish much use well the time that others waste. Much of our day is spent “between” things: between home and work, school, shopping or resting and other things. What could be more refreshing and beneficial during those waiting periods than reading the Bible? Our Theocratic School Bible reading during July averages about five and a half pages a week. That can be read by the average reader in less than a half hour.
4 But there is more to it than straight Bible reading. Do you have the next Topic for Conversation well in mind? (See Presenting the Good News on page 4.) Having your Bible handy and going through it “in an undertone” or out loud will allow you to master it before you use it in the field. (Josh. 1:8) Repeating the “topic” a number of times will allow you to think of how to reply to additional arguments and objections that might come up in the field. Or, are you preparing for a return visit where a certain question must be answered, or are you hoping to start a home Bible study? Why not rehearse the points in your mind from time to time during the day if your task allows you to do this?
AT KINGDOM HALL—IN FIELD SERVICE
5 Have your Bible ready for use at the Kingdom Hall. Many have commented favorably on the shorter Watchtower study lessons, which allow us to use our Bibles more. By all means, bring your Bible to the meetings and use it. Some of the questions now also cite scriptures. Maybe you will want to read one and volunteer a comment on how it applies.
6 Have your Bible handy in the field service. Some brothers have the Bible in hand when approaching a door. In some territories brothers prefer to have it in their pocket or easily accessible in their book bag. Whatever the situation, it is our chief instrument and should be ready for immediate use.
7 As previously mentioned, the psalmist encouraged reading God’s law day and night. One will surely experience increased blessings if he follows the psalmist’s advice, always keeping his Bible handy.

