Presenting the Good News—Through a Topic for Conversation
1 The apostle Paul asked fellow Christians to pray on his behalf “that ability to speak may be given me with the opening of my mouth, with all freeness of speech to make known the sacred secret of the good news.” (Eph. 6:19) He wanted to do well in talking to people and saw the importance of looking to Jehovah for help.
2 Isn’t this exactly the way we feel today? In talking to people during July, what topic for conversation will you use? We can use our own or the following one.
Can the Future Be Predicted?
1. Jesus’ disciples asked about the future.—Luke 21:7.
2. He predicted events taking place today.—Luke 21:10, 11, 28.
3 Our goal, of course, is not just to proclaim a message. We want to converse with the householder, getting him involved in the conversation. Then there is greater opportunity to learn his thoughts and generate interest. To start a conversation we might say: “Most people today are interested in the future. They feel that if they know in advance what will happen, they can plan their lives better. Do you feel that what the Bible predicts is of value today? [Allow response.] Jesus’ disciples wanted to know when this old system would end so that something better could replace it. Luke 21:7 says: [Read it.] Part of his reply was: [Read verse 10 and first half of 11.] Historians tell us that there have been more and greater wars, food shortages, and earthquakes in recent years than at any other time. Are these the proofs that we are looking for? If so, verse 28 says it is reason to rejoice.” (Read.)
4 The Watchtower of July 1 will especially lend itself to this Topic for Conversation. At an appropriate time in the conversation you might say: “This issue of The Watchtower discusses in greater detail what the Bible has foretold for our day and how these things are being fulfilled.” The subscription offer with the three booklets for $1.50, or the alternative offer of a subscription for six months with a 25c book, for $1.00, can then be made.
5 Very likely there are a number of publishers who will want to be prepared to comment on other verses in Luke chapter 21. Thus, if opportunity affords, they will be in a position to discuss more fully what Jesus said Christians should be watching for. May Jehovah bless our united efforts to praise him through conversations that stimulate interest, and through the Watchtower and Awake! subscriptions.

