Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING JULY 3
10 min: Song 1. Applicable Announcements and local announcements.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—Through a Topic for Conversation.” Talk on part of this material but draw the audience into the discussion. Ask audience for suggestions on what might work in local territory in regard to introductions, transitions to literature, comments on scriptures read. Have capable, well-prepared publisher demonstrate how Topic for Conversation might be presented. Mention alternative subscription offer. Can have brief experience or two from publishers who did well with the subscription offer in January or April. If congregation has territory that is seldom visited, now is the time to organize groups so it can be covered with the subscription offer inasmuch as you will not be back again soon.
30 min: Review of District Assembly Program. This part can be scheduled on service meeting following the assembly that most publishers in the congregation attend. Note suggestions in Announcements of June Our Kingdom Service. If this part of service meeting is switched to another date, then it would be good to consider instead the article, “New Subscription Arrangements,” so that the publishers will be acquainted with that information early in July. Song 2 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 10
20 min: Song 3. Local announcements. Accounts report. Question Box.
20 min: “New Subscription Arrangements.” Can be presented partly as talk with some questions and answers.
20 min: “A Full Day in Field Service.” Field overseer can discuss with audience, primarily by means of questions and answers. Following discussion of material, can ask for expressions from those who try to arrange their affairs so as to enjoy a full day in the field service. Ask them how they plan in advance and arrange things so that the time set aside will not be interrupted. The brother in charge can talk to these publishers in advance so that encouraging, well-prepared comments are presented. Review congregation’s midweek service arrangements and encourage support. Discuss June congregation field service report. Song 91 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 17
10 min: Song 100. Local announcements. Discuss Theocratic News with audience, and in view of the many increases shown, might highlight how good it is that Jehovah continues to keep the door open for others to accept the truth. Encourage publishers to report middle of month field service.
15 min: “Is Your Bible Handy?” Talk, with questions and answers. Following discussion of material, might ask publishers what they personally do or what they have heard that others do to keep their Bibles handy so as to make good use of them in the home, at the meetings and in the field service. Would be best to talk to some publishers in advance so that this portion is well-organized and prepared.
15 min: Branch Letter. A family or two could discuss this. Should not be handled simply from the standpoint of presenting facts. Assign to someone who has keen appreciation for the work done at Brooklyn headquarters and can project that warm feeling for the benefit of audience. Can bring into the discussion some thoughts from the article, “A Unique Family That Serves Others,” in the January 8, 1975, Awake!
20 min: Is Pioneer Service for You? After brief introduction, lead audience in an enthusiastic discussion. Proportion time so as to keep it fast-moving. Not necessary to read all scriptures.
1. What work did God assign to Christ Jesus and what work has he given to us today? (Luke 4:43; Matt. 24:14)
2. Generally, persons in what circumstances might consider pioneering?
3. What are some ways that a family or a congregation might assist and encourage a pioneer to continue in the pioneer work? (Acts 28:15)
4. Why are pioneers so much needed today? (Matt. 9:36-38)
5. While a pioneer can do much through good planning and organization, where will his chief strength come from? (2 Cor. 4:7; Phil. 4:13)
6. What are some privileges and responsibilities that open up to those who enter the pioneer service?
7. Why does pioneering bring happiness? (Mark 10:28-30; Acts 13:48, 52)
8. How has your congregation benefited by having pioneers?
Conclude with kind encouragement for each one to examine personal circumstances, take matter to Jehovah in prayer and then determine if pioneering is for him. Song 99 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING JULY 24
10 min: Song 71. Local announcements. Encourage brothers to report, even sending reports home if away at assembly or on vacation.
15 min: “Demonstrating a Superior Way of Life.” Brother assigned this part can give a brief introduction and then draw audience into the discussion with appropriate questions. Scriptures can be looked up and commented on, as time permits. At certain points in discussion, audience can be asked such questions as: How does this apply to us? Is there something here that you think we can especially benefit from? Does someone know of an experience that demonstrates the value of this point? Some publishers can be contacted beforehand so that questions of this kind will have been given advance preparation and thought. When discussing field service, arrangements for field service for weekend can be briefly mentioned and encouragement given for publishers to support these.
15 min: Building One Another Up. It is vital that we take full advantage of meetings and good association so that our spirituality can be kept at a high level. Some publishers occasionally lose sight of the great value of congregation meetings and the need to build one another up by this and other means. Encourage the brothers in the audience to give heartfelt answers to the following questions:
1. What were some features, guiding principles and purposes of early Christian meetings, and are some of these encouraging things found in our meetings? (1 Cor. 14:26, 33, 40; Col. 4:16)
2. (a) Were there supposed to be any distinctions or partiality in the early Christian meetings? (Jas. 2:1-9) (b) How would the absence of such be encouraging?
3. How can inviting a few brothers to your home be spiritually upbuilding, and the need preparations be elaborate? (Luke 10:38-42)
4. Why is sharing together in the field service upbuilding?
Conclude with warm encouragement for all in congregation to be lovingly concerned for the spirituality of others. One thing that we cannot neglect, if we want to make progress constantly and also to have Jehovah’s approval, is meeting together. (Heb. 10:24, 25)
20 min: Congregation can arrange this part in accord with what is needed locally. Song 85 and prayer.

