Attend the “Lovers of Freedom” District Convention!
THREE rewarding days of Bible instruction await you. Be present at 10:20 Friday morning when the convention begins with a musical presentation. Enjoy the opening talk, “Why Peer Into the Perfect Law of Freedom?,” and the concluding part of the morning session, the keynote address: “The Purpose and Use of Our God-Given Freedom.”
On Friday afternoon, admonition will be provided Christians to fulfill their commission as ministers of God. “Busy​—In Dead Works or in Jehovah’s Service?” and “A Free People but Accountable” are two of the themes that will be developed. Encouragement to use one’s freedom to serve Jehovah will be provided in a full-costumed drama. It will draw from the experiences of Ezra and his associates who returned from Babylon to Jerusalem in 468 B.C.E. to beautify God’s temple.
Saturday morning’s session will feature a three-part symposium, “Freedom With Responsibility in the Family Circle.” Following the soul-searching discourse “Keep Yourself Free to Serve Jehovah” will be a talk on Christian dedication and baptism. In the afternoon many will await with anticipation the part “Is Marriage the Key to Happiness?” The session will conclude with a highlight that will undoubtedly bring great joy to all lovers of freedom.
You will want to be present Sunday morning to hear the three-part symposium “Serving as Fishers of Men.” This will discuss Jesus’ illustration of the dragnet and the fish and will consider what part we can have in its fulfillment. The morning session will conclude with the important discourses “Keeping Awake in ‘the Time of the End’” and “Who Will Escape the ‘Time of Distress’?” Then, in the afternoon, you will not want to miss the public talk, “Hailing God’s New World of Freedom.” Before a stirring concluding talk, there will be a discussion of the Watchtower study article for the week. Bring your copy of the magazine to be studied that week.
During June, July, and August, over 140 conventions are scheduled throughout the United States alone, so there will be one not far from your home. Check with Jehovah’s Witnesses locally for the time and place of the one nearest you.

