Jesus’ Life and Ministry
THE article “Jesus Finishes All God Asks,” on the following pages, is the last segment of our long-running series “Jesus’ Life and Ministry.” This feature has appeared in The Watchtower for more than six years, in 149 consecutive issues, starting with the April 1, 1985, issue.
It is our hope that this series in The Watchtower has helped you to follow the apostle Paul’s admonition to ‘look intently at Jesus’ and to heed God’s command to “listen to him.” (Hebrews 12:2, 3; Matthew 17:5) Over the years, many have written to say that they have been helped to do this. “It’s as if I were there listening to him and watching what he does,” wrote one reader. “I have come to love him more because of these articles.”
Another reader wrote: “Every issue seems to contain a point that I had missed when reading the Bible account. I have enjoyed getting in mind the different events in Jesus’ life in better chronological order by reading each article.” Many have expressed similar appreciation for learning when and where Jesus taught and did things during his ministry.
A woman in Spain said: “I have kept all the articles since the beginning. They are so instructive for adults as well as for children. I am 44, and I am thrilled when I read these accounts. It is as if I were present in each historical incident.”
A mother in the United States wrote: “Because of the brevity of the articles and their simple expression, my husband has joined in our family study. My eight-year-old son asked me to write to thank you that his father now studies the Bible. He requests that some day when this series is completed the articles be published in a book so he can share them with his schoolmates.”
Perhaps you share the sentiments of the reader who recently lamented: “I feel a bit saddened to think the series will soon end as the final days of Christ’s life are considered. I shall truly miss their place in The Watchtower.” We hope that you will enjoy this final part of our series “Jesus’ Life and Ministry.”

