Good News From Malawi!
ON NOVEMBER 15, 1993, the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania was officially registered in the southeast African country of Malawi. This will give Jehovah’s Witnesses legal recognition and freedom to preach Bible truths to the people of Malawi.
Back in 1948, a branch office of the Watch Tower Society was established in Malawi to coordinate the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses in that land. On January 8, 1957, the Watch Tower Society was registered there for the first time. For several years Jehovah’s Witnesses enjoyed rapid growth. But violent persecution broke out in 1964. Why?
In obedience to God, Jehovah’s Witnesses maintained strict neutrality in politics. (John 17:16) Evidently, some did not quite understand this Scriptural position and misrepresented the Witnesses as a radical religion and as outlaws. Hence, some felt justified in persecuting these peace-loving Christians. Many Witnesses were fired from their jobs, beaten, and otherwise humiliated. Some were forcibly separated from their children.
In 1972 more than 30,000 Witnesses and some who were studying the Bible with them had to leave the country for fear of losing their lives. Thousands settled in refugee camps in neighboring Mozambique. But in 1975 these refugees were sent back to Malawi, where they had to face further persecution. Many were placed in concentration camps. Amid this turmoil, the Watch Tower Society was struck off the official list of legal organizations in Malawi. Since then Jehovah’s Witnesses and their legal organizations have been under ban in that land.
Despite all of these developments, the Witnesses did not retaliate. They never formed mobs or rioted in protest against the government. Instead, they prayerfully  maintained their Christian obligation to show proper honor and respect for the governmental “superior authorities.” (Romans 13:1-7; 1 Timothy 2:1, 2) The Witnesses also upheld the high standards of Christian living set forth in the Bible and have thus set an excellent example in conduct.
With their newly acquired freedom, Jehovah’s Witnesses in Malawi are determined to continue preaching Bible truths urgently, “in favorable season.”​—2 Timothy 4:2.
[Picture on page 31]
M. G. Henschel with the Malawi Bethel family in the 1960’s

