“Jehovah’s Witnesses Protected Me!”
DURING these last days, many have proved themselves to be “fierce, without love of goodness.” (2 Timothy 3:1, 3) Isaac, a volunteer minister at a branch office of the Watch Tower Society in West Africa, found this to be true. He relates:
“In January 1992, I was traveling on a deserted stretch of road in a communal taxi with five other passengers. I struck up a conversation with the woman sitting next to me, and she gladly accepted a Bible-based brochure from me.
“Suddenly, at about four o’clock in the afternoon, a new car without license plates cut in front of us, and our car screeched to a halt. Three hefty men, each with a rifle, jumped out of the other car and yanked our doors open. ‘Get out, all of you,’ one of them roared.
“Another man grabbed my book bag. When he saw that it contained only Bible literature, he flung the bag away. ‘What else do you have?’ he asked, pointing his gun at me. I quickly gave him the money in my wallet. ‘Is this all?’ he asked. I told him that I was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and that the Witnesses do not tell lies. He snatched my wallet from me, saw my Watch Tower identification card and then said, ‘Ok, Watchtower. Wait here.’
“Next, he turned to the lady I had conversed with in the taxi. She hastily took off her necklace and gave him the money in her purse. When the highwayman noticed the brochure in her trembling hand, he assumed we were together, and so he motioned her to stay with me.
“Meanwhile, the other armed bandits ferociously attacked our fellow travelers. They beat and robbed the driver and the other man journeying with us. One robber grabbed at the second woman’s necklace. When she resisted, they viciously struck her on the head and chest with rifle butts until she was dead. The third woman they dragged out of the vehicle and shot in the chest. Regrettably, she too died. Only I and the young woman with me were left completely unharmed.
“When we were picked up later by a passing motorist, the terrified woman kept repeating, ‘Jehovah’s Witnesses protected me!’”

