Announcements
GIVING GOD’S WORD FIRST PLACE IN OUR LIVES
“How can a young man keep his path pure? By heeding thy word. I find joy in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word.” (Psalm 119:9, 16, AT) This is pre-eminent counsel for both young and old and shows the attitude one should take toward God’s Word. Honest and sincere persons today seek to know and do God’s will. The study of God’s Word is essential for such. They learn precious truths from the perusal of its pages, and then also seek to share the knowledge gained with others, near and far. Accordingly, during the months of June, July and August, Jehovah’s witnesses throughout the world will make a special effort to get into the isolated and more-difficult-to-reach places with the message of God’s kingdom. You, too, may share the knowledge you have with others, calling on your friends and neighbors. If you desire further particulars, contact Jehovah’s witnesses in your vicinity or write the Society. Giving God’s Word the first place in your life in this way will bring you great joy and blessing.
WIDE PUBLIC ACCLAMATION!
The release in 1950 of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures brought wide public acclamation. The truly remarkable and careful translation gained ready acceptance by discerning students of the Bible. Understandable and accurate, this unexcelled translation met a long-felt need, and was eagerly welcomed by sincere seekers for the truth of God’s Word everywhere. The first printing, nearly a half-million copies, was quickly exhausted; and this was but the beginning of an unprecedented demand that continues to this day. You may be the happy possessor of a copy of this translation of the oldest manuscripts in existence by ordering it from the Society and contributing $1.50 to help defray costs. It will be sent anywhere, postpaid.
BROOKLYN BETHEL VACATION
The Society’s offices, factory and Bethel home in Brooklyn, New York, will be closed from August 9 to 24 inclusive for the annual vacation. Orders and correspondence sent in during that period will not be handled until some time after the reopening of the offices. To avoid delays it will be necessary to anticipate your needs well in advance and place your orders in ample time for attention before the vacation period.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of July 6: “Get Out of Her, My People,” ¶1-16.
Week of July 13: “Get Out of Her, My People,” ¶17-22; also, Fixing Destinies in This Judgment Period, ¶1-12.
Week of July 20: Fixing Destinies in This Judgment Period, ¶13-27.

