Strong Refuge
“GOD is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.” Psalm 46, from which those words are taken, was written and preserved for just such a crisis as exists today in the lives of those who watch, pray and hope for the kingdom of God.—1 Cor. 10:11, NW.a
Those who look to human agencies for help are doomed to bitter disappointment. Why? Because the entire system of things under which such human agencies operate is dominated by Satan the Devil and his demons. These invisible forces have no love for their human dupes and devotees; in fact, they are responsible for all the woe and turmoil we find in the world today. (2 Cor. 4:4; Rev. 12:1-12) They will no more be able to furnish protection from God’s wrath at Armageddon than they were able to do so at the Flood.
Religious leaders praying to God for peace and prosperity are likewise doomed to disappointment, for all such prayers are contrary to God’s will. Why should God go contrary to his announced purposes and give selfish men peace and prosperity just so they can consume it on their selfish desires? So long as such men exist God will not bring peace to the earth.—Isa. 48:22; Jas. 4:2, 3.
If we would receive God’s protection and find him a refuge and strength, we must exercise faith in him. We must accept the trouble that his Word foretold would come upon the earth, and while it rages look to God for refuge and strength. We must serve his purpose while making known his purposes to others. “I, even I, am Jehovah; and besides me there is no saviour. I have declared, and I have saved, and I have showed; and there was no strange god among you: therefore ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am God.”—Isa. 43:11, 12, AS.
God’s Word is filled with examples of how he proved himself a refuge and strength to his people in times past. Jehoshaphat found him such when Ammon, Moab and Mount Seir came up against Judah. Asa found God to be a safe refuge when an Ethiopian army, consisting of a million men and hundreds of chariots, came up against him. Hezekiah likewise found Jehovah a present help when Sennacherib and his hosts threatened to come against Jerusalem.—2 Chron. 20:1-30; 14:9-15; Isa. 37:14-38.
In recent years, particularly since 1918, Jehovah’s witnesses have repeatedly found Jehovah to be a refuge and strength. If that were not true they would not be here today, and that in ever-increasing numbers. The most determined and fiendish persecution against them has failed, their persecutors going down while Jehovah’s witnesses lived on to renew their strength and to resume their preaching work.—Isa. 40:28-31; Rev. 11:7-12.
Quite likely at Armageddon we shall see cataclysmic forces of destruction operated by God to overwhelm this old world and blot it out. (Ps. 46:2, 3) We may naturally be frightened, as was Moses at Mount Sinai, but we shall not share the world’s fear, because we will know that God is controlling the forces of destruction and that he is directing them, not at us, but against his enemies, our enemies.
Our Christian obligation now is to be fearless in Jehovah’s service under the shadow of his mighty hand. So we can keep calm and go peacefully about our work as his ministers of good news knowing that he will never forsake his faithful people, but will help them, “and that right early.”—Ps. 46:5, AS.
[Footnotes]
For a detailed discussion of this subject please see The Watchtower of March 15, 1951.

