Announcements
● Literature offer for February: Live Forever book on a contribution of $2.50. March: Any two of the following older 192-page books on a contribution of $1.00: Choosing, Commentary on James, Evolution, “Eternal Purpose,” Good News, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose, Great Teacher, Word of God, World Government and Peace and Security. The congregation may request 25c credit for each 192-page book listed above and placed over the counter during March. Congregations requesting credit should use the Remittance and Credit Request form on the lines below “Other items.” If your congregation is in need of older publications, you may promptly order any of the following from the Society: Choosing, Commentary on James, Holy Spirit, Life Does Have a Purpose. April and May: Subscription for The Watchtower on a contribution of $3.50 per year for semimonthly editions, $2.00 for six-month subscriptions and monthly editions. (There is no six-month subscription for monthly editions.) Awake! subscriptions may be offered on the same basis.
● On Saturday, April 16, the Brooklyn Bethel home and factory and Watchtower Farms buildings will be closed for spring cleaning, so there will be no arrangements for tours on that day.
● Where a circuit overseer’s visit or a circuit assembly is scheduled for April 10, the special talk may be given the following week. Congregations should not schedule the special talk prior to that date.
● Circuit overseers will work with the Theocratic Ministry School overseer and his assistants on Saturday afternoons starting in February 1983.
● When witnessing to strangers by writing letters or sending literature through the mail, the name and address of the sender should be clearly indicated on the outside of the letter or parcel. In some cases the elders may approve using the return address of the local Kingdom Hall. The Society’s address should not be used. A personal letter should be signed by the writer.
Please keep in mind that when a booklet or a magazine is sent, either with or without an accompanying letter, the postage rate is likely to be more than what is required for just a personal letter. If insufficient postage is used, the receiver is required to pay the additional postage before delivery. Also, when letters or parcels having no return address are refused or have insufficient postage, these are opened by the Post Office. If one of the Society’s publications is found inside, it is sent to the Society and we are required to pay the additional postage.
Elders should discuss this matter with publishers who are known to witness to strangers through the mail and help them to determine whether they are violating postal regulations or if they are in some other way causing undue problems for the Society or other Witnesses. All should be concerned to follow the above principles when witnessing by mail.
● The “Daily Texts and Comments” from the 1983 Yearbook of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now available in grade-two English Braille. To obtain this three-volume publication, please send a remittance of $3.75, along with the name and address of the individual that is to receive it, to the BRAILLE DESK. Please do not include orders for Braille material with literature orders for printed publications. Braille publications should not be stocked by the congregation.
● Secretaries: Please take note of page 60 of the Watchtower Cost List for information on where to direct congregation correspondence, orders and other forms.
● New Publications Available:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Regular edition, bi12)—Japanese
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 11, Cr-Da)—Italian
Aid to Bible Understanding (Volume 12, Da-Di)—Italian
Good News—To Make You Happy—Ukrainian
Happiness—How to Find It—Iloko
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth—Sesotho, Swahili, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu
Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!—Fijian, Rarotongan
● Available Again in U.S.A.:
New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures (Large print, bi8)—English
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
The Good News According to Luke (set of two)—Italian
To the Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians (single cassette)—Italian
The First to the Thessalonians Through To Philemon (single cassette)—Italian
Album with complete Greek Scriptures (18 cassettes)—Swedish
Kingdom Recordings Album (empty, for 24 cassettes)—Dutch, Spanish, Swedish

