Increasing Our Share in the Divinely Authorized Marking Work
1 We are living at a time of abounding increase in true worship. As the divinely authorized marking work foretold for these last days rapidly moves toward its completion, honest-hearted ones everywhere are responding to the good news. They conform to Jehovah’s righteous standards and dedicate their life to him. They, in turn, are striving to have a full share in helping still others to become marked for salvation.—Ezek. 9:2-6.
2 Some of us have been sharing in this prophesied work for 5, 10, 20, 40 or more years. Others have been added to the ranks of ministers of the good news more recently. But individually we all do well to ask ourselves from time to time, ‘How do I feel about my privilege of being a Kingdom minister today?’ Also, we could ask: ‘Do I still view the work of the ministry with a sense of urgency?’ Are we individually concerned with increasing our share in the divinely authorized work?
ENCOURAGING EXAMPLE OF THE ‘FAITHFUL SLAVE’
3 “The faithful and discreet slave” continues to take the lead in moving ahead with this work. Year after year missionaries are sent out to expand this marking work in many parts of the earth. The house-to-house ministry and other features of service are used to accomplish the preaching of the good news. New publications are made available and we are instructed on how to use them effectively.
4 One example is the new book You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. We have now had time to read it carefully. At recent Service Meetings we have discussed the contents and received timely suggestions on how to offer it. We have also benefited greatly from the talks based on this new book. Surely all such timely instruction, practical assistance and encouragement have moved us to want to increase our share in the divinely authorized marking work. We all want to use this fine new publication to good advantage.
USE EVERY OPPORTUNITY
5 Now we have had one full month of offering the Live Forever book from house to house and we are continuing with this same offer during February. Will we all take advantage of every opportunity during this short winter month and further increase our share in the ministry? In those areas where inclement weather may make regular house-to-house witnessing difficult, why not expand our ministry in business territory, or work apartment buildings and call back on not-at-homes listed on our house-to-house records? Depending on local circumstances, we may be able to find any number of ways to increase our share in the divinely authorized marking work even during cold winter days in February.
6 Some of us may be able to increase the amount of time we spend in the field ministry. We may be able to enroll as auxiliary pioneers for a month or longer. This would help prepare us for the special activity planned for March and April. Pioneers usually spend more time in the field during those months. Vacation periods may be used to good advantage to increase our time in field service. And then what about planning to spend some extra time in the ministry during the visit of the circuit overseer? He and his wife will appreciate the support and we will personally benefit. But whether serving as regular pioneers, auxiliary pioneers or congregation publishers, the important question is: Are we endeavoring to do all we can to help others to become marked for life in Paradise?
BECOME MORE EFFECTIVE
7 Even if other obligations do not permit us to spend more hours preaching and teaching, can we still increase our effectiveness in the field through more efficient use of the time we do spend in the ministry? Let us take full advantage of all theocratic training arrangements in the congregation, seek Jehovah’s assistance through prayer and remain optimistic about the possibilities of increasing our share in the divinely authorized marking work.—Phil. 4:13.

