Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING JANUARY 30
Song 19
10 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Call special attention to announcement about witnessing through the mail. Remind all to turn in January field service reports. Enthusiastically encourage attentiveness to program so as to select points to use in field service this weekend. Invite all to share in house-to-house ministry first Sunday of month, February 6.
20 min: “Increasing Our Share in the Divinely Authorized Marking Work.” Question-and-answer discussion of article. Include well-prepared demonstration of someone calling back on Live Forever placement.
15 min: Make Good Use of the New Yearbook. Discussion. Consider experiences from 1983 Yearbook related to work in Portugal, pages 130-256, showing blessings that come from putting Kingdom interests first. Invite publishers to share experiences from printed account. Encourage congregation to complete reading the detailed accounts of our work in Australia and Portugal, if they have not already done so. (Arrange for congregation to bring personal copies of 1983 Yearbook to meeting and to prepare comments in advance.) Highlight value of Yearbook in stimulating our zeal for the preaching and disciple-making work.
Song 51 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 6
Song 37
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Remind brothers of second Saturday magazine work. Suggest brief presentations of current magazines.
15 min: “Demonstrating Hospitality to Others.” Warm and encouraging talk. Commend brothers for expressions of hospitality shown and make suggestions for congregation. Brief, pointed local experiences may be used to show how some have benefited from hospitality shown by others and by congregation as a whole.
20 min: You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth. Relate selected experiences on placing the book and starting studies. Encourage all to support weekend field service activity.
Song 32 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 13
Song 1
10 min: Local announcements. Briefly review local January report and commend congregation. Briefly discuss Memorial plans and encourage all to prepare for increased activity during March and April. Cover material in article entitled “Memorial Plans.”
20 min: “Presenting the Good News—By Following Up Interest in the Live Forever Book.” Questions and answers. Also, relate local experiences of brothers and sisters who have had good results from following up interest in Live Forever book.
15 min: Why Avoid Obscenities. Pointed and informative talk based on first two articles in The Watchtower of February 1, 1983. Include helpful suggestions as to how brothers can resist corruptive influence of obscenity. Encourage support of weekend field service activities.
Song 88 and prayer.
WEEK STARTING FEBRUARY 20
Song 4
10 min: Local announcements. Encourage magazine activity on fourth Saturday. Announce field service arrangements. Draw attention to February 15, 1983, Watchtower, particularly the article “The Worst of Times, Yet the Best of Times.” Have a brief demonstration offering magazines to householder.
20 min: “Working in the Harvest as an Auxiliary Pioneer.” Questions and answers. Read selected paragraphs as time allows. Interview some who are auxiliary pioneers this month, or who plan to enroll for March or April, and get suggestions from them as to how it can be done. Call attention to all-time peak of auxiliary pioneers in April 1982. Note Our Kingdom Ministry of July 1982, page 1.
15 min: Are You Prepared for Field Service in March? Brief discussion encouraging brothers to be prepared for special offer of two 192-page books in March. Inform brothers which books listed in Our Kingdom Ministry Announcements are available locally and suggest some points that will tie in well with Topic for Conversation. Publishers can get supplies of literature tonight. Also, consider Question Box information.
Song 24 and prayer.

