Working in the Harvest as an Auxiliary Pioneer
1 Harvesttime is a time for work. When the crop is ripe, the harvest must begin. Any delay can result in serious loss. Everyone is asked to help, including women and children. Other tasks of less importance are temporarily set aside. Each day’s work may start before the sun comes up and often extends late into the evening. Even so, harvesttime brings great rejoicing.—Isa. 9:3.
2 Likewise, spiritual harvesttime calls for much work. Jesus pointed this out when he said to his disciples: “Yes, the harvest is great, but the workers are few. Therefore, beg the Master of the harvest to send out workers into his harvest.” (Matt. 9:37, 38) In addition to bringing more workers into the field, some of those already serving may be able to spend additional time working in the field. In the modern spiritual harvesting work many have responded to the need in the field by enrolling for one or more months as auxiliary pioneers. Their reward has been increased proportionately as they have located interested ones and have even begun studies with some of them. It has been extra work, but they are “filled with joy” as they share in reaping a bountiful harvest of new disciples.—Acts 13:48, 52.
3 The auxiliary pioneer service has opened the way for many to increase their share in the harvest work. It only takes an average of about two hours per day in Kingdom service to meet the auxiliary pioneer requirements. Some have been able to arrange to spend less time at their secular work. In some schools, students have been permitted to schedule classes in order to be dismissed early in the day. Others have made good use of holidays and vacation periods. Many housewives have found it possible to share in the auxiliary pioneer service by simply budgeting their time and having the cooperation of the family. Many are receiving blessings because of making the necessary adjustments.
SUCCESSFUL EXAMPLES
4 One sister writes: “As a housewife and mother, I have been able to enjoy auxiliary pioneering and it has been spiritually upbuilding to me and my family.” A 15-year-old schoolgirl tells of using her two-week spring vacation to share in the auxiliary pioneer service, and says: “I can really see the difference, especially an improvement in conversation. My results are outstanding, and I was able to hold many more conversations with people at the door.” Another Witness wrote: “Auxiliary pioneering has caused me to develop more love in my heart for the dying human race.”
5 As you make your plans, why not talk with others who have successfully pioneered, to get the benefit of their experience? Also, it is always beneficial to go to Jehovah in prayer, asking for his help. We need both spiritual and physical strength for the work, and this he imparts to all who offer themselves willingly. (Isa. 40:29-31) We can ask him for wisdom to say and do the right things and for his spirit to sustain us.—Jas. 1:5; Luke 11:13.
6 How privileged we are to be living in the spiritual harvesttime near the end of this old system! The requirements of the harvest may draw heavily on our time and energy, yet our having a share rewards us with a surpassing joy. Efforts to increase our participation in the disciple-making work through auxiliary pioneer service will bring Jehovah’s blessing.—1 Tim. 4:10.

