Keep Spiritually Strong, Stay Clean for Jehovah’s Service
1 At Isaiah 60:22, Jehovah made a promise that is being fulfilled before our very eyes: “The little one himself will become a thousand, and the small one a mighty nation. I myself, Jehovah, shall speed it up in its own time.” When we think of a nation, we picture a vast group of people who are drawn together by common interests and who are functioning under the authority of a constituted government.
2 The 1991 field service report showed a peak of 4,278,820 publishers of the good news worldwide, a 6.5-percent increase over the previous year. Jehovah has truly gathered a vast throng of sincere people who desire to separate themselves from this oppressive system and become loyal subjects of the Messianic Kingdom government by his Son, Jesus Christ. Year by year the number of gathered ones continues to increase. We rejoice to be part of this nation that can literally be described as a new world society. At the observance of the Memorial in 1991, the total attendance was 10,650,158, a 7-percent increase over 1990. This represents a tremendous potential for many more to join us as Kingdom subjects.
3 We realize, of course, that not all the individuals included in the above Memorial attendance figure have separated themselves from this world to the extent necessary to be fully acceptable as Jehovah’s people. People from all nations are ‘streaming to Jehovah’s house,’ but they need to be fully ‘instructed about his ways’ so that they can “walk in his paths.” (Isa. 2:2-4) More than four million who attended the Memorial have accepted God’s instruction, acquiring spiritual strength that has motivated them to maintain clean conduct and qualify for a share in the Kingdom-preaching work now being accomplished. (Matt. 24:14) Such ones have a good standing in Jehovah’s eyes and enjoy the benefits of all the marvelous provisions he makes available to them. What must the remaining number of more than six million do if they are likewise to become spiritually strong and clean for Jehovah’s service?
4 They have to put up “a hard fight for the faith.” (Jude 3) Once they choose to walk in Jehovah’s way, they come under pressure from the Devil through trials, temptations, and bad influences. Like Paul, they must look to Jehovah for strength to endure. (Phil. 4:13) Jehovah imparts strength to such ones through those who have already become strong in the faith. Paul admonished that “we . . . who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of those not strong.” (Rom. 15:1, 2) When the strong and the weak become united, there is strength to stand firm. “Two are better than one. . . . If somebody could overpower one alone, two together could make a stand against him.”​—Eccl. 4:9, 12.
5 This means that new ones rightfully depend on us as the means through which they can receive strength from Jehovah. Those of us who are dedicated Christians must keep spiritually strong ourselves if we are to help new ones. Christians who are strong are able to ‘impart spiritual gifts,’ which results in ‘an interchange of encouragement.’ (Rom. 1:11, 12) This is one of the primary ways Jehovah uses to unite us and make all of us ‘firm and strong.’​—1 Pet. 5:9-11.
6 We should make it our aim to help these new ones while at the same time keeping conscious of our own spiritual needs. (Matt. 5:3) Spirituality is the key to our strength. This is a quality that must be nourished and fortified by a regular intake of spiritual food. Through his organization, Jehovah provides balanced programs for study of his Word. The five weekly congregation meetings play a vital role in making us strong, ‘inciting us to love and fine works.’​—Heb. 10:24.
7 The benefits of these meetings are multiplied when they are combined with good habits of personal and family study. As a minimum goal, all of us should read and consider the daily text, keep up with the Bible reading program set out in the Theocratic Ministry School Schedule, and prepare for the Congregation Book Study and Watchtower Study. Each family will have to determine how that is going to be organized, making sure that it is done on a regular basis. Also, the family head should see that the study program is tailored to meet the specific spiritual needs of the family. In this way the “household will be built up. . . . It will prove firmly established.” (Prov. 24:3) If we are conscientious in our study habits as individuals and as families, we can be confident that Jehovah will bless us and his spirit will help us to endure various trials successfully.​—Jas. 1:2, 3; 1 Pet. 4:11.
8 Keeping Clean and Above Reproach: While Jehovah warmly invites us to draw close to him, at the same time, he makes it clear that this is done on the basis of our exercising faith in Jesus’ shed blood, which “cleanses us from all sin.” (1 John 1:7; see also Hebrews 9:14.) We can continue to strengthen our faith by personal study of God’s Word and by applying what we learn. Some later lose out because either they fail to take in spiritual food or they make little effort to apply it in their lives. This leaves them vulnerable to the attacks of Satan. Some have become spiritually weak, resulting in inactivity. Sadly, others have allowed themselves to succumb to serious wrongdoing, causing them to be disfellowshipped. Paul warned: “Let him that thinks he is standing beware that he does not fall.” (1 Cor. 10:12) If we willfully neglect study, meeting attendance, and service, we can be easily ensnared by unholy influences and temptations.​—Heb. 2:1; 2 Pet. 2:20-22.
9 It is essential that we keep ourselves clean in every way: physically, mentally, spiritually, and morally. (2 Cor. 7:1) The world that surrounds us is becoming more perverse and degraded every day. The Devil keeps coming up with ever more deceptive ways to entrap us. Keeping ourselves spiritually strong ensures that we will not be ‘ignorant of his designs and be overreached.’ (2 Cor. 2:11) The instruction and counsel we receive from Jehovah’s organization enable us to recognize and resist bad influences.
10 Those taking the lead in the congregation have the responsibility to set a fine example for others in keeping strong and staying clean. Paul emphasized this responsibility when he stated: “Remember those who are taking the lead among you. . . . As you contemplate how their conduct turns out imitate their faith.” (Heb. 13:7) It is vital that appointed elders and ministerial servants be exemplary in their personal conduct as well as in caring for their responsibilities as family heads. They should strive to be like young Timothy, who was urged to “become an example . . . in speaking, in conduct, in love, in faith, in chasteness.” (1 Tim. 4:12; 1 Pet. 5:3) All the rest of us share this responsibility to be good examples by maintaining honorable conduct. New ones often judge the truth, as well as Jehovah’s organization, by what they see in us. We want to make sure that what they see encourages them to take their place in Jehovah’s clean organization.
11 The ingathering for survival through “the great tribulation” continues to pick up momentum. (Rev. 7:14) Only those who become spiritually strong and keep themselves clean will ultimately survive. Much depends on these factors: (1) maintaining good personal study habits and meditating on God’s Word; (2) displaying a genuine personal interest in one another with a desire to impart encouragement; and (3) working together unitedly to maintain clean conduct that will honor Jehovah’s name. Doing these things will assure us of Jehovah’s blessing and protection when this world comes to its end. We can be confident that we will be among “the faithful ones Jehovah is safeguarding.”​—Ps. 31:23.

