Proclaim the Good News With The Watchtower
1 The Watchtower is truly unique because it is a bearer of good news. In contrast, most worldly publications feature news that is bad and disheartening. How can we show others that The Watchtower is different, containing a message that is truly refreshing?
2 We could call attention to “The Purpose of The Watchtower” on page 2 of the magazine. Point out that its aim is to exalt Jehovah as the Sovereign Ruler, note world events that fulfill Bible prophecy, give a comforting message to those who are oppressed, and strengthen faith in God’s provisions for our salvation.
3 Do our comments about The Watchtower convey such thoughts in a convincing way? What we say should not be just a catchy phrase to spark momentary interest; it should have substance, inspiring confidence that creates a desire to learn more.
4 Preparation Needed: We need to read each magazine carefully, analyzing various presentations with our territory in mind. Looking up cited Scripture texts enhances our own understanding. This can deepen our appreciation for the truth and motivate us to share it with others. If the truth is not in our hearts, we will have little incentive to speak out.
5 The interest manifested by an individual determines what we will offer. When the response is negative or complacent, our spoken remarks may suffice. If there is interest but it is limited, it may be best simply to offer the latest magazines or a brochure. If there are expressions of genuine appreciation and a desire to learn more, it would be appropriate to offer a subscription. Usually, it is best to start a new subscriber with a six-​month subscription; it can be renewed if there is sustained interest.
6 When you read the articles in the latest issue of The Watchtower, try to recall previous discussions with householders where these subjects stirred interest. Make it a point to return with that issue for further discussion.
7 We do not know how long and to what extent the good news will yet be proclaimed. We can be sure, however, that The Watchtower will play a major role in what is accomplished. Using this provision, we should imitate the apostles in diligently “teaching and declaring . . . the good news of the word of Jehovah.”​—Acts 15:35.

