Service Meetings for April
Week Starting April 6
Song 186
12 min: Local announcements and Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. “Will April Be a Special Month for You?” Stress point on turning in any auxiliary pioneer applications right away. Also, encourage evening witnessing, and announce local arrangements that may have been made. Emphasize time and location of local Memorial celebration.
15 min: “Proclaim the Good News With The Watchtower.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. Encourage brothers to give thoughtful consideration to persons who show genuine interest in the literature and who may enjoy receiving a subscription.
18 min: “Your Appreciation for Christ’s Death.” Talk with demonstration. After considering paragraph 9, demonstrate how publisher can invite Bible student to the Memorial.
Song 208 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 13
Song 209
10 min: Local announcements. Question Box.
15 min: “Effective Initial Calls.” Question-and-answer coverage. After considering paragraph 6, demonstrate how a publisher might be able to offer and demonstrate a home Bible study by using the tract Life in a Peaceful New World.
20 min: Offering The Watchtower from house to house. Capable publisher converses with householder, using the suggested presentation in paragraph 4 of the article “Effective Initial Calls.” Make appropriate reference to pertinent points on prayer in the April 15, 1992, Watchtower. Householder is pleasant but only mildly interested. Publisher states: “Our literature is offered without charge, but we would gladly accept a small donation toward our work.” Publisher pauses to let the words sink in. Householder simply says “That is interesting.” He says he would be happy to read the magazines but makes no move to give a contribution. Publisher presents him with magazines and expresses desire to return and discuss matter further. Householder agrees. After demonstration, chairman asks publisher why he did not offer to write up a subscription. Publisher appropriately felt that the interest was rather minimal and it might be more appropriate to call again in order to determine the extent of the householder’s interest.​—See May 1990 Our Kingdom Ministry article “Use Our Literature Wisely.”
Song 87 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 20
Song 195
10 min: Local announcements and accounts report. Give commendation for donations made to Society and congregation.
15 min: Discuss material on “Antichrist” in Reasoning book, pages 32-3. What is the definition of “antichrist”? Is there only one, or are there more? When did the antichrist appear, and who would be identified as such? Brief demonstration of publisher calling on churchgoer who was warned about Jehovah’s Witnesses.
20 min: “Keep Spiritually Strong, Stay Clean for Jehovah’s Service.” Question-and-answer discussion of insert. Elder handling this part should formulate some of the questions to make local application of the information. Emphasize minimum goal for maintaining spiritual strength referred to in paragraph 7.
Song 197 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting April 27
Song 169
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News. Give Memorial highlights. How many were in attendance? What is the potential for starting Bible studies with new ones? Service overseer to organize return visits to be made on Memorial attenders who are not presently studying.
20 min: “Use the Reasoning Book on Return Visits.” Question-and-answer discussion. Feature two well-​rehearsed demonstrations on paragraphs 3 and 4.
15 min: Ask for experiences from those who auxiliary pioneered in March and April. What sacrifices did they make, and how do they feel Jehovah blessed their efforts? Were any new Bible studies started as a result of their increased activity for the month? Experiences should be arranged in advance. Encourage all to consider auxiliary pioneering during months ahead.
Song 93 and concluding prayer.

