Use the Reasoning Book on Return Visits
1 “I planted, Apollos watered.” So stated the apostle Paul. (1 Cor. 3:6) These four words provide a simple outline for the first two steps in making disciples. The return visit work has often been referred to as the “watering” work. It is an indispensable link between the initial contact and the person becoming a baptized disciple. The return visit work enables us to ‘scatter knowledge about’ to nurture the grain of interest shown until it takes root and a Bible study is started.​—Prov. 15:7.
2 Some may be reluctant to call again where interest was shown because of uncertainty about what to say. Our handbook Reasoning From the Scriptures has proved to be most useful in doing this watering. Usually before the householder will agree to a regularly scheduled Bible study, a series of short visits must be made. The Reasoning book provides outlines of Scriptural themes that can be discussed with the householder. Prepare well for the return visit, perhaps using one or more of the following suggestions.
3 If you placed a copy of the April 15, 1992, “Watchtower” on the subject of prayer, when you return you might pose the question:
▪ “What could make a person’s prayers unacceptable to God?” After allowing the householder time to respond, take out your Reasoning book and turn to page 293. Discuss with him some of the scriptures under that theme, encouraging him to read directly from the book. If you discern sincere interest, you may then choose to offer the subscription.
4 On another return visit, after asking the householder what he understands God’s Kingdom to be, as referred to in the Lord’s Prayer, turn to pages 226-32. As time permits, develop the scriptures under “Is God’s Kingdom a Real Government?” and “What Will God’s Kingdom Accomplish?” Clear up the common misconception that the Kingdom is in one’s heart. The Kingdom is a real government! Rather than cover all the material at one time, raise some questions to discuss later.
5 In another instance, the householder may take a copy of the April 22, 1992, Awake! on “Life​—What Is Its Purpose?”
You could ask:
▪ “Is there any evidence that the human body was designed to live forever on the earth?” Or, “Do you think the dead know what the living are doing?” These questions may spark some interest in the householder because they affect him personally. Make arrangements to return with the answers, as found in the Reasoning book on pages 247 and 100, respectively.
6 If the initial discussion was regarding the future of the earth, you could ask:
▪ “Will humans be permitted by God to ruin the earth in some way?” Then turn to pages 44-5 of the Reasoning book and discuss the Scriptural answer. Or the householder may ask: “If billions are resurrected from the dead, where will they all live?” The answer can be found in the Reasoning book, page 340.
7 Try not to flood the householder with all the truth at one time. Leave some questions to be answered on future visits. As God’s fellow workers, we want to carry out skillfully the planting and watering by effective use of the Reasoning book. We can be assured that God will make it grow.

