Your Appreciation for Christ’s Death
1 “The Son of man came, not to be ministered to, but to minister and to give his soul a ransom in exchange for many.” (Matt. 20:28) No other man who has ever lived on earth could do what Jesus Christ did for mankind. By means of his life course and eventual death on a torture stake, we have been directed in the way to receive the greatest gift that anyone could obtain, everlasting life. Yet, most people have little appreciation for what Christ did.
2 Consider an encounter that Jesus had with ten lepers. When they caught sight of Jesus, they cried out: “Jesus, Instructor, have mercy on us!” (Luke 17:13) He did have mercy on them, instructing them, according to the Law, to go and report to the priests. On the way, all ten lepers were healed.
3 But only one returned to Jesus to express thanks. The other nine? They continued on their way with no thought of thanking their benefactor. (Luke 17:15-17) Whom do we resemble? We want to be like the man who went back. He had true appreciation. Is that how we feel about Christ’s death?
4 Showing Our Appreciation: Each year the Society suggests that specific verses in the Bible be read during the week prior to the Memorial date. The suggested Bible readings can be found under the dates of April 12-17 on the 1992 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses. We can show our appreciation by reading and meditating on these events that took place in Jesus’ life just before his death.
5 Our field service activity is related to appreciation for the Memorial. Elders will want to make well-​organized arrangements so that pioneers and publishers will be able to plan increased field activity during April.
6 This is usually a month when tens of thousands share in the auxiliary pioneer work. Last April 69,887 participated here in the United States. Can you do so this April? If you are not able to auxiliary pioneer, plan to increase your share in the preaching activity as circumstances allow.
7 Build Appreciation in Others: Each year at the Memorial celebration, many interested persons meet with us. For example, of the 10,650,158 persons who attended the Memorial worldwide last March, more than 6,370,000 were interested persons. This shows the great potential for growth in the organization.
8 We should use the Society’s printed invitations and make arrangements to provide transportation for Bible students and interested persons where needed. Be warmly enthusiastic when inviting them.
9 Help them to see why the Memorial was instituted, who partake of the emblems, and what the emblems represent. (1 Cor. 11:23-26) Also, explain the hope of those partaking and that of observers who do not partake of the emblems. (John 10:16; Rev. 14:3, 4) This will help interested persons to understand that all need to ‘exercise faith’ and that just attending the Memorial of Christ’s death once a year is not enough.​—John 3:16.
10 The Memorial of Christ’s death is a very special event. By thoroughly preparing for it, we show that we truly appreciate all that Jehovah and Christ have done for us. Building appreciation for this occasion in our Bible students and other interested persons will help them, also, to exercise faith in Jehovah’s ransom provision through Jesus Christ.

