Alaska’s Grueling Dogsled Race
By “Awake!” correspondent in Alaska
CAN you imagine riding on the runners of a crude sled one third the distance across the United States, or from London to Rome? Traveling such a distance day and night through barren, windswept and snow-covered wilderness would certainly be a test of strength and endurance. Sixty-two mushers and their teams were ready to do it, and I wanted to see it.
With a friend, I flew to the historic gold-rush town of Nome, Alaska. The Iditarod Trail Race would conclude here, on the coast of the Bering Sea.
A Bit of Nostalgia
Iditarod (pronounced Īdĭtʹarod) is the name of both an abandoned mining town and an old mail route that followed a network of trails dating back to the late 1800’s. These pathways stretched for more than two thousand miles (3,200 km) from Seward, on the Gulf of Alaska, to Nome, on the Bering Sea. Summer traffic along the Iditarod was mainly by boats and barges on the Yukon River. However, in winter the mode of transportation shifted to the dogsled. Therefore, the name of the race, the Iditarod Trail Race.
It wasn’t until recent years that the snow machine took the place of the musher and his sled. So, many old-timers view the Iditarod race as a nostalgic reminder of how much men depended on their dogs to open up a new frontier.
Dogsledding, or “dog mushing,” is popular in many parts of the earth. During the long winter season in Alaska it provides a welcomed diversion. It can reduce the depressing moods of “cabin fever,” which occurs when one remains indoors too long. Dog mushing can be a delight for the spectator also. The beautiful Siberian Huskies and the Alaskan Malamutes in action in front of a sled in a winter wonderland are a thrilling sight.
Several races are held each year, inviting thousands of people to line the course where mushers speed along at between 18 and 20 miles per hour (29 and 32 km/​hr)! Most races are for two to three days at about 25 to 30 miles (40 to 48 km) per day. In contrast, however, the Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race is like the marathon run. It is a call into the wild, where men and dogs are tested by the winter elements, minus 50 degrees F (−45.6° C) at times, 30-knot winds, blizzards, loneliness, and exhaustion due to sleepless nights.
Our plane was approaching the beautiful but barren edge of the Bering Sea, the coast of Nome. Shore ice and packed snow extended along the coast as far as the eye could see. I scratched the frost from my window in order to see more clearly. Right below us, proud and graceful, trotting along in the bright noon sun, was the lead dog team. Pressing forward on their padded harnesses, those canines were aware that they were out in front of the challengers and they were heading for a victorious finish.
What Does It Cost?
At the race headquarters in Nome I learned much about the cost of racing. There is more to it than harnessing 14 dogs to a sled and shouting, “Mush!”
A well-built young man about 18 years of age told me that he was the youngest musher in the Iditarod race one year ago. It had cost him $7,000 (U.S.) to prepare his team for that episode. I learned that some mushers will pay $500 to $600 for a good sled dog. A valuable lead dog that will follow commands and stay out in front of the team may cost as much as $2,000 to $4,000. No wonder many mushers breed their own dogs!
Food for the dogs also costs money. The rules of the contest require two pounds per dog for each day on the trail. This must be flown in to certain trail locations. Menus vary according to each musher. Dogs devour fish or beef, lard, wheat-germ oil, honey and vegetable oil. Since a warm meal is best, the ingredients are mixed and boiled.
There are also dangers to be met​—and not all from the weather. This year a moose resented intrusion on his domain. The huge animal stood its ground, charging three teams​—42 snarling, howling dogs. One musher sought refuge in a nearby tree. The confrontation became so serious that another musher finally shot the animal.
This race is only for those who are ready to meet the cost​—in money, danger and endurance.
Proper Treatment of Dogs
Would it surprise you to learn these sled dogs wear “running shoes”? If you look closely you will see leather booties, which are required by the race rules. Two sets of these pads must be available to protect the huskies’ paws, especially when they run on icy areas along windswept sections of the route.
The owners are not prone to treat their pets harshly. At times mushers will even refuse to put their team on the trail, or a race will be canceled, due to poor trail conditions.
What happens if a dog gets too tired along the way? What if he gets sick or is injured? He will be placed in the sled basket and brought to one of the 28 checkpoints where a veterinarian or race marshal can see to it that it is cared for. All dogs must be accounted for at the finish line. If he cannot do that, the musher will be disqualified. Much effort is put forth to give proper treatment to the dogs.
The Musher​—A Hearty Breed
Does it take a special breed of person to be a musher? Well, consider the stamina needed to push or pull a sled on steep grades under the kind of conditions previously mentioned. Would you be willing to sleep outdoors in a sleeping bag on a mattress of spruce boughs at below-zero temperatures? That certainly requires a rugged individual. Among them this year was a veteran musher 75 years old. And he completed the 1,000-mile (1,600-km) journey!
There were also seven women among the mushers. To train for the race, one woman, a few years ago, put on a bathing suit, walked out on a frozen lake, chopped a hole in the ice and slipped into the freezing water. She wanted to see if she could endure such an experience far from home if her sled broke through the ice. Was she discouraged? That same woman was racing to Nome. Six of the seven women entered finished the race.
Training for the Contest
Although sled dogs are bred to run, and are most happy when they are running, they need to be in good condition for it. Just as a human needs to build up cardiovascular capacity, and strength, so does a dog. Too much weight can be detrimental for animals as it is for people. Therefore, much time is spent during the summer months working the team so that the dogs will be in good condition.
Prior to the first snowfall, dog teams might be seen attached to the front bumper of an old pickup truck. The musher, perched on the hood of the vehicle, holds the reins as they charge chariot-style down the road. Of course, if he wants to get in condition for the race, he had better get down and run with the team, because good mushing demands stamina on his part for pumping with one foot and for pushing the sled.
The Iditarod Trail Race of 1980 took from March 1 to March 25. Sixty-two teams were entered to race for the $12,000 first prize, with the total purse of $52,500 to be distributed among the first 20 to reach Nome. Thirty-six teams finished. The number of dogs in a team vary from 10 to 20. Siberian Huskies are the favorite breed. They are smaller, tougher, faster and more gentle than the heavier Alaskan Malamutes, which are inclined to fight among themselves. Sometimes breeding is done with Indian dogs (part wolf) or Labradors (with tougher feet).
About 1,500 spectators lined up along Nome’s Front Street as 44-year-old Joe May, of Trapper Creek, Alaska, slowly walked his weary team of 10 dogs across the finish line. As the wailing fire siren announced his arrival the exhausted musher made claim on his $12,000 first prize. He earned every penny of it, finishing in a new record time​—14 days, 7 hours and 11 minutes.
Will Joe May race again in the Iditarod? “It’s my last race,” he said at the end. Then added, “Well, maybe.” Next year the purse has been upped to $100,000.
[Map/​Picture on page 21]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
NOME
Nancy Lake
ANCHORAGE

