Have You Ever Wondered—
Does It Really Matter What You Believe?
IN 1553, the Spanish physician Michael Servetus was burned to death in Geneva. His crime? He had argued against the doctrine of the Trinity. Unfortunately for him, he lived at a time when religious belief could be a matter of life or death.
Nowadays things have changed. True, there are lands where Christians suffer for publicly expressing their faith; and in countries such as Northern Ireland and Lebanon, religious differences lead to bloodshed. But in many countries today there is a remarkable tolerance​—even apathy—​in religious matters. Atheism abounds. Many have serious reservations about what their churches teach. And generally people are left to make their own decisions about which religion, if any, they should accept.
Since this is so, it is appropriate to ask: “Does it really matter what you believe? Should not religion be viewed as merely a matter of personal choice?” Let us first consider:
DOES IT REALLY MATTER WHETHER WE BELIEVE IN GOD OR NOT?
Well, that depends. Consider a man who regularly shares in worship with some religion. Yet in his everyday life he is dishonest, tells lies, perhaps is even a thief or an immoral person. For such a man, we may feel that it does not make all that much difference what he claims to believe.
If, however, we really believe that God exists, it will make a difference. Why? Because we will feel answerable to Him. Hence, when, for example, we are faced with a decision or a temptation, we will not only think: “What do I want to do?” we will also consider: “What will be pleasing to God?” The apostle Paul once stated: “Each of us will render an account for himself to God.”​—Rom. 14:12.
‘If that is the case,’ some may say, ‘then surely it is better not to believe in God. Then we will have more freedom to do what we want.’ This line of reasoning, however, would only be helpful if the question of God’s existence were merely hypothetical; that is, if there were no real proof as to whether God existed or not. This is not the case. There is overwhelming evidence that God does exist, and is concerned about us.
Hence, even though acknowledging that his existence limits our freedom to some extent, nevertheless this opens the way to otherwise unattainable blessings. It protects us from making wrong choices and suffering the consequences that many ungodly persons suffer from their so-called freedom. In this age of tension and fear, we can enjoy the “peace of God that excels all thought.” (Phil. 4:7) And in an age when the future seems cloudy and uncertain, we can feel serene and confident, putting our trust in God. The psalmist said: “Watch the blameless one and keep the upright one in sight, for the future of that man will be peaceful.”​—Ps. 37:37.
Truly, it does matter whether we believe in God or not. But if we do, can we worship him in any way we see fit?
DOES IT REALLY MATTER WHICH RELIGION WE BELONG TO?
The answer is Yes, because what we believe about God and how we worship him deeply affect us as people.
For example, most are horrified when they read of the brutal tortures inflicted at one time by the Inquisition on those whom the Inquisitors considered heretics. Yet such atrocities were committed by persons who believed that God punished sinners in everlasting hellfire. They were, after all, only giving their victims a foretaste of what they considered God would do to them for all eternity in the afterlife.
Yes, history has demonstrated the great effect that religion has on people. The fertility rites of the ancient Canaanites produced a depraved and licentious people. Worship of cruel gods helped Assyria to become one of the most vicious world powers of human history. On the other hand, individuals who sincerely believe in a just and loving God have always tried to follow the apostle Paul’s counsel: “Become imitators of God.”​—Eph. 5:1.
There is another consideration. Jesus himself said: “The true worshipers will worship the Father with spirit and truth.” (John 4:23) Truth does not contradict itself. Not all the contradictory teachings of the world’s many religions can be true. Hence, there must be some sincerely religious people who are not true worshipers because of not worshiping according to truth.
HOW CAN WE BE SURE THAT WHAT WE BELIEVE IS THE TRUTH?
This is not a disrespectful question. There is nothing sinful about examining one’s beliefs in the light of the Bible to ascertain whether they are true or not. The apostle Paul advised: “Make sure of all things; hold fast to what is fine.”​—1 Thess. 5:21.
The evidence is that God does exist, that he has revealed himself, his name and his purposes through his Word, the Bible. If we read the Bible and apply what we learn, we are guided through the pitfalls of this life, and will gain a wonderful hope of a life to come. Do you believe this? It certainly matters whether you do or not. We invite you to accept the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses in examining the proof. Then you, too, can gain the happy assurance that the things you believe in are the truth.

