Announcements
TRIUMPHING OVER ENEMIES BY KINGDOM PREACHING—Ps. 110:2; Matt. 24:14, NW.
The continued preaching of the message of God’s established kingdom is evidence of its victory over the enemies of the Kingdom. God has given assurance to his faithful witnesses that the enemies will never be able to silence “this good news of the kingdom” from being proclaimed. Jehovah’s witnesses are now working unassigned territory. Those not able to participate in this work will serve people living in congregation territory with the offer of three books and three booklets on a contribution of $1.50.
TRUTH VERSUS FICTION
“Truth is stranger than fiction,” someone has said—but it is far more beneficial. How much ‘fiction’ actually passes for ‘truth,’ do you suppose? According to Bible prophecy men today have made lies their refuge and have hid themselves under falsehoods. Truth has been obscured by error and wrong accepted by many as right. So the truth may sound strange to you when compared with what you have heard all your life. But that does not necessarily make it false. Remember, Jesus said: “The truth shall make you free.” In the mass of propaganda flooding all means of communication how can you be sure what is right? Why not follow Paul’s advice, “Let God be found true, though every man be found a liar”? Accept the Bible as the source of truth. Allow it to expose ‘creed’ and ‘dogma.’ Study it with the three books “Let God Be True”, “The Truth Shall Make You Free” and “The Kingdom Is at Hand”. They will be sent you with three booklets on a contribution of $1.50.
NOTICE OF ANNUAL MEETING WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY OF PENNSYLVANIA
The Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania will hold its annual meeting of members on Monday, October 1, 1956, at ten o’clock in the forenoon at the registered office of the Society, which is located at 4100 Bigelow Boulevard, corner of Parkman Avenue, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Members of the corporation should be certain that the secretary’s office has the proper addresses to which to mail the usual letter of notice advising them of the meeting and in which the proxy forms are enclosed. We need to have all the proxies returned to the office of the secretary of the Society not later than the 15th of September. Each member should complete and return his proxy promptly whether he is going to be at the meeting personally or not.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
September 30: The Divine Origin of Marriage, ¶1-20. Page 525.
October 7: The Divine Origin of Marriage, ¶21, 22, and Marriage Under Imperfect Conditions. Page 532.

