Keep the Kingdom First
1 Putting God’s Kingdom first in life and keeping it there is not easy when we are faced with economic pressures or other problems. How do we keep the Kingdom first when difficulties arise? What if we are offered a job that requires us to miss the meetings or that interferes with our field service? Must the Kingdom then take second place in life?
2 Strong Faith Is Necessary: When our faith is tested under such circumstances, we must not lose sight of Jehovah’s promise and Jesus’ assurance of divine support if we seek first the Kingdom. (Ps. 37:25; Matt. 6:31-34) Worldly influences and pressures could cloud our view and prevent us from keeping the Kingdom paramount. Some have allowed prospects for prominence on the job or for financial gain to become the main thing in life. However, like Paul, we need to appraise accurately what really counts in life.​—Phil. 3:7, 8.
3 Are Adjustments Needed? A publisher said: “My heart was in my business​—it was my greatest love. I felt I could still be a Witness while dedicating most of my time to business interests.” But she had a nagging feeling that she could do more to serve Jehovah. In time, she gave up the business that was an obstacle to her spiritual progress. Once she wholly devoted herself to the Kingdom work, she was able to say: “Now I feel my life is successful in Jehovah’s eyes, which is what really matters.”
4 Commendably, many have given up secular careers and prospects for greater financial returns, simplified their lives, and entered the full-time service. Young, single ministerial servants and elders attending the Ministerial Training School have done this and are enjoying fine privileges of service. Imitating the sterling example of Paul, they are genuinely content with basic material provisions.​—1 Cor. 11:1; 1 Tim. 6:6-8; Heb. 13:5.
5 While our view of life may be ridiculed by the world, we have Jehovah’s blessing. (1 Cor. 1:26-31) Is it not encouraging to know that he will use us as fully as possible and will help us to accomplish his work? Our present opportunity to proclaim God’s established Kingdom will never be repeated. So now is the time to keep the Kingdom first in our lives.

