Save
Suggested Field Service Presentations
How to Use This Insert
Most of the following presentations appeared in past issues of Our Kingdom Ministry. Try as many as you wish in your witnessing activity, and see what results you obtain. Save this insert, and refer to it when preparing for the ministry.
You may arouse a person’s interest in God’s Word if you get to the point quickly. Raise a specific question, then read the brief Scriptural answer. You might try these suggestions:
“As you contemplate the future, do you feel hopeful or doubtful? [Allow for response.] The Bible predicted the unsettling events we see today and their outcome.”​—2 Tim. 3:1, 2, 5; Prov. 2:21, 22.
“There is much concern today about health care. Did you know that God promises that he will permanently solve all health problems?”​—Isa. 33:24; Rev. 21:3, 4.
“Did you know that the Bible foretells that eventually there will be only one government ruling the whole world?”​—Dan. 2:44; Matt. 6:9, 10.
“What do you think conditions would be like if Jesus Christ ruled the earth?”​—Ps. 72:7, 8.
“Many people suffer discrimination because of their gender, religion, or race. How do you think God feels about such prejudice?”​—Acts 10:34, 35.
“We know that Jesus Christ performed many miracles in his day. If you could ask him to perform one more miracle, what would it be?”​—Ps. 72:12-14, 16.
“Most people are tired of hearing about problems. They want to hear about solutions. But where can we find real solutions to our problems?”​—2 Tim. 3:16, 17.
“Can you identify the Kingdom that you pray for in the Lord’s (or, Our Father) Prayer?”​—Rev. 11:15.
Conversation Starters
The list of questions below, compiled from topics in the Reasoning book, shows the page number in the book where each answer is found:
Why do we grow old and die? (rs 98)
What is the condition of the dead? (rs 100)
Are there sound reasons for believing in God? (rs 145)
Does God really care what happens to us humans? (rs 147)
Is God a real person? (rs 147)
Do all good people go to heaven? (rs 162)
Must a person go to heaven to have a truly happy future? (rs 163)
Why is it important to know and use God’s personal name? (rs 196)
Is Jesus Christ actually God? (rs 212)
What will God’s Kingdom accomplish? (rs 227)
What is the purpose of human life? (rs 243)
What can help to improve a marriage? (rs 253)
Are all religions acceptable to God? (rs 322)
How can a person know which religion is right? (rs 328)
How powerful a figure is Satan in today’s world? (rs 364)
Why does God permit suffering? (rs 393)
Why is there so much wickedness? (rs 427)
Who rules this world​—God or Satan? (rs 436)
Suggestions for Presenting the Require Brochure
“No doubt you would agree that many people believe in God. All who do believe in him agree that God requires something from us. What people cannot agree on is, What does God require of us?” Then present the Require brochure, turn to lesson 1, and discuss it.
“With so many problems in family life today, have you ever wondered what is the secret for achieving family happiness?” After a response, explain that in the Bible, God reveals the real secret of family happiness. Read Isaiah 48:17. Then turn to lesson 8 in the Require brochure, and point to some of the cited Bible verses that provide reliable guidance for each member of the family. Read the list of questions at the beginning of the lesson. Ask if the person would like to read the answers.
“This brochure contains a well-rounded-out study course covering the basic teachings of the Bible. On each page, you will find answers to questions that have troubled people for centuries. For example, What is God’s purpose for the earth?” Turn to lesson 5, and read the questions at the start of the lesson. Ask the householder which one interests him the most, and then read the corresponding paragraph(s), looking up appropriate scriptures. Explain that satisfying answers to the other questions can be found just as easily as this one. Suggest that you return again to discuss another question.
“What do you think is the reason for all the violence in public schools? Does it result from a lack of parental training? Or could it be something else, such as the influence of the Devil?” Allow for a response. If the person says that it is because of the Devil’s influence, read Revelation 12:9, 12. Point out the Devil’s role in promoting turmoil in the world. Then open the Require brochure to lesson 4, and ask if the person ever wondered where the Devil came from. Proceed to read and discuss the first two paragraphs. If the person chooses “a lack of parental training” as the reason for violence in the schools, read 2 Timothy 3:1-3 and point out the traits that evidently contribute to this problem. Then open the Require brochure to lesson 8, read paragraph 5, and continue the discussion.
“Do you think it is reasonable to expect that the Creator would give us the knowledge we need to build a successful family life?” After a response, introduce the Require brochure. Turn to lesson 8, and explain that it contains principles from the Bible for every member of the family. Offer to demonstrate how to use the brochure with the Bible to get the greatest benefit.
“With all the challenges we face in modern-day life, do you feel that prayer can be of real help to us? [Allow for response.] Many say that prayer gives them inner strength. [Read Philippians 4:6, 7.] Even so, a person may feel that his prayers go unanswered. [Open the Require brochure to lesson 7.] This brochure explains how prayer can be of the most benefit to us.”
“We have been talking to our neighbors about why there are so many different religions in the world. Yet, there is only one Bible. In your opinion, why does this confusion of religions exist? [Allow for response. Open the Require brochure to lesson 13, and read the opening questions.] You will receive satisfying answers to those questions by reading this lesson.”
After placing the Watchtower and Awake! magazines with a person, ask if you might read to him one short paragraph. If allowed to do so, open the Require brochure to lesson 5. Point out the questions listed at the start of the lesson, and ask him to listen for the answer to the first question as you read the opening paragraph. After reading the paragraph, ask the question and get his response. Offer the brochure, and if it is accepted, arrange to return to get his responses to the next two questions in the list.
Suggestions for Presenting the Knowledge Book
With the Bible in hand, begin by saying: “We are sharing a scripture with everyone on your street today. It states . . .” Read John 17:3, and then ask: “Did you notice what is promised if we have the right kind of knowledge? [Allow for response.] Where would a person find such knowledge?” After a response, show the Knowledge book, and say: “This book points to the knowledge that leads to everlasting life. It does so by answering the most common questions that people have about the Bible.” Show the table of contents, and ask the person if he has ever wondered about any of those subjects.
“Have you ever wondered if God is really concerned about the injustice and suffering that we see around us or even experience ourselves? [Allow for response.] The Bible assures us that God loves us and that he will help us through times of distress.” Read portions of Psalm 72:12-17. Open the Knowledge book to chapter 8, and point out that it gives a comforting answer to a question that millions have asked, Why does God permit suffering? If possible, discuss some of the Scriptural thoughts covered in paragraphs 3 to 5, or do so on the return visit.
“Most of us have lost loved ones in death. Have you ever wondered whether we will see them again? [Allow for response.] Jesus proved that our loved ones can be rescued from death. [Read John 11:11, 25, 44.] Even though this took place centuries ago, it demonstrates what God has promised to do for us.” Open the Knowledge book to the picture on page 85, and read the caption. Then show the picture on page 86, and comment on it. Lay the groundwork for the next visit by asking: “Would you like to know the reason why humans grow old and die?” Return to discuss chapter 6.
“Have you ever thought about why humans yearn for a longer life?” After a response, open the Knowledge book to chapter 6, and read paragraph 3. Reason on the cited scriptures. Referring to the two questions at the end of the paragraph, ask the person if he would like to see the answers for himself. If the response is favorable, discuss the next few paragraphs.
“We are asking people if they believe this . . .” Read Genesis 1:1, and then ask: “Do you agree with that statement?” If the person agrees, then say: “I do too. However, do you think that if God created all things, he is also responsible for wickedness?” After acknowledging the person’s response, read Ecclesiastes 7:29. Open the Knowledge book to chapter 8, and read paragraph 2. If he does not agree with Genesis 1:1, urge him to examine the evidence that the Creator exists.​—See Reasoning book, pages 84-6.
“Would you agree that with today’s moral values changing so rapidly, we need a reliable guide in life? [Allow for response.] Although it is the oldest of books, the Bible gives practical counsel for modern living and happy family life.” Then turn to chapter 2 in the Knowledge book, and read paragraph 10 and the first sentence of paragraph 11, including 2 Timothy 3:16, 17.
“Would you like to know what the future holds for us and for the earth? [Allow for response.] The Bible sums up the future in one word​—Paradise! That is where God put the first human couple when he created them. Notice this description of what it must have been like.” Open the Knowledge book to page 8, and read paragraph 9, under the subheading “Life in Paradise.” Then discuss the points in paragraph 10, and read the cited scripture, Isaiah 55:10, 11. Offer to continue the discussion of what life in the restored Paradise will be like, covering paragraphs 11-16.
When making return visits on those with whom you placed the Watchtower and Awake! magazines, you might say this:
“The last time I called, I was pleased to leave with you a copy of the Watchtower magazine. Perhaps you noticed that the full title of the journal is The Watchtower Announcing Jehovah’s Kingdom. Today I would like to explain what this Kingdom is and what it can mean for you and your family.” Then open the Require brochure to lesson 6, and read and discuss as much as the person has time for.
“I visited you recently and left copies of the Watchtower and Awake! magazines. These journals build respect for the Bible and its moral guidance. Because I feel it is essential for everyone to understand God’s Word, I came back to show you something that will help you to do that.” Introduce the Require brochure or the Knowledge book, and offer a Bible study.
When featuring any of the older 192-page books, you might try this presentation:
“Much emphasis has been placed on the need for quality education. In your opinion, what kind of education should a person pursue to ensure the greatest happiness and success in life? [Allow for response. Then read Proverbs 9:10, 11.] This handbook [give the title of the book you are offering] is based on the Bible. It points to the only source of knowledge that can lead to everlasting life.” Show a specific example in the book, and encourage the person to read it.
Other Publications
Suggested presentations for additional books and brochures can be found in the Watch Tower Publications Index under:
Presentations
List by Publication
The Direct Approach
To start a Bible study, try using one of these direct approaches:
“Did you know that in just a few minutes, you can find the answer to an important Bible question? For example, . . .” Then, pose a question that appears at the beginning of one of the lessons in the Require brochure and that you think would appeal to the individual.
“I stopped by to show you our free Bible study program. It takes about five minutes to demonstrate. Do you have five minutes?” If the answer is yes, use lesson 1 in the Require brochure to demonstrate the study, reading only one or two selected scriptures. Afterward, ask: “When would you have about 15 minutes so that we can cover the next lesson?”
“Many people have a Bible, but they do not realize that it holds the answers to the important questions we all have about our future. Using this study aid [the Require brochure or the Knowledge book] for an hour or so a week, you can gain a basic understanding of the Bible in just a few months. I would be happy to show you how the program works.”
“I’m calling to offer you a free home Bible course. If I may, I’d like to take just a few minutes to demonstrate how people in some 200 lands discuss the Bible at home as family groups. We can use any of these topics as a basis for discussion. [Show the table of contents in the Knowledge book.] Which one especially interests you?” Wait for the person to make a selection. Turn to the chapter that is chosen, and start the study in the first paragraph.
“I give Bible lessons free of charge and have openings in my schedule for additional students. This Bible study aid is what we use. [Show the Knowledge book.] The course lasts only a few months and provides answers to such questions as: Why does God permit suffering? Why do we grow old and die? What happens to our dead loved ones? And how can we draw close to God? May I demonstrate a lesson?”
If you have found an effective presentation that gets results in cultivating interest, by all means continue to use it! Simply adapt it to the literature offer for the current month.

