Announcements
FIELD MINISTRY
How many people are there in the world who, if there is a choice, are willing to die rather than compromise on what they believe? Not many. But those who have firm faith in God’s promise of a resurrection are thus strengthened to faithfulness. Jehovah’s witnesses have such faith, and during April they will continue to call at the homes of people everywhere endeavoring to aid others to gain faith in God and his Word. As an aid in this work, they will be offering a year’s subscription for this magazine, The Watchtower, along with three Scriptural booklets, for $1.
MEMORIAL OF CHRIST’S DEATH
Where will you be on the evening of April 5? That depends on what the date means to you. To Christians who take seriously the instructions of the Lord Jesus to commemorate his death, that date is most important. This year April 5, after sundown, corresponds to Nisan 14 on the Jewish calendar, and that is the date that Jesus Christ died on behalf of mankind. So at Kingdom Halls of Jehovah’s witnesses around the earth large numbers of persons will be gathered for the Memorial of Christ’s death on that evening. After a Bible discourse, the Memorial emblems, the bread and the wine, will be passed, following the example Jesus himself set on the last night he was with his disciples before his death. You are invited to attend this important meeting. If you do not know where the nearest Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s witnesses is located, write the publishers of this magazine for information.
A FIRM FOUNDATION
How firm is your foundation knowledge of the Bible? Are you familiar with the Bible’s true-life story of mankind? What is the Bible’s purpose? its theme? What are its teachings? How can you know? Read “Things in Which It Is Impossible for God to Lie,” 416 pages of factual, faith-inspiring information. Read it with the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, a modern-English version of 1,472 pages. Both for only $1.50. Send today.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES FOR THE WEEKS
May 1: Completing the Work of Making Disciples. Page 201.
May 8: Finding Happiness in Making Disciples. Page 208.

