Barbados, West Indies
WELCOME to Barbados​—the “land of the flying fish,” and the gateway to the West Indies. Did you know that this tiny island is one of the most densely populated countries in the world? Its land area of approximately 166 square miles [430 sq km] is inhabited by more than 253,500 people. But as the saying goes, “Beautiful things come in small packages,” and this is certainly true of this most easterly island of the Caribbean archipelago.
Barbados’ eastern coastline provides a picturesque view of gently sloping hills overlooking the whitecaps of the restless Atlantic Ocean, whereas the west coast is fringed by white beaches that are caressed by the more serene water of the Caribbean Sea.
At one time sugarcane was the economic “king” in Barbados. However, of late, tourism has become the principal money earner. Every year this island plays host to thousands of visitors, who outnumber its entire population.
From the time of Barbados’ settlement by English colonists in 1627 C.E. to the granting of its independence in 1966, a strong link was maintained with Britain and, subsequently, with the Anglican Church. To what extent did this affect everyday life? At one time legislation was enacted requiring ‘family prayers and attendance at church.’ Morning and evening prayers were made compulsory. Any failure to obey resulted in a fine of 40 pounds [18 kg] of sugar. Everyone was obliged to conform to the ruling and to the discipline of the church without any deviation. This led one historian to describe Barbadians as “stiff with starch and Anglicanism.” However, the situation has changed somewhat, since at present there exist 141 different “Christian” sects and denominations. Would the true faith be able to flourish in such a religious stronghold?
Sowing Seeds of Kingdom Truth
In 1905, nine years before the establishment of the Messianic Kingdom in heaven, Joseph Brathwaite began witnessing in Barbados as a colporteur, as full-time workers among Jehovah’s Witnesses were then called. He had learned the truth in British Guiana (now Guyana). Before long, truth-hungry persons like Algernon Symmonds and his wife, Maud, accepted the gladsome message of the Kingdom. Both of them, along with Juliet Shepherd, were baptized in 1909. Symmonds’ young daughter Waldemar (who later became Mrs. Vere Rice) soon joined her parents in distributing Bible tracts.
These early Bible Students had a burning desire to talk to others about what they had learned. The spirit of urgency and self-sacrifice moved them to distribute publications of the Watch Tower Society as they took the message to many villages on the island. Sister Rice relates: “Pappy [her father], who operated a business in the capital city, Bridgetown, would use his mule and carrier to transport the group of Bible Students sharing in the work to cover the country districts. We would go out mainly on weekends. The poor mule did not get much rest, and so it would stop quite often on the way home​—whether due to tiredness or just plain stubbornness, we couldn’t say. As a result, we would get back home very late on Sundays, sometimes much past midnight. Yet I had to be up the next morning to go to school.”
Memories of Exciting Days
Among the ones whose activity dates back to those early times is Sister Lina Gaul, familiarly addressed by young and old alike as “Mammy Gaul.” Though her memory is not as sharp as in former times, oh, how she loves to relive those exciting days and to reflect on Jehovah’s marvelous dealings with his people! Now in her 90’s, Mammy Gaul recalls the time, back in 1910, when her father and mother received a tract from Mr. Thomas, a schoolteacher. With the aid of this tract and others printed by the Bible Students, the family soon learned the truth about hell, the soul, the Trinity, and other teachings. It did not take them long to sever all ties with the Christian Mission Church at Workman Village, and soon they associated with the ecclesia (or congregation) of Bible Students meeting at No. 40 Roebuck Street in Bridgetown. By 1911 both of her parents were ready for baptism, and the following year Lina was also immersed.
Sister Gaul and her parents, Alexander and Josephine Payne, were viewed as “strayed sheep” by their former Christian Mission associates, and efforts were made to “restore” them. To that end, the mission held public meetings right in front of the Paynes’ home and implored the Lord to send them back to the Christian Mission fold.
Sister Gaul, with a pleasant smile and twinkling eyes, recalls an occasion when her mother’s former best friend from the mission was sent to their home. As if hearing the conversation all over again, she relates:
“‘Sister Payne,’ said my mother’s friend, ‘I have a message from the Lord for you.’
“‘Did you see him? What did he look like?’ Mother countered.
“‘He is a tall white man, dressed in white, riding a white horse, and he tells you to come back to Workman Village Hall.’
“Mother’s next retort quickly ended their attempts to get us to return to the Mission Church. She said: ‘Well, you go back and tell this “man” that I, Josephine Payne, say that I am not coming back.’”
The Paynes, as well as other individuals associating with the Bible Students in those early years, met with considerable ridicule and persistent opposition. However, their faith was strong. In retrospect, we can appreciate this question raised in the Scriptures: “Who has despised the day of small things?” (Zech. 4:10) Without a doubt, Jehovah’s purpose to have his name declared in all the earth included this small island in the West Indies.
Sister Gaul is still actively serving and has never missed a month in preaching the good news since her baptism in 1912. Although having suffered two strokes, locally referred to as “passovers,” she still maintains a clear head and is always looking for opportunities to share the good news with others.
Undiminished Zeal
Another hard worker, Sister Waldemar Rice, has effectively presented the truth to people in every station of life over the past seven decades. She has the knack of using Barbadian, or “Bajan” dialect, to good effect. Her thorough acquaintance with local expressions adds color to her witnessing without detracting from its dignity, and her keen enthusiasm for the Kingdom hope, when expressed in the vernacular, commands a listening ear. When speaking to persons of humble background about deteriorating world conditions, she may say: “Dis worl’ in bare turmoil, dah is de troof, when um en trouble in one place, um is starvation in another or riots in yonder.”
She is bold and fearless in advocating the truth, and this example has encouraged many young folks over the years. Though her physical strength has waned, Sister Rice’s zeal for Jehovah’s service remains as vibrant as ever right into the 87th year of her life.
Reaching the White Community
Barbados, like most West Indian islands, is made up mainly of descendants of black African slaves​—90 percent of the population. Among the first persons of the white population to accept the truth was Lucy Gooding, whose family once lived where the branch building and a Kingdom Hall are presently located in Bridgetown.
John Benjamin took the Kingdom message to the Goodings one evening in 1910. As staunch Anglicans, they were startled to have explained to them the Bible truth about some of their precious beliefs. Concerned, they spoke to their minister. “Why worry about these things?” he replied. “Forget them and stick to the church.” Instead, they resigned.
Since Sister Gooding had a very strong personality and was able to explain the truth clearly, she was in the forefront of the Kingdom work for many years. From the very earliest days, her house served as an unofficial missionary home for special representatives of the Society who visited Barbados.
Among these early Witnesses, no segregation or disharmony existed. Social and ethnic divisions never infiltrated their ranks, as they did the rest of the community. All the old-timers who are still with us are quick to relate the evidences of the very strong love and attachment they felt, and still feel, toward one another. It is as Jesus said: “By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you have love among yourselves.”​—John 13:35.
The adopted sister of Lucy Gooding, Winifred Heath, remembers the early days and the changes she herself had to make in order to become an approved servant of Jehovah. She laughs at herself as she embarrassedly recalls: “Man, I used to swear like a fisherman.” Because those changes came slowly, she did not get baptized in the early years but did so in 1940 when the gathering of the “other sheep” was under way.
Benefits From Public Talks
Public Bible talks have played an important role in spreading the truth. Alfred Joseph, who had originally come from Guyana, had his initial contact with the truth at an open-air Bible lecture at Brandons Beach, close to the Bridgetown port. About 50 persons were in attendance to hear the talk “Where Are the Dead?” This start of his Bible education led to his baptism in 1915, which was held not far from the very location where he first heard that Bible lecture.
Jesus said: “You will know the truth, and the truth will set you free.” (John 8:32) Now that Brother Joseph was spiritually free, he could help others gain that same freedom. Interestingly, in 1516, by Spanish Imperial License, the way had been opened up for legalized slave trading from Africa, which lasted for over three and a half centuries. But, perhaps with a touch of irony, Alfred Joseph and William R. Brown of Jamaica, both descendants of African slaves, went to Africa to point the way to spiritual freedom for many thousands living in West Africa. Thus, on June 29, 1915, Brother Joseph left by steamer to take up a work contract in Sierra Leone, where he also worked like a yeoman in spreading the good news of the Kingdom.
When Brother Joseph returned to Barbados 18 years later, he played a leading role in delivering open-air lectures. On one occasion, he took a group of brothers and sisters to work Waverly Cot in the parish of St. George. As was their custom, they spent the morning preaching to people in their homes and inviting them to a public meeting to be held in the afternoon. A public hall was rented for that purpose. However, as soon as the lecture started, with only the brothers and sisters inside, the members of the Church Army of St. Luke’s Church assembled right outside with a bass, or “boom,” drum and a kettledrum. The loud beating of the drums, accompanied by singing, was designed to drown out the speaker. A crowd gathered. The noise was overwhelming. Brother Joseph, with no sound equipment, could hardly be heard.
Then, much to the surprise of the brothers and the crowd outside, there was a sudden downpour of rain. Yet, the sky had been clear, with no hint of an impending storm. Since the hall in which the brothers were assembled was the only place that offered any shelter, all the people that were gathered outside, including the ones beating the drums, came scrambling into the hall, which quickly became filled to capacity. Everyone stayed for the hour-long lecture and enjoyed it, too. When the brothers left for their homeward trip, they discovered that strangely the rain had fallen only in the area where the hall was located!
Seeds Fall on Other Islands
At present the branch office in Bridgetown, Barbados, directs the work of Kingdom preaching on five other islands: Bequia, Carriacou, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent. These islands are situated west of Barbados​—all within 158 miles [253 km].
Grenada, the farthest of these islands to the southwest, is only 120 square miles [311 sq km], with a population of 112,000 friendly inhabitants. Grenada earned the nickname “Spice Island” because of the prevalence of such aromatic spices as cinnamon, cloves, tonka bean, cocoa, and nutmeg.
The seeds of truth were planted on this colorful island the year World War I broke out. As a migrant worker in Panama, Elias James had accepted the message of God’s Kingdom and had become a dedicated and baptized publisher. Very eager to share the truth with those on his home island, he returned there in 1914. Before long he contacted Mr. Briggs, a Barbadian residing in Grenada. Briggs quickly embraced the Kingdom message.
Just about this time, zealous workers in Barbados were sending tracts and other pieces of literature to their acquaintances on the “lower islands.” Judith Callender, who served Jehovah faithfully until her death several years ago, related that her uncle “Popie” would send tracts to her father, Francis, a Barbadian, when he was living with her in Grenada. In turn, he shared the good news with fellow Barbadians.
Among those who embraced the truth was Chriselda James, sister-in-law of Elias James. She succeeded in raising a family of nine children in the truth despite the persistent opposition of her husband. All nine children became baptized Witnesses. As a professed member of the anointed, she proved to be a loyal and enduring Christian until she died in 1986, at 87 years of age. Three of her children died before she did, but all the others are still active with two of them serving as regular pioneers and one as an elder and a special pioneer.
Visiting traveling ministers also are remembered for their share in the Kingdom work in Grenada. Among them were A. T. Johnson, W. R. Brown, and E. J. Coward. Brother Coward’s service in the eastern Caribbean was a success by any standard. However, it did not escape the envious eye of the clergy. Exploiting the fears that existed during World War I, enemies of the truth caused a wicked rumor to spread suggesting that E. J. Coward was a German spy! Under this pressure from the clergy, government officials ordered Brother Coward to leave the British West Indies. Thus his ministry here was brought to an abrupt end. After this experience, the Society realized that no Bible Student from the United States would gain easy admittance to the islands. So arrangements were made for Brother George Young, a Canadian, to be sent there in 1922.
Over the years conventions were attended mainly by elderly persons, so people began to refer to this as the “old people religion.” Their spirit was young and eager, however. It was not uncommon for these devoted workers to walk five miles [8 km] and more, sometimes in heavy tropical rain, to attend the weekly meetings.
Come with us now as we move over to St. Vincent, just 74 miles [118 km] north of Grenada, to see how the work got started there.
A Beginning in St. Vincent
St. Vincent, a colorful island of 150 square miles [388 sq km] in area and home of one of the oldest botanic gardens in the eastern Caribbean, was visited by Brother A. T. Johnson in 1913. At that time, Ethel and Maud Thompson and their father showed some interest in the Kingdom message. A number of years later, Philippa La Borde, a Trinidadian, settled in the island.
There is a rustic expression among farmers in the West Indies that has often proved to be true: “Drop seed bears more than the one planted.” In other words, a seed that falls by chance produces more than the one deliberately sown. For example, in 1918, while going through her husband’s pockets before doing the laundry, Philippa found a Bible tract that had been given to him by W. R. Brown. This tract sparked interest. Both she and her husband studied and accepted the truth and then were baptized on August 1, 1918. A few years later, sometime before 1923, they went to St. Vincent for health reasons. They intended to stay for just a few months, but it turned out that they stayed for many years.
Recalling her first impressions when she went to St. Vincent, Philippa stated: “The streets were rough and dusty, but the people were very friendly, and that was the important thing.” Over the next 50 years, Sister La Borde, generally referred to as “Mother Lab” throughout the island, was able to take the message to top officials of government​—because she had been the kindergarten teacher for some of them. She was petite and of frail appearance, but she had a strong personality and was capable of expressing Bible truths in a simple and logical manner.
Her initiative and resourcefulness were clearly seen in the way in which she assisted Marion Dunn, a native of St. Vincent, to the point of baptism. Mrs. Dunn had first come into contact with the truth in Cuba in 1914. Soon thereafter, she returned to St. Vincent, but then she ran into stiff and sustained opposition from her cousin with whom she was living. Because of the vengefulness of her cousin, Mrs. Dunn hesitated to dedicate her life to Jehovah and symbolize this by water baptism. However, after Sister La Borde had provided the necessary Scriptural encouragement and help, arrangements were made to have Marion Dunn privately baptized in Sister La Borde’s home in 1935. Years later, Sister La Borde reflected, “I learned a great deal from working with Sister Dunn, namely, patience and humility.”
Additional Help Provided
John C. Rainbow, from the Society’s headquarters in the United States, was assigned in 1924 to spend a week with the Witnesses in St. Vincent. His visit provided fine encouragement not only to these faithful sisters but also to those who attended his lectures at the Carnegie Library in Kingstown, the capital city.
George Young, on his second missionary tour through the islands, also stopped at St. Vincent to help these sisters. At that time, in 1932, the Photo-Drama of Creation was shown at the Carnegie Library and was very well received. In fact, by public demand, arrangements were made for another showing, this time at the capital’s courthouse. Brother Young put on a series of public lectures and helped the sisters to organize a weekly study of The Watchtower. To aid in furtherance of true worship among these humble folks, he also initiated the house-to-house ministry on this island.
Groping for God and Finding Him
During the war years of 1939 to 1945, something developed in St. Vincent that surely illustrates angelic direction in the ingathering of sheeplike ones. High in the mountains of Riley is a place from which a person can look to the south and get a commanding view of the island of Bequia some ten miles [16 km] away or can look to the north and get a dizzying view of the Mesopotamia Valley just below. Up in these mountains lived a sincere group of people who met regularly to learn about God. Though misguided, they were still ‘groping for God.’ (Compare Acts 17:26, 27.) Leonard Pope, the bishop of the group, with leader Albert Forbes and the congregation of “Shakers,” as they called themselves, had come to appreciate the Watch Tower publications and were using them in their meetings.
One day in 1942, Rupert G. Wyllie stopped to listen to Leonard Pope as he was preaching in an area called Paul’s Lot in Kingstown. Pope was preaching loudly, but from what he said, Wyllie, who was a reader of Watch Tower literature, knew that Pope must have been reading the same literature. Besides, in Pope’s hand, which he was using to make sweeping gestures, there was a book to which he kept making frequent references, claiming that it proved the things he was saying. Wyllie recalled thinking, ‘It’s true he is a Shaker, but now he is saying something that’s worth listening to.’ Later, when talking to Wyllie, Pope said: “There should be some place in Kingstown to study this.” Wyllie knew Sisters La Borde and Dunn and so directed Pope to them. He met with the sisters and learned more about the truth. Soon he and his congregation of eight persons were walking the five miles [8 km] to Kingstown for the weekly study of The Watchtower.
In 1944 during a visit to St. Vincent by Gilbert Talma, the Society’s branch overseer in Trinidad, all eight of them were baptized at Edinboro Beach. However, it was not until 1947 that this group of Witnesses in Riley was organized to form the second congregation in St. Vincent. The first was in Kingstown. The following year several of the former “Shakers” became full-time pioneers and gave an effective witness in the rugged country areas.
The last of the original eight in “Bishop” Pope’s group, Leonora Forbes, despite legs crippled by arthritis, continued to have an active share in spreading the Kingdom good news right up to her death in March 1988. She was a wonderful source of encouragement to young and old alike.
When a small plot of land on top of a hill was donated for the building of a Kingdom Hall, these diligent workers labored hard. The site commanded a majestic view, but it was a challenge to build there. Brothers and sisters toted building supplies on their heads to the building site​—a distance of a mile and a half [2.4 km] from both the river and the nearest access road. Finally the hall was completed, the first one owned by our brothers on the island. The approach to this picturesque Kingdom Hall was by means of steps that were cut into the clay hill. Of course, in rainy weather these steps would become extremely slippery, and a number of traveling overseers have had a slippery ride to the bottom of the hill​—standing or otherwise!
Before we go on to St. Lucia, we are going back briefly to Barbados to observe the progress of the work there.
Hired Buses for Witnessing
The colporteurs (now called pioneers) were doing extensive work in the distribution of Bible literature. Cuthbert Blackman, now in his 77th year, was one of the 10 pioneers in Barbados in 1931, and there were 44 others who shared in the work as time and circumstances permitted.
Today the inhabitants of Barbados are well served by a network of modern roads. In fact, even though described as “21 miles [34 km] long and a smile wide,” the island has 800 miles [1,280 km] of paved or asphalt roads. However, 50 years ago transport was very different from now. There were frequent blind corners in the roads, which were leftovers of a road system that had essentially been designed for the donkey carts of the 17th century. Because of that, Brother Blackman relates, “We were glad enough to have the services of Brother Edwin Hackett’s cart pulled by his faithful horse Harry.”
However, as other means of transportation became more common, the brothers began to hire buses for witnessing. In this way all the 11 parishes of the island could be systematically covered in group witnessing. For a time the brothers used testimony cards to explain the reason for their visits. Later, recordings of Brother Rutherford’s sermons were played on portable phonographs for householders, and transcription machines were used for larger audiences.
Normally, people in the island rise early in the day. Alfred Joseph recalled that one morning he and some other brothers decided to get an early start in the witness work in Holetown, a small community on the west coast. They hung the transcription machine high up on a tree so that the sound would travel far in the quiet morning air and thus reach more people. This aggressive tactic got an immediate response. Brother Joseph said: “A police sergeant soon appeared on the scene, advising that he had been dispatched by the ‘Reverend’ and that we were to stop our program of Bible education. We encouraged him to listen for a few minutes. When he observed that we were not disorderly in any way​—apart from starting early—​and that there was nothing wrong with our Kingdom message, he left.”
Bold Witnesses
The zeal and boldness of the brothers, coupled with determination to give a thorough witness, was a hallmark of that period. These early Witnesses took the message to the gates, as it were. Keen to expose the hypocrisy and confusion in Christendom, they succeeded in making many people sit up and think seriously, something they would not have done otherwise.
For instance, when a certain “Reverend” Ince of St. Lawrence Nazarene Church in Christ Church, Barbados, heard about Brother Joseph’s travels in Africa, he invited Brother Joseph to address his congregation about life in Africa. “I readily accepted,” Brother Joseph recalls, “and agreed to speak for an hour. I used a good part of the time to relate my ministerial work in Sierra Leone and the way of life there. But then I felt I should say something about certain Bible teachings. I asked the ‘Reverend’ Ince and his catechist to follow the texts I was using, such as Ezekiel chapter 34 and Isaiah chapter 28. Then, becoming even more bold, I invited Ince to read Isaiah 56:10, 11. [“His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb dogs . . . ”​—KJ] Well, this was going just too far, for he immediately called for a hymn to be sung. Before the congregation got started, however, I continued my theme.
“At the very next opportunity, he called for a collection to be taken. Now, can you imagine me contending with him even on this point, and that right in his own church? Well, I did! You see the Society’s policy was deeply etched on my mind​—‘Seats free and no collection’—​and I couldn’t let this opportunity slip by without saying something. I declared to the entire congregation that we wouldn’t collect a cent and that I would even pay for the cost of the electricity used during the meeting. Eventually, no collection was taken after all.
“I asked the congregation if they would like to have me speak to them again, on another occasion. The response was a definite yes. However, their ‘reverend’ never invited me again.
“Some time after that incident, I set up the transcription machine in the open air well to the rear of the same Nazarene Church and played Judge Rutherford’s recordings. As a result, when the congregation assembled for service, many did not go inside but, rather, stayed outside to listen to the recorded lecture. Whether it was mainly out of curiosity or because of real interest, I couldn’t say, but this I could say: ‘My congregation’ outside was larger than what was inside the church.”
By 1936 there were four congregations of Jehovah’s Witnesses located in Barbados​—one in Bridgetown and one each in the parishes of Christ Church, St. George, and St. Philip.
Blind Man Helps Others See
Many persons throughout the island were accepting the truth. They would show this by standing before the company, as congregations were then called, repudiating their former connection with Christendom and making a declaration of their consecration (dedication). Later, they would symbolize this by water immersion. One of those doing this in the late 1930’s was a blind person, Cecil Alleyne.
Cecil made his public declaration in a different setting. As assistant pastor of the Nazarene Church at Blades Hill, St. Philip, he already knew a host of Scripture passages. But he had never grasped “the pattern of healthful words.” (2 Tim. 1:13) However, when Brother Blackman witnessed to him, even though Cecil was blind, it did not take him long to see the truth. Now he felt incensed over the many years of spiritual enlightenment he had lost in his association with the Nazarene Church. Shortly thereafter, he stood up in the church and made his declaration that he would no longer be associating with them but that he had become one of Jehovah’s Witnesses. Many who were in attendance wept and begged him not to leave, as he was very much loved by them. But in the course of the years that followed, many of these very ones took up true worship as a result of Brother Alleyne’s witnessing to them.
He knew the districts very well, as he had not been born blind. When he would be escorted around in the territory, he knew just where he was and who lived in whatever house he might be passing at the time. His remarkable zeal and good sense of humor endeared him to others. He had a winsome way with the people, supported by an infectious laugh, that would both drive home the Scriptural points he was making and provide a refreshing pause for the points to sink in. He was largely responsible for a fine congregation that was later established at Blades Hill. One of those to whom he witnessed and whom he greatly helped was Oswald Batson, who became a pioneer and later served as a circuit overseer and then as a district overseer in the six islands of the branch territory until his death in 1957. Brother Alleyne has also died.
Theocratic Organization During World War II
Historically the year 1938 was significant to Jehovah’s people the world over. That year marked the recognition of the need for a complete theocratic organization. In the eastern Caribbean, as was true all over the world, there was a tightening up of the organizational structure. This was indeed providential, as it contributed to the unity that was needed to help true Christians to maintain neutrality during the world conflict that soon followed.
Even though these islands were not directly involved in the hostilities, as colonies of Great Britain they provided manpower for uniformed services. However, our brothers kept out of the war activities and devoted their efforts to pointing to Jehovah’s Kingdom as the only hope for mankind. Even though there was no official ban on the Society’s publications, officials used their high office to restrict the entry of literature, records, documents, and other supplies that would be of assistance in the Kingdom activity.
A scarcity of literature resulted. So whatever publications the brothers received were used with great care. Sister Lucy Gooding and a few others in Barbados became devoted scribes, duplicating and distributing to the brothers study articles of any Watchtower magazine they received. Expressing heartfelt gratitude, and reflecting the attitude of all those then associating, were the words of Sister La Borde of St. Vincent: “We thank Jehovah and our dear Sister Gooding, who shared the heavenly calling with us, that we were able to keep up with the latest information.”
After the war ended, an appeal was made to the government to allow the Society’s publications to be imported again. Soon after, shipments were received, and no difficulty has been experienced since that time.
Gilead Graduates Arrive
Many countries, including Barbados, were now in for an unanticipated blessing. Beginning in 1945, graduates of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead arrived. What a grand stimulus this gave to the work!
James and Bennett Berry, two fleshly brothers, and Franklyn Lamar Pate began serving as missionaries in November 1945. They also served the other islands now under this branch as circuit overseers, then called servants to the brethren. By their sharing with the brothers the fine training received at Gilead, a discernible improvement was noted in the standard of teaching, both inside the congregations and in the field ministry.
For the first time the brothers in Barbados appreciated the benefit of covering all the scheduled paragraphs of assigned study material within the allotted time. This was of particular benefit to the Bridgetown Congregation, where an argumentative spirit had developed among some individuals. The improved spirit was conducive to further spiritual growth. A number of new and younger ones began to associate.
By now there were six congregations in Barbados, with 72 active publishers. The Memorial attendance for that year was 199. Meanwhile, Grenada reported 15 publishers, with 22 present for the Memorial.
Presidential Visit
In 1946 following the war, the president of the Society, Nathan H. Knorr, and the then vice president, Frederick Franz, visited the West Indies for the first time. On this occasion, however, the only island visited was Trinidad, which supervised the Kingdom work in all the islands of the eastern Caribbean.
What excitement and appreciation bubbled when a letter was received from the branch office at Port of Spain, Trinidad. Addressed to all congregations, this letter read in part: “A convention is to be arranged, and public meeting with Brother Knorr as speaker. It will be impossible for Brothers Knorr and Franz to visit other islands on this trip, so please inform the brethren. . . . It would be well for the company servants and pioneers to come, if they can afford it. This will be a wonderful opportunity for the brethren in the West Indies to meet with the Society’s president and vice president and gain much valuable information about forwarding the Kingdom service.”
However, the benefits of the convention program were shared even by those who could not make the trip to Trinidad. To make that possible, a large convention was held in Barbados in October of that year. By this time Joshua Steelman, another Gilead graduate, had arrived, and he had a share in the convention program. At this convention the brothers welcomed the news that they would be having regular visits to the congregations by “servants to the brethren,” now called circuit overseers. The peak attendance was 902. This was the beginning of the era of larger, well-organized conventions in Barbados.
Among those strengthened by that convention were the Gall brothers, St. Clair and Frank. The true pioneer spirit that the missionaries displayed impressed them so much that they also took up the pioneer service. In 1950 Frank Gall and Fitz Gregg were the first Barbadians invited to attend Gilead School. After graduating from the 16th class, both were assigned to British Honduras (now Belize).
As the local brothers extended themselves, at times beyond what is normal, Jehovah poured out abundant blessings on them. Dudley Mayers, who is 81 years old, recalls those years and tells us: “There were only ten of us in our little group in Hall’s Village, St. James, including four members of my family. Since one of the brothers was quite old and there were many sisters, I was appointed to all the servants’ positions in the company, as we called the congregation then. Later, we moved our location to Cave Hill, St. Michael, about three miles [5 km] from the original location, and from then on things really began to improve to the point where today we have about 135 publishers and more than 200 attending our Sunday meetings.” Brother Mayers himself, though he has had three heart attacks, continues to serve regularly as an auxiliary pioneer.
They Did Not Give Up
It took the missionaries some time to adjust to local conditions and acquire a measure of immunity to local diseases. Many of them did not give up but stayed in their assignment.
A sterling example of one who did not quit and who has come to be much loved by the brothers is Sven Johansson. He and Richard Ryde were assigned to serve as missionaries in Grenada in March 1949. Brother Johansson, originally from Sweden, recalls the time he got malarial fever. Not knowing what the ailment was, he tried to treat himself for a cold in the best way he as a bachelor knew how, but he finally realized that his sickness was much more serious than he had imagined. He writes: “When the doctor got me under his care, it was too late. Everyone thought I was going to die. My missionary partner, Richard Ryde, even wrote to Brother Knorr about funeral arrangements. Brother Knorr promptly replied that he should see to it that I got the best medical attention available.
“Eventually, I pulled through. Then my partner took ill similarly. Together we had repeated relapses. At times both of us were sick and in bed at the same time. To determine which one would get up to take care of the other and look after necessary home chores, we would compare body temperatures. The one with the higher temperature got to stay in bed. For many years we struggled with this annoying and recurring fever. As for me, it took eight years before I was cured.”
Respected for Honest Work
Brother Johansson served not only in Grenada, where he married a local sister, but also in St. Vincent. In 1951 he and his wife went to St. Vincent, where they served as regular pioneers for several years. However, no sooner had he settled down than he received a notice from the chief of police that he had five days to leave the island. In a subsequent interview with the chief, he was told that he was declared undesirable because he was a foreign spy. Brother Johansson explained to him that he was one of Jehovah’s Witnesses and did not get involved in politics. The chief of police remained adamant.
Brother Johansson wrote: “My only appeal was to go and see the administrator of the island. After making an appointment, I was able to speak with the administrator for about 30 minutes. He confirmed what the chief of police had told me earlier, namely, that I was now an undesirable visitor. The administrator then declared that I was against Catholics; being himself a Catholic, he felt very strongly about that. I assured him that I was not against Catholics. I mentioned that my barber was a Catholic and that I visited Catholics in their homes to talk to them about the Bible. Finally, he said: ‘Mr. Johansson, I have heard you are very good at repairing radios. I have two radios that need repairing. I’ll send them to you tomorrow for repairs. You can stay in the island.’ He then picked up the telephone, phoned the chief of police, and gave him instructions that I should be permitted to stay in the island.”
More than once, a fine witness resulted from the fact that Brother Johansson was exemplary in his secular work. A businessman wanted a reliable and honest person to repair defective radios. He took two identical radios that were in good condition and cut a wire in the circuit of each radio. Then he sent the two radios to two technicians whom he considered to be among the best in their trade. When Brother Johansson sent back the radio that had been given to him for repair, he enclosed a bill for $2.40 (88¢, U.S.), stating that it was for soldering a broken wire. The other technician sent a bill for replacing tubes and other parts. Brother Johansson got the job as radio repairman for that firm.
During the 39 years that Brother Johansson has been in these islands, he has shared in circuit, district, and special pioneer work. At present he is residing in Barbados and serves as a regular pioneer and as a member of the Branch Committee that supervises the Kingdom work in these islands. Although he suffered a severe heart attack recently, he is back on his feet once more. His heart, having been weakened somewhat, demands a slower pace. His example over the years reminds many of Paul’s comment at 2 Corinthians 6:4-6: “In every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers, by the endurance of much, by tribulations, by cases of need, by difficulties, . . . by long-suffering, by kindness, by holy spirit, by love free from hypocrisy.”
Kingdom Work Gets Going in St. Lucia
St. Lucia, 120 miles [192 km] northwest of Barbados, is a lush and beautiful tropical island with 120,000 inhabitants. Famous for its twin sugarloaf-shaped mountain peaks that jut out of the sea, Gros Piton and Petit Piton, the island is noted for producing bananas and copra.
In 1947 St. Lucia also began to produce Kingdom fruitage. The first native Witness was Leanna Mathurin. At the time she accepted the truth, she was living in Demerara, Guyana. She wrote to Brother Knorr, inquiring if there was anything she could do to help spread the good news in St. Lucia. After receiving Brother Knorr’s encouraging reply, she moved to Micoud, a village some 30 miles [48 km] from Castries, the capital.
Two years later, Gilead-trained missionaries arrived​—Lloyd Stull and William Cammers. These two, along with Leanna Mathurin, made up the total population of Jehovah’s Witnesses in the island.
This zealous sister, being conversant with the native patois, a mixture of French and English, reached many of the country folk with the comfort from the Scriptures. From her personal funds she had a small Kingdom Hall built. Two rooms were added to it, one on either side. She occupied one herself, and she reserved the other for traveling ministers. Though 82 years old, she is still zealously serving as a regular pioneer.
St. Lucia, being predominantly Catholic, presented certain challenges to the missionaries’ obtaining suitable housing, but Brother Stull says: “We took the view that everything we needed would be provided for in the house-to-house ministry.” And sure enough, time after time their necessities were taken care of.
Over the years more missionaries were sent to St. Lucia. Among these were Fred Dearman from the United States and William and Edith Honsinger from Canada, who are still faithfully serving in their assignments. Jehovah’s blessings have been truly manifest on their labors of love, for now there are four fine Kingdom Halls serving the needs of five congregations and their 380 zealous publishers.
Seasickness During Convention Travel
In the early years, in order to get to conventions on the various islands, the brothers had to use sloops, windjammers, schooners, or whatever vessel moved on the sea between the islands. There was no reliable air service linking the islands. For those who were rugged sailors, sea travel presented no problem. But for some like Brother Stull, it frequently proved to be a sickening experience.
Someone described one of those trips this way: “Brother Stull, not being a good sailor, got very sick on the boat. Further, to make a bad matter worse, what was to have been a one-day journey took three days because of the sea’s turbulence.
“Sleeping had to be done on deck, as there was cargo in both the ship’s hold and cabin space. There was a tarpaulin with which to shelter, but eventually the rain and the sea spray would get through. Brother Stull was so sick he did not have the strength to take shelter, so most of the time he was exposed to the elements. During the day when the sun would shine, we would roll him over on one side to dry, then roll him over on the other side until he was dried out​—until the next spell of bad weather, when there would be a repeat of the experience.”
The harrowing experience persisted until the friends came within sight of the convention island. But even then there was no relief. The tide reversed, and the boat drifted out to sea, out of sight again. When they finally did dock, what a disappointment it was to learn that the immigration and customs officers had already left their posts! So the brothers had to spend another night aboard the schooner.
Richard Ryde, who was based in Grenada as a missionary, also experienced the hardships of interisland travel. He was scheduled to serve as chairman for a convention in Barbados. He sailed from Grenada to St. Vincent, hoping to make connection through to Barbados. Knowing the vagaries of interisland travel, he allowed sufficient time so that he could share in preconvention work. However, because of sea conditions, Brother Ryde arrived in Barbados just in time to hear the public talk! When the boat in which he traveled approached Barbados, those on board could see land on several occasions. They could even make out people walking on the shore. But adverse tides and winds kept them from reaching it. The superstitious sailors took these developments as a bad omen and put up crosses, but to no avail. With understandable disgust, Brother Ryde told them, “Boys, you don’t need the crosses​—you need an auxiliary motor.”
Visit From Headquarters
How delighted the brothers were with the news in 1949 that Brother Knorr, on his second trip through the Caribbean, would be visiting Barbados! This time, Milton Henschel, also from the headquarters staff, would be accompanying him. An interisland district convention to be held at the Steel Shed was arranged to coincide with the visit.
The attendance at the public talk, “It Is Later Than You Think!” was 3,000. That number was not exceeded for another 25 years. During that convention Brother Knorr also discussed with the pioneers a subject that would bring spiritual dividends to the islands​—the prospect of Gilead training.
The “No-Hell Religion”
Woven into the culture of Barbadian life is the people’s great love for the Bible. This, along with widespread literacy and a keen desire for learning, makes the house-to-house ministry a pleasant challenge. A person is rarely refused a hearing. Rather, he may find that an animated religious discussion can develop, requiring a good knowledge of the Bible and skillful use of it.
For some time, especially during the 1960’s and 1970’s, people would often refer to the Witnesses as the “no-hell religion.” One of our brothers recalls that Gertrude Linton was referred to by people in the community as “No-Hell Gertie.” That obviously was designed to stumble persons who were showing an interest in our message. So it became necessary to have a part on a circuit assembly program showing how to deal with this objection by using the King James Version. Bible texts such as Psalms 55:15; 86:13; Isaiah 14:9; and Jonah 2:2, with the accompanying marginal references in the King James Version, were used. Since most homes had that version of the Bible with marginal references, the brothers were able to reason with people from their own Bible and help them to see that the hell referred to in the Scriptures is not a place of fiery torment but the grave. This method evidently proved to be very successful, for one hardly ever hears this objection anymore.
Covering the Grenadines With the Witness
The major islands now in this branch territory were being given a fine witness. But the smaller islands that are spread out between Grenada and St. Vincent also needed attention. These islands are called the Grenadines.
Nowadays a person who travels by air in this area is never out of sight of these islands. However, to reach them years ago, the Society purchased a 65-foot [20 m] schooner named Sibia. It was on March 18, 1950, that an international group of missionaries dropped anchor off the island of Carriacou, the largest of the Grenadines. Among the crew members were Arthur Worsley, Stanley Carter, Ronald Parkin, and Gust Maki, who served as captain​—all of them zealous proclaimers of the good news. Before long the 7,000 people on this island of 13 square miles [34 sq km] had received their first organized witness.
The brothers found that, in spite of their being relatively isolated, there was a warmhearted spirit among the people. They did not have much materially, but this mattered little to the missionaries since they were there to give and to share. So to help these humble folks, the missionaries often exchanged Bibles and other literature for the local produce of peanuts, corn, and vegetables. On August 29, 1950, the first local Witness, a sister, was baptized. On September 22, 1952, a congregation was organized. Today that congregation has over 43 publishers, not to mention the scores of publishers who have moved away from the island and who are now in Europe, North America, and other Caribbean islands.
Another of the Grenadine islands that preserves its untouched, rustic beauty is Bequia. The Sibia sailed into its picturesque harbor, Port Elizabeth, on April 5, 1950. During the following years, ten visits were made by the Sibia to this island of some 6,000 inhabitants. Today, a strong congregation of about 20 publishers takes care of the interest there.
In 1953 the president of the Society approved the purchase of a larger boat, a motor vessel called Le Cheval Noir, to take the place of the Sibia. The name was changed to a more appropriate one, Light, which truly represented the purpose of this twin-screw vessel. There was room for eight persons to live on board. It could even carry up to 50 persons on short interisland runs, and this was often done as it ferried publishers between the islands to attend conventions.
Help After Hurricane Janet
In September 1955, Hurricane Janet swept across the islands of Barbados, Bequia, Carriacou, Grenada, and St. Vincent. Like an angry bull, the wind, at a velocity never before experienced in the memory of those living in this area, ripped up trees and houses. Before moving farther north, Janet blew trillions of horsepower of destructive energy on these islands for a full week. Ninety percent of the houses and buildings in Carriacou were thrown down or destroyed.
The love that the brothers showed toward those affected by the hurricane was indeed outstanding. “During the hurricane we were with the vessel Light in the Puerto Rico area,” Gust Maki said. “The brothers and sisters in Puerto Rico gave us a lot of clothing and food items to carry to the brothers in Carriacou.” Recalling the people’s reaction, he continued: “Since the churches in Carriacou were all damaged, there were no religious services for several months. The Catholic priest was seen going to his members’ homes to offer Communion to them before he left the island. The Anglican priest called at one parishioner’s home to beg for money in order to repair the church; at the same time this person was living in a makeshift kitchen. She was heard to say, ‘My bishop comes to beg for money, while Jehovah’s Witnesses come to help their members.’”
Emigration Influences Growth
The years from 1950 to 1970 altered the pattern of growth and development of the organization throughout the branch territory. People from all over the eastern Caribbean felt the need to migrate to more developed countries in search of the “better life” and improved economic conditions. This was especially true of Barbadians. Within a 30-year period, Barbados reported a net population loss of 74,000.
The economic situation of our brothers was no different from that of other people. Many found themselves torn between two pressing demands​—the necessity to provide food, clothing, and shelter for their families, and the more urgent need to keep spiritual things first and preserve family unity in true worship. This situation prompted quite some soul-searching for family heads in the islands.
Many congregations were considerably weakened by the departure of some brothers who had been the most zealous publishers. In some cases, protracted absence of one member of the household contributed to marital infidelity, and to repair the marital breach, discipline as well as guidance from the elders was required. The fact that the family was not together contributed, in some cases, to children becoming delinquent. As years passed, the returning migrants were in most cases better off financially, but in view of the damage to family relationships and the spiritual loss, some found themselves asking, ‘What good was it after all?’
Finer Choice, Grander Blessings
There were those, however, who resisted the economic lure, kept their families together, and endured the hard times. They just dug deeper into their resourcefulness and were richly blessed for doing so. Consider two of those who set fine examples​—Milton Alleyne and Fitz Hinds.
Though a skilled and experienced contractor, Milton Alleyne resisted the urge to emigrate. He stayed in the community so that he could help his family in more than just economic ways and so that he could help the local brothers. He kept his family together and now experiences the joy of having all his four children dedicated and baptized and active in the truth. Two are now serving as regular pioneers and one as a special pioneer. Brother Alleyne now serves as presiding overseer of the Hillaby Congregation in Barbados.
Fitz Hinds also demonstrated patient endurance. He has been in the forefront of theocratic activity, providing leadership in the congregation for more than 36 years. Currently serving as Watchtower Study conductor in Sugar Hill, Barbados, he too has had the joy of helping his entire family grow up in the truth. His three sons are all ministerial servants, and one of his daughters is a regular pioneer. The rest of the family regularly share in the auxiliary pioneer service at various times during the year.
Happily, it can be said that the pattern of the 1950’s through the 1970’s has been reversed. Now fewer of the more qualified and zealous brothers think of emigrating for economic reasons alone.
Some who have taken hold of the privilege of full-time service have been favored with training at Gilead School. It is heartwarming to reflect on the fact that the Barbados branch has sent ten full-time workers to Gilead over the years. To coordinate the rapidly expanding work on the islands, two of the graduates who were reassigned here, A. V. Walker and O. L. Trotman, now serve on the Branch Committee along with Sven Johansson.
It is evident that the work of making disciples has progressed well. The brothers have acquired needed organizational ability and have taken on more responsibility in connection with the Lord’s work in these closing days of this wicked system of things.
After the Light, Follow-Up Work
The missionaries on the boat Light did a valuable work on the islands. There was one drawback, however. In these small islands, people were deeply concerned about who would christen their babies after birth and who would perform the last rites or bury them when they died. Interested persons who studied with the missionaries, some of whom went so far as to leave their church, felt abandoned when the missionaries had to pull up anchor and sail to another island. ‘Who now will bury our dead?’ they wondered. So they returned to their church.
Hence, by 1957 the Society’s floating missionary home Light had served its purpose and was sold. The missionaries that were on the boat were assigned elsewhere. The stage was now set for land-based full-time workers to follow through on the interest shown.
Stanley and Ann Carter were assigned to St. George’s, Grenada. Loyally and faithfully they labored to strengthen the brothers. Soon the enthusiasm that was generated by the zealous Witnesses in the city led to the need for a larger meeting place. A fine Kingdom Hall was built on a location overlooking the beautiful harbor of St. George’s and was dedicated by Robert Wallen of headquarters staff when he visited as zone overseer in March 1964.
Readjustments Sift out Disgruntled Ones
The Society’s provision in 1961 for additional training by means of the Kingdom Ministry School for special pioneers, missionaries, and elders in the congregation did much to strengthen the work organizationally. It helped qualified brothers to appreciate the value of putting forth the effort to stay with their assignments instead of emigrating for economic benefits. Attention also needed to be given to situations involving publishers whose lives were morally unclean. Such cases were at times not being dealt with promptly. Therefore, the one-month course that was provided in Bridgetown, Barbados, and Kingstown, St. Vincent, supplied the necessary Scriptural readjustment in viewpoint.
Some complained when adjustments were made, but others were humbly grateful to be able to serve Jehovah in any capacity. For example, Reuben Boyce admits that when he was replaced as presiding overseer in the Bridgetown, Barbados, Congregation, it came “as a big surprise” to him. But he accepted it as being at Jehovah’s direction or by His permission. On the other hand, one who no longer walks in the way of the truth approached Brother Boyce with feigned sympathy and said: “What happened? Why they removed you, Man?”
Brother Boyce responded, “How do you mean?”
The one who was trying to stir up discontent then stated: “That ain’t good enough! What are you going to do about it?”
Brother Boyce’s rejoinder reflected the loyal attitude of the great majority of brothers when he said: “Look, Man! This ain’t nothing to talk about. When the Society appoints a person to a post in the congregation, they don’t tell you they are going to appoint you; so when they remove you, you don’t make a fuss​—you carry on as usual. So I don’t see anything to get cranky about.” And that ended the conversation.
Over the years Brother Boyce has continued to maintain his loyalty to Jehovah and His organization and to benefit from the needed discipline. Now totally blind and very advanced in age, he serves as an elder. In his later years he has also had the blessing of having his wife, who formerly was an unbeliever, become a dedicated and baptized Witness.
New Branch Organized
Among the Theocratic News items in the February 1966 issue of Kingdom Ministry (Trinidad Edition) was a brief but significant announcement: “A new branch office began functioning January 1, 1966, in Barbados to oversee the work in Barbados, Bequia, Carriacou, Grenada, St. Lucia and St. Vincent.” By this time the number of Witnesses in these six islands totaled 1,084. These publishers had the assignment of preaching to a combined population of more than half a million. Of course, much witnessing had already been done.
Two missionaries were sent to Barbados to organize the missionary home in which the branch office would be located. These were Benjamin and Beryl Mason. Brother Mason had attended the 2nd and 39th classes of Gilead. Zeal for the ministry was his hallmark. He had a slight stoop in his appearance, and with his characteristic sense of humor, he would remark that his stoop was a result of “pressing forward in the Lord’s service.”
From its very beginning, the new branch lost no time in giving more personal attention to the brothers, caring more for their needs. Also having the branch office right in the island community meant getting congregation supplies more readily, without having to order from Trinidad and then depend on the unreliable shipping service between the islands. It did not take long for all the brothers in the branch to become used to being a part of the new “branch family.”
It was now time for the Society to send down permanent roots in Barbados. An excellent piece of property in Bridgetown was purchased to be used for the new branch office, missionary home, and Kingdom Hall. It was the very property that had been the center of so much theocratic activity for more than 50 years​—Lucy Gooding’s home.
The Barbados branch office is ideally located in Bridgetown, one block from the new general post office and about a ten-minute walk from the Bridgetown port. The fine, clean appearance of the buildings is often commented on by people as they pass by​—people who also watched the community effort of the Witnesses in the construction. All the congregations shared in the actual construction, and that in itself was a great witness.
The coordination of the construction work on the branch buildings and the fellowship it engendered made the brothers think more seriously about needed Kingdom Hall construction. Suddenly they realized that construction skills were readily available among the brothers in the island. Thus, within 18 months after the dedication of the branch buildings, eight new Kingdom Halls were built in the branch territory. The first to be dedicated was at Cave Hill, Barbados; others followed in Castries, St. Lucia, as well as Grenville, Grenada, to name just a few. In the entire branch territory there are now 28 Kingdom Halls, thus making it possible for all the 33 congregations to meet in buildings owned by the brothers.
Political Changes Around Us
Beginning in 1958 there were big political changes throughout the West Indies. Ten West Indian islands, from Jamaica in the northwest to Trinidad in the south, were joined in a political federation. But it turned out to be a fiasco, and so it was dissolved in May 1962. Instead of all these islands proceeding to political independence as one nation, each one was left to pursue independence on its own. Thus, Barbados became an independent nation on November 30, 1966. Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent did so later.
However, these political developments did not affect the relationship among the brothers on the various islands. Both before and since the political independence of these islands, the brothers have always endeavored to live in harmony with the Bible principle of neutrality. They well know that Christ said concerning his followers: “They are no part of the world, just as I am no part of the world.” (John 17:16) They have also been guided by the apostle Paul’s words: “If possible, as far as it depends upon you, be peaceable with all men.” (Rom. 12:18) Since the brothers did not get involved politically but maintained strict neutrality, they have come to be highly respected, even though not loved, by their island’s government. Sometimes, politicians may get annoyed at the brothers for not performing what are considered to be civic duties, especially during local elections. However, over this matter the brothers have never had really serious problems.
On a few occasions, some of the Witnesses’ children have been threatened with expulsion from school for refraining from pledges and oaths of political allegiance. When that happened, it was helpful to refer the school administrators, especially the ones in Barbados, to some of the features of the island’s constitution. When the school authorities were reminded of the rights guaranteed there, we seldom had further difficulty. The brochure School and Jehovah’s Witnesses has proved to be an excellent instrument for making our position clear to school administrators and teachers.
Gilead Graduates Set Fine Example
All the islands have benefited from Gilead-trained traveling overseers and missionaries. Each of these has made a solid contribution to the spreading of the good news and to the strengthening of the congregations.
In 1960 John and Lynne Mills came to Barbados from Trinidad to do circuit work. And this they did successfully for many years, with a young child at that.
Richard and Gay Toews arrived in Barbados on February 21, 1967, to take up their missionary assignment. In that same year Brother Toews was appointed to head the branch administration, and he cared well for that responsibility for 13 years. As the apostle Paul had instructed Timothy to do, the brothers in the branch during that time worked to develop and train local brothers, rather than the foreign missionaries, to handle responsibility and to take care of vital assignments.​—2 Tim. 2:2.
Gay Toews, an affable and hardworking sister, proved to be a fine missionary during the years she lived in Barbados. She became quite familiar with the “Bajan” expressions and used them frequently in her house-to-house ministry, even though the Barbadian idioms did not sound quite the same when rolled off a Canadian tongue! She experienced considerable success in directing interest to the organization. Because of ill health, in time Brother Toews and his wife, Gay, returned to Canada, where they now share in district work.
At present the Barbados branch has ten missionaries and five missionary homes. Four of the five traveling overseers are Gilead trained. Many who are now serving in the full-time service say that one of the things that motivated them to take up the full-time service was the fine example of the missionaries.
With all this missionary help, the increase might have been greater were it not for the immoral situation of the times. In one of the islands, 78 percent of all native children are born out of wedlock. Whereas the religions of Christendom are easily prepared to adapt to the so-called new morality, Jehovah’s people cannot. In an effort to give social respectability to the result of such promiscuous sex, one island government, in a recent Family Law Reform bill, removed the word illegitimate (to describe children born out of wedlock) from the statute books. So our brothers have had to lay strong emphasis on adhering to Jehovah’s high standards of morality.
International Convention in Bridgetown
A fine indication of the spiritual growth, maturity, and stature of the brothers in Barbados was reflected in their hosting one of the series of international conventions in 1978. The brothers were thrilled to have that privilege, which proved to be a resounding success. Never before had so many delegates from abroad attended any sort of convention in Barbados. Delegates had come from 28 nations.
An excellent witness was given in hotels and elsewhere as these hundreds of delegates mingled with the people of Barbados. As a result, over 6,000 were present for the public talk, which was delivered by Karl Adams from Brooklyn Bethel. Jack Barr and his wife, Mildred, from London, England, were also in attendance, and Brother Barr handled several vital portions of the program. He was then waiting for legal papers that would permit him to enter the United States so that he could serve as a member of the Governing Body.
Free Radio Service Results in Witness
In Barbados when an issue, practice, or celebration becomes topical, provision is generally made to have differing views aired on the radio stations. This forum has been used effectively by God’s people to state our stand on various issues, and this has resulted in breaking down prejudice against our work. On one occasion we were invited to send a representative to serve as part of a panel that would consider questions on a call-in program on the subject of Christmas, since we do not observe this celebration.
On the panel was the bishop of the Anglican Church. Before the program went on the air, the brother representing the Witnesses approached the bishop and asked him how he should be addressed. The bishop indicated that he could be addressed as Father, Bishop, or Reverend. Our brother politely explained that he would not be able to use any of such titles because the Bible does not agree with such a practice. The clergyman was obviously upset, so he went to the moderator of the program and stated that he would not appear on the program with that Witness​—it was either he or the Witness. Since the brother representing the Witnesses was the only one on the panel who did not agree with the celebration of Christmas, he had to be retained. So it was a very annoyed and humiliated clergyman who left the studio.
When the issue of blood transfusion and the practice of homosexuality became topical, again the Witnesses were invited to send representatives to serve on various panels and to present the Bible’s viewpoint.
Avoiding Distractions
It can readily be said that the local theocratic organization has come a long way during the past 84 years. While there has been no organized repression of God’s people in these islands, our wily adversary, Satan the Devil, has used other devices. He has employed more subtle traps​—immorality, fault-finding, and excessive recreation.
For example, the most popular island sport is cricket. It is pursued with a passion, so much so that one writer observed: “Cricket is more of a religion than a sport.” Enthusiasts follow the game on radio, on television, or in person at the “hallowed” cricket pitch at Kensington Oval in Barbados. But most of the brothers, knowing its time-consuming nature, have endeavored to maintain a balanced view toward this and other forms of recreation that can make incursions into a person’s spiritual life.
The response to auxiliary pioneer work during April demonstrates that our brothers truly do endeavor to put Kingdom interests first. In April 1988 the Barbados branch reported a peak of 1,009 auxiliary pioneers. This means that there were on the average over 32 auxiliary pioneers per congregation on the six islands under the supervision of the branch. Altogether, 46 percent of the brothers were engaged in some form of full-time service during that month. Such zealous activity without doubt contributed to the fact that in April of that year the branch was blessed with a new peak of 2,571 publishers.
Telling Forth Jehovah’s Praise in the Islands
The history of Jehovah’s Witnesses is now part of the history of Barbados. That silent sentinel of land at the entrance to the Caribbean Sea has given voice to the good news of God’s Kingdom for the past eight decades. And because of that loud voice, the island has truly become a spiritual gateway for many thousands who have come to enjoy “seasons of refreshing” through gaining a fine relationship with Jehovah God and his Son, Christ Jesus.​—Acts 3:19.
The prophet Isaiah long ago wrote: “Sing to Jehovah a new song, his praise from the extremity of the earth . . . Let them attribute to Jehovah glory, and in the islands let them tell forth even his praise.” (Isa. 42:10, 12) It is the united prayer of all 2,571 Kingdom proclaimers in this branch territory that the blessing of Jehovah will continue to be upon their efforts to tell forth his praise.
[Box/​Map on page 150]
Profile of Barbados Branch
Capital of Barbados:  Bridgetown
Official Language:      English
Major Religion:       Anglican
Combined Population:  629,184
Publishers:           2,571
Pioneers:             299
Congregations:        33
Memorial Attendance:  8,065
Branch Office:          Bridgetown
[Map]
(For fully formatted text, see publication)
ATLANTIC OCEAN
BARBADOS
  Bathsheba
  Holetown
  Bridgetown
ST. LUCIA
  Castries
  Micoud
ST. VINCENT
  Kingstown
BEQUIA
  Port Elizabeth
GRENADINES
CARRIACOU
GRENADA
  Grenville
  St. George’s
CARIBBEAN SEA
[Full-page picture on page 148]
[Picture on page 153]
Lina “Mammy” Gaul, left, and Waldemar Rice, early Witnesses in Barbados
[Picture on page 155]
Lucy Gooding, whose house was used as a missionary home
[Picture on page 156]
Winifred Heath, who changed her life to qualify for baptism in 1940
[Picture on page 158]
Chriselda James of Grenada raised nine children in the truth
[Picture on page 159]
E. J. Coward, from Brooklyn headquarters, served eastern Caribbean islands
[Picture on page 161]
Philippa “Mother Lab” La Borde, a Witness since 1918, served in St. Vincent for 50 years
[Picture on page 165]
Cuthbert Blackman used a horse cart for pioneering
[Pictures on page 170]
Frank Gall, left, one of the first Barbadian Gilead graduates, and Dudley Mayers, who helped form early congregations in Barbados
[Picture on page 173]
Richard Ryde, left, and Sven Johansson were sent to Grenada as missionaries in 1949
[Picture on page 175]
Lloyd Stull, one of the first missionaries sent to St. Lucia
[Picture on page 180]
“Sibia,” a 65-foot [20 m] schooner used in the missionary work
[Picture on page 183]
“Light,” a twin-screw vessel that replaced the “Sibia”
[Picture on page 184]
Members of the Branch Committee: A. V. Walker, left; O. L. Trotman; and Sven Johansson
[Picture on page 188]
Benjamin and Beryl Mason, who helped to organize the missionary home
[Picture on page 191]
Richard and Gay Toews, missionaries assigned to Barbados in 1967, now serving in Canada
[Picture on page 192]
Branch buildings and Kingdom Hall in Bridgetown, Barbados
[Picture on page 193]
1978 “Victorious Faith” International Convention, National Stadium, Barbados
[Picture on page 194]
Bathsheba coast, on the Atlantic Ocean side of Barbados

