Refreshing Good News
How refreshing it is to have this world report and to know about the worldwide progress in Jehovah’s work! “As cold water upon a tired soul, so is a good report from a distant land.” (Prov. 25:25) We have been very busy with the assignments of work given to all of us, so the exciting events reported come like refreshing cold water just when needed. This is information we should share with others for their good. “The brightness of the eyes makes the heart rejoice; a report that is good makes the bones fat.” (Prov. 15:30) What did you find outstanding in the report? Will you tell others?
In the first century of our Common Era, when the Christian congregation was growing and the good news was reaching new fields, the faithful servants of Jehovah passed on reports to their brothers and encouraged them. In some places, they experienced opposition, but it did not stop the ingathering of more Christians. New congregations were organized in many places. Jehovah blessed the efforts of his servants in the proclamation of the good news despite attempts at interference by enemies of the truth.​—Acts 11:19-21.
Traveling representatives such as the apostle Paul and his companions went among people of the nations under direction of holy spirit. They pioneered in territory of the Roman Empire and found sheeplike ones who readily accepted the good news. Believers were organized into congregations, and they were spiritually built up when told of developments in the work. Take Antioch as an example: “When they had arrived and had gathered the congregation together, they proceeded to relate the many things God had done by means of them, and that he had opened to the nations the door of faith.”​—Acts 14:27.
When it became necessary for some to travel to Jerusalem for a meeting with the apostles and older brothers in order to settle a problem, “these men continued on their way through both Phoenicia and Samaria, relating in detail the conversion of people of the nations, and they were causing great joy to all the brothers.” (Acts 15:3) They took advantage of the opportunity to encourage their brothers with the reports. Each one of us who is dedicated to Jehovah can bring joy to others by relating how Jehovah has been doing many things by means of his Witnesses. Make use of this year’s report to encourage your own family, your brothers, and interested ones among the 9,201,071 who attended the Memorial last year. Stimulate others to read the annual report and rejoice.
May we continue to share in doing what is described at Isaiah 52:7: “How comely upon the mountains are the feet of the one bringing good news, the one publishing peace, the one bringing good news of something better, the one publishing salvation, the one saying to Zion: ‘Your God has become king!’”
Keep on Sharing in the Work
Jehovah has become King! The proclamation is being made worldwide now. Kingdom subjects are increasing. The number of congregations increased last year by 2,759, making the total 57,670 worldwide. The number of new Kingdom Halls is increasing. Dedicated ones everywhere are lending support to the preaching work and preparing structures for advancing the good news. We appreciate this support being given by all in their labors of love and in their contributions.
And most important, the great crowd are coming by hundreds of thousands yearly. It is because Jehovah’s Witnesses are saying, “Come!” (Rev. 22:17) The invitation is being heard, and people everywhere are taking advantage of the opportunity to call on the name of Jehovah for salvation. (Rom. 10:13-15) And they will not be disappointed. (Rom. 10:11) Yes, this is truly good news that comforts the people. Let us all keep on saying, “Come!”
In 1989 much more will be done under the direction of the King Jesus Christ and the guidance of Jehovah’s holy spirit. Let nothing turn any of us away from our worship and service to Jehovah. Keep alert to follow Jehovah’s way with proper godly fear, and give him glory, as we “worship the One who made the heaven and the earth and sea and fountains of waters.”​—Rev. 14:7.
Please accept our warm Christian love and best wishes.
Your fellow servants,
GOVERNING BODY OF JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES

