Appreciation for “New World Translation”
AT A MOTEL
A pioneer minister in Colorado writes: “I went on a call with a sister where people have a motel. While I was using my New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures, the man noticed it and asked why it was plainer than his Bible. So I explained. He said: ‘I want one, and, by the way, I want one for every room at the motel. How much are they?’ I told him one dollar. He said: ‘Bring me a case.’”
WAITING FOR THE BUS
A pioneer sister in Louisiana entered into a discussion with a woman while waiting for a bus. “I told her I visited the homes of the people daily encouraging them to read the Bible more, because the Bible is our Guide. She said she did not read it much because the words were too hard to understand. I told her I had a modern-English translation. We got on the bus and sat together and I discussed the sermon with her. Then I read a few verses where the word charity is used, such as at 1 Corinthians 13:1, in the King James Version. I asked her what she understood that word to mean. She spoke of donations. I showed her from the New World Translation that the word really meant love. She asked how much the Bible cost. I said $1. She gave her name and address so I could deliver it to her house. To a different person I showed the ‘Table of the Books of the Bible,’ where one can learn who wrote each book, when and where. He took a copy. So by using the various suggestions of the Society, I placed 17 Bibles.”
IN OFTEN-COVERED TERRITORY
A report from a congregation in Texas tells about their ministerial work on December 25, last year: “Eighteen assembled at the Kingdom Hall, some of whom were able to spend a full day in service. Thirty-one Bibles were placed! What kind of territory? Territory that has been covered at least once each month and often once every three weeks! One householder commented: ‘Several in my Sunday-school class have a copy of that Bible, and I have been looking in all the stores for one. I’m glad you came.’”
TO THOSE GOING TO CHURCH
A congregation report from east Texas tells how the people were amazed at the low price of $1 for the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures. What about those householders getting ready for church? A short presentation of the Bible was made, which “sent many to church with the New World Translation. In one small town four persons went to one church possessing their green Bibles.”
AT HIS PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT
From South Carolina comes this experience: “I work for a large automobile company and I usually keep a copy of the New World Translation in my desk drawer. One day a salesman, looking in my drawer, saw the Bible and began to thumb through it. It interested him very much, so he came to me and asked if he could get a copy. In turn, he put the Bible in his desk drawer. Another salesman came along and looked in his desk drawer and was greatly interested in the Bible. He came to me and wanted to know if he could get a copy also. This circle continued, and I was able to place seven Bibles in the office. Also, I offered the Bible to my manager. He said that he liked the King James Version and that he was afraid to try something new because he liked the poetic expressions of that version. However, he told me that he would take a copy home and look at it and either bring me the Bible back the next day or a dollar. The next day he came in without the Bible and had $2. He wanted another copy. In the shop I placed a Bible with the service manager. He was extremely interested in this modern-language translation, so he gathered several mechanics and even some customers together and asked me to demonstrate the Bible to them, making comparisons between the King James Version and the New World Translation. This I did, and among the mechanics and the customers I was able to place twelve additional Bibles, bringing the total for the month to twenty eight.”

