Dwelling All Our Days in Jehovah’s House
“ONE thing I have asked from Jehovah—it is what I shall look for, that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the pleasantness of Jehovah and to look with appreciation upon his temple.” What keen appreciation of Jehovah, of His house and of His worship David had! What a fine example he set for all servants of Jehovah today!—Ps. 27:4.a
In David’s day Jehovah’s house was the tabernacle originally constructed in the wilderness. However, it was termed a temple here by David and by Samuel, at 1 Samuel 1:9, because it was indeed Jehovah’s glorious palace, which is the literal meaning of the Hebrew word heykhal, here rendered “temple.” Not being of the tribe of Levi, David could not, of course, literally dwell at Jehovah’s house or temple. But he could be at that place on every suitable occasion to join with his fellow Israelites in the worship of their God Jehovah.
After the day of Pentecost Jehovah no longer recognized that literal house in Jerusalem. From then on the Greater Solomon, Jesus Christ, began building a spiritual house or temple, and for many centuries worship at that temple was limited to “the congregation of the first-born who have been enrolled in the heavens.” Today, however, the prophecy of Isaiah regarding that house in a special way is being fulfilled: “My own house will be called even a house of prayer for all the peoples.”—Heb. 12:23; Isa. 56:7.
The prayer of David at Psalm 27:4 should be the prayer of each one of God’s servants today. How does one prove that this prayer does indeed express the sentiments of his heart? First of all by dedicating himself to Jehovah to do his will.—Ps. 40:7, 8.
But that step marks only the beginning. One shows that he has asked Jehovah for this grand blessing of dwelling at his house all the days of his life by taking advantage of all opportunities to assemble with Jehovah’s congregation. That means he will put forth diligent efforts to attend all congregational meetings not being easily discouraged because of much and arduous travel, because of bad weather or because it may displease worldly relatives or acquaintances.
Additionally, one proves that David’s words are his sentiments by going from house to house inviting men of goodwill likewise to dwell at Jehovah’s house.—Isa. 2:3.
In all such ways Jehovah’s servants prove that the sentiments of David’s prayer are indeed theirs. Thereby they will get to behold, to know and to feel the pleasantness of Jehovah, just what a loving and glorious God he truly is.
[Footnotes]
For details see The Watchtower, December 15, 1961.

