From Our Readers
Hurricane Pauline  It always makes me happy when I am reminded that I am part of an organization that really cares about people. Thank you for the excellent article “Two Faces of a Disaster.” (October 8, 1998) How satisfying it is to know that others recognize that Jehovah’s Witnesses are “organized and honest”!
D. F. S., Brazil
Solitude  The article “The Bible’s Viewpoint: The Value of Solitude” (October 8, 1998) seemed to have my name on it. Solitude is something necessary in order for me to keep doing well spiritually and emotionally. However, I will remember the point that solitude is “a rewarding place to visit but a dangerous place in which to remain.”
L. G., United States
Vatican and Holocaust  Over the years, Witnesses have come to my home, and we have had a pleasant time. However, I found your article “The Catholic Church and the Holocaust” (October 22, 1998) to be offensive. Pope Pius XII was a saintly man who did all that he could to assist Jews, and thousands were saved by his efforts!
J. P., United States
Our intent was not to offend Catholic readers but to give an accurate report on the controversy over the Vatican document “We Remember: A Reflection on the Shoah.” Statements made in the article were the views of respected historians, writers, and jurists—some of whom are Roman Catholics themselves. Obviously, any role the Vatican might have played in saving lives is commendable. Still, it is a fact that the pope failed to speak out publicly against the Nazi regime. Doing so might well have saved millions of lives.—ED.
Loving One Another  The series “Will All People Ever Love One Another?” (October 22, 1998) was excellent! It has helped me to restrain a powerful urge I sometimes have to nurture resentment and hatred. Many thanks! I hope that the encouragement I receive from your publications will help me to become a servant of Jehovah God.
G. C., Italy
Courageous Missionaries  After reading the article “We Live No Longer for Ourselves” (October 22, 1998), I just had to say thank you for such faith-strengthening information. Here in Britain we face a lot of apathy. But this is nothing compared with what Jack and Linda Johansson went through. The article really touched my heart and made me grateful for what I have.
L. J., England
My wife and I have been full-time ministers for some years now, and we know that adapting to a new assignment can be a real challenge. The Johanssons were frank in expressing how they felt when they moved. Their story showed us that our feelings are not unique and that we should continue relying on Jehovah.
S. E. C., Brazil
Making the Truth One’s Own  I am 12 years old, and I enjoyed the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Make the Truth My Own?” (October 22, 1998) Now that school has started, it is a bit more difficult to prepare for Christian meetings. But I have to buy out time. I think that this article is going to help many young people to develop affection for Jehovah and deep roots in the truth.
C. S., Portugal
A year ago I was asking myself the same questions about the truth. I wasn’t sure whether I really loved the truth or was in it because of my family. Then I did as you encouraged—I proved it to myself by doing Bible research. I am now happy to say that the truth is my own. I look forward to being a full-time evangelizer!
H. N., United States

