Made for a Grand Purpose
AS NOTED earlier, people have long looked skyward and wondered, ‘Why is it all here?’ A talented musician long ago sang appreciatively: “The heavens are declaring the glory of God; and of the work of his hands the expanse is telling.”—Psalm 19:1.
Our gorgeous earth brings a similar response. For example, after a spaceflight, astronaut Charles M. Duke, Jr., exclaimed: “The earth is the most beautiful sight in space, with all its colors of land, seas, and clouds.” He added: “Looking at it against the blackness of space was almost a religious experience.”
What is your response when you look at a bright, star-filled sky? Or when you view a scene on earth of spectacular natural beauty? Do you ever wonder how it came to be, or why?
Making Known His Purpose
Jehovah proposed a question to the man Job: “Where did you happen to be when I founded the earth?” (Job 38:4) The question served to humble Job, for he, of course, did not exist at that time. Yet, long before the time of Job, God created sons in his likeness—spirit persons, angels. (Psalm 104:4, 5) So continuing his questioning of Job about the earth, God asked: “Who laid its cornerstone, when [angels] joyfully cried out together, and all the sons of God began shouting in applause?”—Job 38:6, 7.
Why was there such gladness among the angels at the founding of the earth? Because they evidently knew that the earth was special among God’s material creations. Perhaps God even gave the angels some preview of his glorious purpose respecting the earth. Later, Jehovah revealed to mankind that he “did not create [the earth] simply for nothing, [but] formed it even to be inhabited,” yes, to be lived upon and enjoyed by humans, even forever.—Isaiah 45:18.
After creating man and woman, Jehovah made known his purpose regarding the earth when he instructed the first couple: “Be fruitful and become many and fill the earth and subdue it, and have in subjection the fish of the sea and the flying creatures of the heavens and every living creature that is moving upon the earth.” (Genesis 1:28) God created the human pair with the miraculous powers to produce children, and his purpose was that the entire earth be filled with perfect people reflecting the good qualities of their Creator.
True, people now live practically everywhere on earth, but they are not inhabiting it in a way that brings credit to their Creator. Humans are in a sick, dying condition, and they do not properly care for the earth or its animal creations. Jehovah created humans perfect, and his purpose was, in the course of time, to have the entire earth brought under the control of a righteous human family all living together forever in an earthly paradise.
We can be confident that this purpose will be fulfilled. Why? Because of Jehovah’s promise that what he purposes he “shall also do.” (Isaiah 46:11; 55:11) His Word gives the assurance: “The righteous themselves will possess the earth, and they will reside forever upon it.” (Psalm 37:29; Revelation 21:3, 4) Many may recall that God’s Son, Jesus Christ, promised the repentant wrongdoer who died alongside him: “You will be with me in Paradise.” (Luke 23:43) How will that come about?
How God’s Purpose Will Be Fulfilled
When Christ fully asserts his rulership over the earth, that wrongdoer will be resurrected to life on earth under the long-prayed-for heavenly rulership. (Psalm 72:1, 5-8; Matthew 6:9, 10; John 18:36, 37; Acts 24:15) However, before the resurrection of the dead occurs, the earth will be cleansed of all those who refuse to worship God. The Bible promises: “The God of heaven will set up a kingdom that will never be brought to ruin.” And it adds: “It will crush and put an end to all these kingdoms, and it itself will stand to times indefinite.”—Daniel 2:44.
Surely, the all-wise Creator of our grand universe can fulfill his purpose to have this earth filled with people who reflect his good qualities! (Genesis 1:27) So that humans could have opportunity to learn how God will accomplish this, he provided a book that people everywhere can read.a Note how a man in Dayton, Ohio, U.S.A., described it:
“I will never finish reading this book in my lifetime. It begins by having a beautiful home destroyed by rebellion. Tragedy, disaster, sorrow, murder, and death follow. As the family multiplies, the plunge into despair and darkness accelerates. Centuries roll by, nations rise and fall, thousands of characters pass in review, every human emotion from stark, raw hate to a martyr’s love is encountered. Hope, beginning as a faint spark, grows to absolute assurance. A perfect government is to reestablish the beautiful home. Its ruler is the King, Christ Jesus. The government, the Kingdom of God. The family, the human race. The book is the Bible!”
We encourage you to examine this most important book, the Bible. In addition, we invite you to examine in greater detail evidence that this universe and its many features did not develop simply by chance. You will find a scholarly examination of this matter in the book Is There a Creator Who Cares About You? On page 32 of this magazine, you can learn how to receive a copy.
[Footnote]
See A Book for All People, published by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society of New York, Inc.
[Picture on page 10]
“The most beautiful sight in space”
[Credit Line]
NASA photo

