Get a Haircut or Lose Your Job!
IN THE highly competitive business world more and more reputable companies are giving their employees what amounts to an ultimatum: ‘Shape up in appearance or ship out!’
For example: The National Cash Register Company, an international concern with more than two hundred and fifty sales offices in the United States, has sent out an executive order entitled “NCR Corporate Image.” It says in part: “Many customers are adverse to doing business with a company whose representatives are not well groomed. As competitive and difficult as it is to secure new business today, we can ill afford to repel customers for any reason.” The code for the company’s male employees is then set out:
“Hair will be neatly trimmed and combed. Length of the hair must terminate above the collar, and not extend over the ears. Sideburns will extend no lower than the ear lobe, and will not flare out or widen at the lower ends in excess of 1-1/4 inches. Small and neatly trimmed moustaches are acceptable. Handle bar, Fu-Man-Chu, brush type moustaches and beards are not acceptable. Business suits and shirts must be of the dress type, with tie. Balance of clothing is to be neat and clean so as to present a well-groomed, business-like appearance.”
The NCR directive also stipulates proper dress and attire for their female employees.
It is interesting to note in this connection, that the California Unemployment Insurance Appeals Board recently handed down a ruling stipulating that in an area where employers generally refuse to hire men with long hair, then such persons are not eligible for unemployment benefits. Also, in January of this year the U.S. Supreme Court declared that the constitutional rights of a high-school student were not violated when a school board required that he cut his long hair.
Interestingly, the matter of suitable grooming and appearance, including that of one’s hair, is commented on in the Bible in connection with Christian ministers. Under inspiration the apostle Paul recommended “modesty and soundness of mind” in regard to apparel and pointed out that uncommonly long hair would be a “dishonor” to a man. (1 Tim. 2:9; 1 Cor. 11:14, 15) He also stressed that one’s course could have an effect on others for good or for bad. So he set forth the mature view for ministers of God in the comment: “In no way are we giving any cause for stumbling, that our ministry might not be found fault with; but in every way we recommend ourselves as God’s ministers.”​—2 Cor. 6:3, 4.

