Do You Remember?
Have you read the recent issues of The Watchtower carefully? If so, you should recognize these important points. Check yourself.
● Why was Jesus courageous in the face of those who sought his life?
His confidence was in Jehovah God, the Source of life.—P. 6.a
● Is it right to keep on preaching the Bible in a land where the rulers forbid it, perhaps because they have a state church?
Yes. The apostles, faced with such a proscription on the part of Jewish rulers in the first century, said: “We must obey God as ruler rather than men.”—Pp. 13, 14.
● Who benefit from Christ’s ransom now?
All who exercise faith in it. Those of his anointed followers are declared righteous by God, which means that he grants them the right to human life. The “other sheep” too enjoy a righteous standing before God; he forgives their sins, though not granting them the right to life at this time.—Pp. 38, 40.
● How has Jesus come out of Bethlehem, as foretold at Micah 5:2?
Over nineteen centuries ago he was born there. Additionally, it is of interest to note that Bethlehem means “House of Bread,” or “Bread Supply.” Jesus likened his own flesh to bread, and on his ascension to heaven he presented the value of his human sacrifice on behalf of mankind. So now, having been installed as King in 1914, he comes forth from what might be called a heavenly House of Bread (Bread Supply) in that what sustains men for everlasting life is administered by him from heaven.—Pp. 42, 45.
● How are Christ’s anointed followers “like dew from Jehovah” and “like a lion”?
Like dew, they are a blessing from Jehovah to men of goodwill. And like a lion, since 1919 they have fearlessly carried on their work among the nations, undaunted by opposition.—Pp. 53-55.
● What are the senses of the four main Hebrew words for “man”?
Ish means simply man; adám means human or earthling; enósh means weak or mortal; and geber means a physically strong or able-bodied man.—P. 56.
● How can reasonableness be shown in the giving of instructions or counsel?
Rather than commanding, we can entreat. Rather than being arbitrary and inflexible, we can explain and consider problems raised.—P. 80.
● How does a reasonable person react when corrected in an error?
He is ready to listen, willing to change his way if error is proved, thankful to be corrected before the error grows to bigger proportions.—P. 82.
● Why are certain words and expressions found in the King James Version Bible missing from the New World Translation?
Because they appeared in the Greek-language text used in preparation of the King James Version, but they do not appear in the Westcott and Hort Greek text, which is based on an exhaustive comparison of ancient manuscripts and which text is the basis for the Christian Greek Scriptures in the New World Translation.—Pp. 88, 91.
● How can one use riches to make friends with God?
God’s favor cannot be bought. But if we are moved by love to use our resources to glorify him, expending both ourselves and our possessions to advance his worship, this is well pleasing to him.—P. 109.
● What was foreshadowed by the deliverance of the Israelite firstborn in Egypt? by the deliverance of Israel and of the “mixed company” through the Red Sea?
The firstborn pictured the members of Christ’s spirit-begotten congregation, who, while still in the world, have been delivered out of its spiritual darkness, through faith in Christ, the antitypical passover lamb. At the Red Sea was pictured the deliverance through Armageddon of those on earth who worship Jehovah.—Pp. 139, 140.
● What is pictured by the group of horsemen of Revelation 6:1-8?
That Christ’s presence, as represented by the first horseman, is associated with war, famine and pestilence, filling the common grave of mankind; and these are the things pictured by the other horsemen.—P. 152.
● What lesson did God teach when he asked Job what he knew about the founding of the earth, control of the sea, the dawn, hail, rain and ice?
It was a lesson in man’s littleness contrasted with Jehovah’s greatness.—P. 168.
● Why is it important to keep proving what we are?
Because all of us were born in sin, we live in an immoral world, and, even if we know God’s requirements, overconfidence or indifference on our part can cause us to stray from the pathway of life.—P. 170.
● Is Christianity a “personal thing”?
Yes, indeed. It calls for personal decisions and personal conviction. But it must not be hid from others, because there is the personal obligation to speak about one’s faith to fellow believers and to those of different beliefs.—Pp. 197-199.
● In what way can a believing wife often do the most good toward winning her unbelieving husband to the truth?
By her godly subjection to her husband, by her conduct characterized by a quiet and mild spirit, coupled with faithfulness to God, she may do more than by what she says to help him to see the truth.—P. 211.
● What comes after Christendom’s end?
God’s righteous new world in which true Christians will forever carry on pure worship.—P. 240.
[Footnotes]
All page references are to The Watchtower for 1962.

