Governing Body Adjustments
JEHOVAH has been blessing his people with noteworthy expansion of the Kingdom publisher ranks throughout the world. Especially has this been so following the adjustment of the organizational arrangement as outlined in the book Organization for Kingdom-preaching and Disciple-making, which became effective in 1972.​—Isa. 60:17.
It is evident, too, that we are approaching a climactic point in the history of mankind. Jehovah’s witnesses may therefore expect that opposition will continue to arise in many places. (Matt. 24:9) As we keep “close in mind the presence of the day of Jehovah,” it is anticipated that many more persons will take their stand for God’s kingdom under Christ, if that be Jehovah’s will.​—2 Pet. 3:12.
In view of this, the time seems appropriate to make further adjustments so that God’s people will be in a better position to care for the many new ones now in their midst and the further increase they trust that Jehovah may yet give in the near future. (Isa. 60:8, 22) These are matters to which the Governing Body of Jehovah’s witnesses has given prayerful attention.
To facilitate its work, six committees of the Governing Body have now been formed. Each will have its chairman, who will serve for a period of one year. These committees are supervisory in nature and it is not intended that they will handle all the details and routine work. The various corporations that have been serving the Kingdom interests so well until now will, of course, continue to fulfill their important role as legal agencies of Jehovah’s witnesses, their Governing Body and its committees.
These six committees, which began functioning on January 1, 1976, are as follows: Service Committee; Writing Committee; Publishing Committee; Teaching Committee; Personnel Committee; Chairman’s Committee.
As regards our branches throughout the world, a Branch Committee of three or more members appointed by the Governing Body will administer the organizational arrangements for each branch. These committees will also have a chairman who will serve for one year.
It seems clear that Jehovah’s direction is manifest in the formulation of these recent adjustments. Doubtless, too, his spirit will move all of us to give the fullest support and cooperation as these arrangements are implemented. Surely this is the time to keep moving ahead with the expansion of the Kingdom-preaching and disciple-making work. In this we look to Jehovah for his continued blessing on all that is yet to be done under the leadership of Christ Jesus.​—Matt. 28:19, 20.

