Gilead Missionaries​—Uniquely Different!
JEHOVAH’S WITNESSES are different! This was repeatedly emphasized at the graduation ceremonies of the 75th class of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead, held on Sunday, September 11. An audience of 2,023 listened attentively as each speaker urged the graduating missionaries to continue in their unique position as loyal representatives of Jehovah God.
In his introductory remarks, chairman Karl F. Klein made it clear that Jehovah’s Witnesses really are different. “Very few religious organizations in the United States send out missionaries the way Jesus said we should,” he stated. (Matthew 28:19, 20) And those few that send out missionaries, he said, usually have them concentrate on secular, economic and social issues, or they become political activists or medical missionaries. “The very few that do preach,” said Klein, “have nothing to say about the importance of Jehovah’s name or about the Kingdom good news.” “But there is no question that all of Jehovah’s Witnesses are taught to preach the Kingdom of God,” he added, “and this is especially taught in Gilead missionary school.”
L. A. Swingle, another member of the Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses, pointed out how beautiful the class was​—especially in a spiritual sense. “In our eyes and in Jehovah’s eyes,” Brother Swingle told the students, “you are a beautiful group of Witnesses, as you are completing your course here and accepting an assignment to go to the far corners of the earth.”
The students also received parting counsel from their instructors. Noting that Isaiah likened himself to a polished arrow at Isaiah 49:2, U. V. Glass reminded the students that they had been properly trained and prepared, and they could be a formidable weapon in the hands of the Warrior-King, Jesus Christ. Instructor J. Redford urged the class: “Live up to your good name​—Gilead graduate—​by giving a heap of witness in the countries to which you are being sent.”
Governing Body member C. W. Barber impressed the students with the need to take their assignments seriously. Speaker R. Wheelock pointed out the success that previous missionaries have had in following the example of Jesus Christ.
Likening the graduates to the ancient Gibeonites who were determined to serve Jehovah, L. K. Greenlees, also a member of the Governing Body, advised: ‘Resolve to be like those Gibeonites. Cherish your assignment and give it your most industrious care.’
The morning’s program was capped by the address of F. W. Franz, president of both the Watch Tower Society and Gilead School. Speaking on the subject “A Time to Shine,” he drew attention to the fact that the students had already been shining as pioneer ministers in the field of witnessing. “By means of their Gilead training,” he said, “they are better equipped, more so than ever before, to go forth and let their light shine and show how powerful an agency God is using in the form of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.” As the students then received their diplomas there was hearty applause.
The afternoon program featured the students. After answering the questions in The Watchtower study, they presented a musical program with the theme “Sing Praises to Jehovah in All the Earth.” Outlining the history of the music used by Jehovah’s Witnesses in the past hundred years, it showed how they indeed have been different from the world​—even in the melodies and lyrics used.
The students’ enactment of a Bible-based drama concluded the program. Full of joy to be used by Jehovah in this special way, and with a prayer of thanks and petition for Jehovah’s blessing to be upon them, the 38 students departed​—eager to go to the 17 lands to which they are being sent.

