Announcements
● Literature offer for August: One of the following 32-page magazine-size brochures may be offered for a contribution of 30¢: Enjoy Life on Earth Forever!, “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, and The Government That Will Bring Paradise. September: Life​—How Did It Get Here? By Evolution or by Creation? for a contribution of $2.50. October: One-year subscription for Awake! or The Watchtower or both, for contribution of $5.00 each. November: New World Translation and “Let Your Kingdom Come” for a contribution of $4.50.
● During the week of August 31 to September 5, 1987, the Society will be taking an inventory of all literature on hand in Brooklyn. Because of this inventory, no congregation literature orders will be processed for shipment or for pickup during that week.
● Each congregation will receive three Literature Inventory forms and should take an actual count of campaign literature. Please fill out the forms completely and send the original to us no later than September 6, 1987. Keep a carbon copy for your files. We are sending a third copy for use as a work sheet.
● 1988 Calendar of Jehovah’s Witnesses: Publishers and pioneers, please order your calendars through your congregation. Congregations should begin collecting requests for these calendars now. Then on September 1, 1987, or as soon as possible thereafter, send this order to the Society, using the regular Literature Order form (S-14). Calendars in other languages should be listed under “Other Language Publications,” showing the quantity for each language separately as well as the year 1988. The calendars will be available in Chinese, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Portuguese, Spanish, and Swedish. Calendars are controlled stock items and will be charged to the literature account at $1.00 each, which is the rate for publishers, pioneers, and the public. Do not send the remittance with the order. (See the Cost List, paragraphs 23-25.) Until the calendars are available and shipments are made, these will appear as “Back Ordered” on congregation invoices.
● Publishers should submit personal requests for literature to the congregation literature servant rather than ordering them directly from the Society. The presiding overseer should arrange for an announcement each month before the congregation literature order is sent to the Society so that all interested in obtaining personal literature items may advise the brother handling literature in time. (Literature servants, please see the Cost List, paragraph 10.)
● New Publications Available:
You Can Live Forever in Paradise on Earth (Small size)​—Thai
“Look! I Am Making All Things New” (Brochure)​—Indonesian, Papiamento
The Government That Will Bring Paradise​—Efik
● New Cassette Recordings Available:
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, The Song of Solomon (set of three; congregation and public: $4.50; pioneers: $3.75)​—Spanish
My Book of Bible Stories (set of four in album; congregation and public: $8.00; pioneers: $6.00)​—Norwegian

