Be Spiritually Prepared for School
1 With the new school year close at hand, parents, elders, and youths should all give serious thought to the challenges that Christian youths will encounter. What will help them to get the most out of their educational opportunities while setting a fine example of godly conduct and maintaining Christian integrity?
2 When faced with a term of secular education, Daniel and his three teenage companions made diligent preparation. Their ‘determination in heart’ to maintain integrity brought them Jehovah’s favor and blessing. Similar steadfast determination to remain loyal to Jehovah during this coming school year will bring rich rewards to Christian youths today.​—Dan. 1:8, 17; Prov. 10:22.
REVIEW SCHOOL BROCHURE
3 Parents play a key role in helping children to be spiritually prepared for the new school year. Motivated by love, parents should take the initiative and the time necessary to review the School brochure thoroughly with their children. Make definite arrangements to get a copy into the hands of classroom teachers as well as other school officials. Some youths can be encouraged personally to present the brochure to their teachers. However, parents should rehearse with them not only what to say but also how to say it. When situations arise at school, parents and children should review appropriate sections of this brochure before making final decisions. (Phil. 1:10) Parents can do much to bring honor to Jehovah’s name by teaching their children how to take a firm stand for the truth and then helping school authorities to understand our Christian position.
4 Elders also can help young ones to be well prepared spiritually. Be sure the congregation has a sufficient supply of School brochures on hand. Congregation Book Study conductors can inquire of parents and youths to see if some assistance is needed. Many elders express ongoing interest in the Christian conduct and scholastic grades of young ones, and in this way they are able to offer practical help as needed. Such heartfelt concern by the older men of the congregation gives moral support and can be “a strengthening aid” to young ones.​—Col. 4:11, 12.
5 Youths, are you prepared to uphold Christian principles in school? Your desire and ability to do so will benefit not only yourself and any other Witness youths who are presently in your school but also those who will follow you in years to come. Will you be able to resist the peer pressure exerted to induce you to engage in wrong conduct? Can you courageously maintain Christian neutrality, even in the face of ridicule? Are you prepared to make good use of the School brochure and the Reasoning book to explain your Bible-based view of holidays and worldly celebrations? Will extracurricular activities and recreational pursuits lure you into the snare of bad association? Whether you have read and studied the School brochure previously or not, review it now and ‘determine in your heart’ the course you will follow. If you do this, your actions will be consistent with the fine conduct of other devoted Witnesses in school.
6 May parents and youths alike be spiritually prepared to apply the information in the School brochure during the coming school year, and may Jehovah bless your faithfulness in this regard.

