Do the Work of an Evangelizer
1 Paul encouraged Timothy to keep his senses in all things, do the work of an evangelizer, and fully accomplish his ministry. (2 Tim. 4:5) Whether young or old, new in the truth or well-experienced in the preaching work, we too want to share fully in the evangelizing work.
2 While declaring the good news during the month of August, we will offer the Society’s recent brochures: The Divine Name That Will Endure Forever, The Government That Will Bring Paradise, Enjoy Life on Earth Forever! and “Look! I Am Making All Things New.” If we take time to become familiar with these four brochures, we should be able to present them effectively to the people in our territory.
HOW TO USE THE BROCHURES
3 The Divine Name brochure: If you are using the current Topic for Conversation, you can easily tie in John 17:3 with the question, What is the name of the only true God? After asking that question, you might say, “John 17:3 speaks of two persons. One is named Jesus, but the other is referred to only by the title “God.” Now, notice what is stated in this brochure on page 4, . . . here under the subheading ‘What Is God’s Name?’” You can then read the paragraph following the subheading and refer to Psalm 83:18 where Jehovah’s name appears. After that, you may turn to pages 8 and 9 in the brochure and show the various ways the divine name is translated into different languages, as well as how it looks in Hebrew. Then you can offer the householder this informative brochure for 30¢.
4 The Government brochure: After you read John 17:3 and point out that knowledge of God and of Jesus means everlasting life, ask the householder if he has given thought to enjoying life on earth forever. Allow for a response. Then turn to page 3 of the brochure and read a portion of the model prayer, emphasizing that God’s will is to be done on earth. Thereafter, read the rest of paragraph 1 showing that the Kingdom is the means God will use to solve the problems that make life so difficult today. At this point the brochure could be offered. Or you may wish to turn to pages 28 and 29, show some of the blessings that God’s Kingdom government will bring to mankind, and then offer the brochure for 30¢.
5 The Life on Earth brochure: When offering this brochure, the regular Topic for Conversation can be used, or you may wish to use a simplified presentation. After introducing yourself, ask the householder if he thinks the day will ever come when there will be plenty of food for everyone. Will there be a time when all families of the earth will have their own home and be able to live in peace and happiness? After the householder’s reply, turn to illustration 47 in the brochure. Explain the wonderful conditions depicted there and show how these will soon prevail here on earth. If you have the opportunity, invite the householder to consider the scriptures at illustration 47. You can tell him that this brochure shows what we must do in order to enjoy life on earth forever. Offer a copy for 30¢.
6 The “Look!” brochure: Throughout the world there are millions of people who do not recognize the Bible as the inspired Word of God. This brochure is designed to help such persons. After introducing yourself, ask the householder if he knows that the Bible is the only religious book that truly explains Paradise. Allow for his reply. Then invite him to read Revelation 21:4 with you and see what Paradise will be like. Consider paragraph 1 on page 3 along with the picture on the cover. Invite the householder to accept this brochure for 30¢ and learn more about Paradise.
7 During August all can offer brochures as we share in the evangelizing work. Parents can help their children prepare a simple presentation. New ones can start out by selecting a presentation that is brief and with which they feel comfortable. May we zealously do the work of evangelizers, reaching as many people as possible with the satisfying information published in the brochures.​—1 Tim. 2:3, 4.

