Meetings to Help Us Make Disciples
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 2
Song 26
10 min: Local announcements and appropriate Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Encourage all to share in magazine witnessing on second Saturday of August. Suggest appropriate presentations for current magazines.
20 min: “Do the Work of an Evangelizer.” Question-and-answer discussion. Encourage brothers to keep accurate house-to-house record of placements and interest shown. Have purpose of calling back and endeavoring to start studies. Remind brothers about successful results enjoyed last August when brochures were featured. Briefly demonstrate suggested presentation of each brochure when corresponding paragraphs are considered. Remind publishers that brochure placements are to be counted as booklets.
15 min: “What Are Your Spiritual Goals for the Future?” Talk by elder based on Our Ministry book subheading beginning on page 116. This should be presented in a warm, encouraging manner.
Song 51 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 9
Song 37
10 min: Local announcements, “Magazine Price Increase,” and accounts report. Encourage all to share in field service this weekend.
25 min: “Use the Index to Grow Spiritually.” Question-and-answer discussion of article, followed by demonstration of newer one approaching experienced brother and asking how to overcome the common objection, “I’m busy.” Experienced brother covers “How to Find Information” section starting on page 5 of Index. Refers to pages 7 and 8. To answer question, they turn to main heading “Field Ministry” and go to “objections” on page 309. They look down the column to “busy.” Briefly comment on points found in Reasoning book, pages 19 and 20 and page 7 of May 1985 Our Kingdom Ministry.
10 min: “New Circuit Assembly Program.” Enthusiastic talk about new circuit assembly program starting in September.
Song 203 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 16
Song 127
10 min: Local announcements and consideration of the day’s text. Encourage family participation in magazine activity on fourth Saturday.
20 min: “Be Spiritually Prepared for School.” Question-and-answer consideration of article. When considering paragraph 5, have two demonstrations. In first demonstration, have parent of small child present brochure to school principal. In second demonstration, have teenager present a copy to teacher. Discuss some of the specific problems that youths must deal with in school. As time permits, audience can relate interesting experiences enjoyed in talking with school officials.
15 min: “Helping a Child to Grow in Godly Wisdom.” Elder discusses February 15, 1987, Watchtower article with a married couple and a single parent. Make local application.
Song 10 and concluding prayer.
WEEK STARTING AUGUST 23
Song 130
10 min: Local announcements and Theocratic News.
20 min: “Presenting the Good News​—With Good Teaching Methods.” Question-and-answer discussion. Highlight the need to teach when preaching the good news. When discussing paragraph 3, suggest questions that would stimulate conversation with local householders. Encourage all to learn how to use questions appropriately, and how to emphasize specific points when reading scriptures.
15 min: Local needs or “Christian Women​—Maintaining Integrity in the Workplace.” Talk based on article in March 15, 1987, Watchtower.
Song 134 and concluding prayer.

