New Circuit Assembly Program
1 What a grand privilege it is for us to serve Jehovah! There is no better way of life. Do we not say to Jehovah, as did the faithful sons of Korah: “A day in your courtyards is better than a thousand elsewhere”? (Ps. 84:10) We will rejoice, then, in the circuit assembly program for the 1988 service year, starting in September, which emphasizes the theme “The Excelling Value of Serving Jehovah.”​—Phil. 3:7, 8.
2 The purpose of the program is to help us appreciate more fully the unique privilege of serving Jehovah at this particular time. Jesus Christ set the perfect example of single-minded service to God. Christians must not only acquire his mental attitude but also maintain it. (Phil. 2:5-8) The circuit assembly program will help us to analyze our individual service to God, to identify the positive qualities that are so vital to wholehearted worship, and to see wherein we can make progress.
3 We have often heard the expression “pioneer spirit.” What is the pioneer spirit? How can all of Jehovah’s servants show they have it? These and other similar questions will be answered. Scriptural counsel will be provided on how we should view opposition to our ministry and how we can cope with it. Youths will receive encouragement and will be helped to examine their sense of values in matters related to sports, motion pictures, and television programs. In addition, the many opportunities for wholehearted service open to older persons will be discussed along with a consideration of what some of them are actually doing.​—Isa. 48:17, 18.
4 A portion of the assembly program will give specific attention to family matters. It is entitled “Building Up a Household That Serves Jehovah.” The need for discernment and good communication within the family will be discussed and demonstrated. Questions about secular education for children in Christian households will receive attention.
5 This assembly program deals with problems that must be faced now. Answers that are workable will be presented realistically. We should all make definite plans to attend this circuit assembly and pay more than the usual attention to the things we hear. (Heb. 2:1) The result will be a fuller realization of the excelling value of being a servant of our Grand Creator, Jehovah.

