Presenting the Good News​—With Good Teaching Methods
1 An important goal in preaching the good news is to make disciples. To this end, we need to teach interested ones to observe the things Jesus commanded us. (Matt. 28:19, 20) The apostles set a fine example in this regard as “every day in the temple and from house to house they continued without letup teaching.” (Acts 5:42) Paul did the same in his ministry. (Acts 18:11; 20:20) We want to imitate the fine example of these faithful teachers of the good news.​—1 Cor. 11:1.
2 Two excellent teaching methods used effectively by Jesus and his apostles were: (1) the use of questions, and (2) emphasizing specific points when we read or quote the Scriptures. How can we use these methods in our house-to-house work and when conducting Bible studies?
FROM HOUSE TO HOUSE
3 When we have an opportunity to speak with a householder, it is good to get his viewpoint on the subject so that our presentation can be tailored to meet his particular needs. Appropriate viewpoint questions can be helpful in doing this. The householder’s answers to questions relative to present world conditions can provide us with useful information for our discussion. In fact, questions that invite the householder to comment have made some householders more inclined to listen to what we have to say.
4 But how can we know what questions to ask? As part of our field service preparation, it is good to take a few minutes to think about the kind of people in the territory, their general opinions, and matters that concern them. Then think of viewpoint questions that could be asked to draw them into a conversation.​—See School Guidebook, pages 51-2.
5 Our house-to-house ministry also provides the opportunity to read scriptures that can convey God’s thoughts on a specific subject. How we read the scriptures is important. We want the listeners to remember the specific point we are teaching. To do this, we need to use proper emphasis and stress specific words. This can be done by reading key words with more intensity or volume, or by calling attention to what we are going to read next. Also, after reading the text, we may want to repeat key words in order to give further emphasis to a point.​—See School Guidebook, pages 126-7.
AT BIBLE STUDIES
6 The use of questions is vital when conducting Bible studies. Well-worded questions can make the student think and can help him to a clearer understanding of the truth. Thus, well-placed supplementary questions not found in the publication being studied may be asked. On page 51 in the School Guidebook there are helpful suggestions that you may wish to review from time to time.
7 Making good use of the Bible is essential. Even though some scriptures may be quoted in the publications, at times it may be beneficial to have the student read directly from the Bible. Make sure the key words are properly emphasized so that the Bible student will appreciate why the scripture is quoted and will understand its application.
8 May our effective use of questions and proper emphasis in reading scriptures help us to continue making disciples in harmony with Jesus’ command.​—Matt. 28:19.

