Use the “Index” to Grow Spiritually
1 From 1930 to 1985 the Society produced an abundant variety of Bible study aids that together comprise a unique library of indispensable information. This spiritual food has been provided progressively as “food at the proper time” to help sincere people to “go on growing in the . . . knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.” (Matt. 24:45; 2 Pet. 3:18) Now we have the Watch Tower Publications Index 1930-1985 that makes it relatively easy for us to locate specific points of information. It can aid us greatly in our endeavors to make further spiritual advancement.​—Prov. 4:18; 9:9.
2 Knowing how to use the Index will facilitate finding information needed for preparing talks, field service presentations, reports, and compositions, or for answering questions related to our Christian faith. This can be of immense value in our personal and family study, in preparing for Christian meetings, and for preaching and teaching the good news to others. (Col. 4:6) We need to acquaint ourselves with its various features.
FEATURES
3 A helpful innovation in this new Index is that regular features of The Watchtower and Awake! have been indexed under their respective headings, such as “Questions From Readers,” “Young People Ask . . . ,” and “The Bible’s Viewpoint.” Also, “Question Box” items from Our Kingdom Ministry have been listed separately under that heading. In this way specific information is made readily accessible to fill the particular needs of parents, overseers, and publishers, or to facilitate personal Bible study and research.
4 Another fine feature of this Index is the section under “Dates,” with its subheadings “B.C.E.,” “C.E.,” and “Clarification of Beliefs.” Also, the scripture index with its references to Aid to Bible Understanding has been revised so as to list only those references that provide meaningful explanations about the verses cited.
5 The Index helps us to appreciate the progressive development of our understanding of many scriptures and Bible subjects. (See page 5, paragraph 6 of Index.) The indexing of information on the term “porneia” illustrates this well. Under “meaning of word,” as with all subheadings, current references appear first. Further information on the subject can be found under other subheadings such as “Scriptural ground for divorce” and “sexual practices within marriage not.”​—See Index, page 669.
VALUABLE TOOL
6 Proverbs 2:4, 5 encourages us to keep searching for knowledge of God just as we would search for hid treasure. We need to seek out Jehovah’s sayings and commandments, and search for wisdom, discernment, and understanding. This searching requires effort and perseverance. It calls for much digging. What a useful tool “the faithful and discreet slave” class has made available for our use in doing that! Let us use the Index to good advantage.

