The Promise of a World Without Corruption
CORRUPTION has penetrated every level of society. Whether it is in government, science, sports, religion, or business, corruption seems to be out of control.
In one country after another, depressing news of corruption scandals hits the headlines. Many who have made a commitment to serve the interests of the people are being exposed as serving their own interests by receiving bribes and kickbacks. So-called white-collar crime is rampant. More and more people of high social or economic status are guilty of serious ethical and criminal violations in connection with their regular occupations.
There is growing concern over what one European journal describes as “‘grand corruption’​—the practice by which senior officials, ministers and, all too frequently, heads of state require payments before approving major purchases and developments.” In one country “two years of police investigation and almost daily arrests have still not deterred the incorrigibly corrupt,” states the British magazine The Economist.
Because of such widespread corruption, many today feel that there is no one they can trust. They echo the sentiments of the Bible writer David when he said: “They have all turned aside, they are all alike corrupt; there is no one doing good, not even one.”​—Psalm 14:3.
How do you cope with the reality of widespread corruption? Most people today simply ignore it. But even if you ignore corruption, it will still hurt you. How?
Corruption Affects You
Both high-level and small-scale corruption increase the cost of living, diminish the quality of products, and result in fewer jobs and lower wages. For example, it is estimated that crimes such as embezzlement and fraud cost at least ten times as much as the combined cost of burglary, robbery, and theft. The New Encyclopædia Britannica (1992) states that “the cost of corporate crime in the United States has been estimated at $200,000,000,000 a year​—three times the cost of organized crime.” This source explains that while the effects may not be readily detected, “such crimes have a huge impact upon the safety of workers, consumers, and the environment.”
The bitter fruits of corruption remind us of King Solomon’s words: “I myself returned that I might see all the acts of oppression that are being done under the sun, and, look! the tears of those being oppressed, but they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors there was power, so that they had no comforter.”​—Ecclesiastes 4:1.
Are we, then, to resign ourselves to corruption? Is it inevitable? Is a world without corruption an impossible dream? Happily, no! The Bible teaches us that injustice and lawlessness will soon be eliminated.
What the Bible Tells Us
The Bible tells us that corruption began when a powerful angel rebelled against God and induced the first human couple to join him. (Genesis 3:1-6) Nothing good came out of their sinful course. Rather, from the day Adam and Eve sinned against Jehovah God, they began to suffer the bad consequences of corruption. Their bodies began the slow process of deterioration, leading to inevitable death. (Genesis 3:16-19) Since then, history abounds with examples of bribery, deception, and fraud. Yet, most perpetrators seem to get away with it.
Unlike ordinary criminals, corrupt executives and politicians rarely go to jail or make restitution for their ill-gotten gain. Because of the secret nature of bribes, kickbacks, and payoffs, it is often difficult to expose high-level corruption. But this does not mean that a world without corruption is an impossible dream.
Rescue from corruption will come from man’s Creator, Jehovah God. Divine intervention is the only solution. Why? Because mankind’s unseen enemy, Satan the Devil, continues to mislead mankind. As we read at 1 John 5:19, “the whole world is lying in the power of the wicked one.” What else could explain the increase in corruption​—much of that carried out with impunity?
No amount of human effort can overpower Satan and his demons. Only divine intervention can guarantee obedient mankind “the glorious freedom of the children of God.” (Romans 8:21) Jehovah promises that soon Satan will be restricted so that he cannot deceive mankind anymore. (Revelation 20:3) In the meantime, if we desire to live in God’s corruption-free new world, we must reject this world’s corrupt ways.
People Can Change
In the days of Jesus Christ, there were those who abused their power and oppressed their fellowmen. For instance, tax collectors were notorious for their corrupt practices. This was despite God’s explicit law: “You are not to accept a bribe, for the bribe blinds clear-sighted men and can distort the words of righteous men.” (Exodus 23:8) Zacchaeus, a chief tax collector, admitted that he had extorted by false accusation. But instead of promoting social reform on a broad scale, Jesus entreated individuals to repent and abandon their corrupt ways. As a result, reputedly corrupt tax collectors such as Matthew and Zacchaeus gave up their former life-style.​—Matthew 4:17; 9:9-13; Luke 19:1-10.
Those involved in dishonest practices today can likewise reject corruption by putting on “the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.” (Ephesians 4:24) It may not be easy to pay taxes honestly or to stop sharing in questionable schemes. Still, the benefits are worth any effort.
No longer conditioned by this corrupt world, those who are concerned with the well-being of others enjoy inner peace. There is no fear of being caught in wrongdoing. Rather, they enjoy a good conscience. They imitate the Bible example of Daniel the prophet. The Bible account says that high officials were constantly seeking to find some pretext against Daniel. “But there was no pretext or corrupt thing at all that they were able to find, forasmuch as he was trustworthy and no negligence or corrupt thing at all was found in him.”​—Daniel 6:4.
Jehovah’s Promise
Jehovah promises that “although a sinner may be doing bad a hundred times and continuing a long time as he pleases, yet I am also aware that it will turn out well with those fearing the true God, because they were in fear of him. But it will not turn out well at all with the wicked one, neither will he prolong his days that are like a shadow, because he is not in fear of God.”​—Ecclesiastes 8:12, 13.
What a relief when corruption no longer causes unhappiness! What a blessing to live forever in a world without corruption! This is not impossible. The Bible speaks of the “hope of the everlasting life which God, who cannot lie, promised before times long lasting.” (Titus 1:2) If you hate corruption and love righteousness, you may well see the fulfillment of God’s promise of a world without corruption.
[Picture on page 4]
Corruption is rife in government and business circles
[Picture on page 5]
Corruption often affects dealings with public officials

