“Joyful Praisers” District Convention of Jehovah’s Witnesses
Three rewarding days of Bible instruction await you. With 180 conventions scheduled in the United States alone, likely a convention will be held near where you live. Be present when the program begins with music at 9:40 a.m. on Friday.
The Friday morning program will feature welcoming remarks as well as the keynote address, “Set Apart as Joyful Praisers Worldwide.” In the afternoon the program will focus on youths, parents, and education. “Am I Prepared to Get Married?” is a talk young ones will not want to miss. Parents should listen carefully to “Parents Who Find Pleasure in Their Children.” The afternoon program will conclude with the discourse “Education​—Use It to Praise Jehovah.” What is discussed should help youths to get along successfully in school.
The Saturday morning program will feature the baptism, and opportunity will be provided for those who qualify to be baptized. In the afternoon there will be a frank discussion of how Satan from early times has used sexual desire to ensnare people. There will also be the powerful discourse “Avoid the Snares of the Devil.” The day’s program will conclude with the important talk “Why Mankind Needs the Knowledge of God.”
Sunday morning, the symposium entitled “Joyful Praisers During This System’s Conclusion” will focus attention on the world-shaking events that lie directly ahead of us. It will stress the urgency of fleeing to safety before the beginning of the “great tribulation” that Jesus Christ spoke about, as recorded at Matthew 24:21.
The Sunday morning program will conclude with the important drama “Honoring Worthy Ones in Their Older Years.” Then, in the afternoon, the public talk, “Praise the King of Eternity!” will be delivered. It will be a major highlight of the convention.
Make plans now to attend. To find the location nearest your home, contact the local Kingdom Hall of Jehovah’s Witnesses, or write the publishers of this magazine. The June 8 issue of Awake! will list the addresses of all convention locations in the United States, Canada, Britain, and Ireland.

