VOL. XXVIII NOVEMBER 15 No. 22 
A.D. 1907-A.M. 6036 



CONTENTS 

Views from the Watch Tower 339 

Curiosity a Dangerous Snare 339 

A Sign of Our Times 340 

The Lesson of Samson's Life 340 

Samson Judged Israel Twenty Years 341 

Ruth's Choice 344 

Dwelling with God's People 345 

"Speak, Lord, for thy Servant Heareth" 345 

Unequally Yoked Parents 345 

Consecration of our Children 346 

A Kind and Indulgent Parent 347 

The Voice of the Lord 348 

The Holy Anointing Oil 349 

Some Interesting Letters 350 

page 338 

LETTERS FOR THE EDITOR SHOULD BE SENT TO ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 
BUSINESS COMMUNICATIONS AND REMITTANCES 
-ADDRESS TO- 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE & TRACT SOCIETY, 
"BIBLE HOUSE," 610, 612, 614 ARCH ST., ALLEGHENY, PA., U.S.A. 

-OR TO- 
BRITISH BRANCH-24 EVERSHOLT ST., LONDON, N.W. 
GERMAN BRANCH-MIRKER STR., 45, ELBERFELD. 
AUSTRALASIAN BRANCH-EQUITABLE BLDG., COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE 

PRICE, $1.00 (4S.) A YEAR IN ADVANCE. 

MONEY MAY BE SENT BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 

TERMS TO THE LORD'S POOR AS FOLLOWS:- 

All Bible Students who, by reason of old age, or other infirmity or 
adversity, are unable to pay for this Journal, will be supplied FREE if 
they send a Postal Card each June stating their case and requesting its 
continuance. We are not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on 
our list continually and in touch with the Studies, etc. 



ENTERED AS SECOND CLASS MAIL MATTER AT ALLEGHENY, PA., POST OFFICE. 



THIS JOURNAL IS PUBLISHED IN THE 

FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH, DANISH AND ITALIAN LANGUAGES. 

SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



Send no more orders for Nos. 300 and 150 for the present 
—except with patent thumb index. We still have a good 
quantity of No. 138, and of all styles with the index, which 
costs 25 cents extra. A new edition of Nos. 300 and 150 will 
be gotten out next spring. The orders came so fast that we 
are swamped. The bindery hopes to give us the last of our 
5,000 edition by Nov. 15, but we have orders waiting for 
perhaps all of these. If your order has been delayed have a 
little further patience. If you do not get yours by Nov. 15 
advise us. 

DAWNS, STUDIES AND CHRISTMAS 



We remind Colporteurs that they can greatly increase 
their sales by mentioning that these books make presents 
that combine elegance, usefulness and cheapness. 

SWEDISH, GERMAN AND FRENCH TRACTS 



We have these in good supply for the Volunteer work. 
We also always have plenty of the English. 



SOME OF OUR CORRESPONDENTS fail to sign their names 
to communications, or to give their addresses, and then are 
distressed when they do not hear from us. Put full address 
on every letter or card you write. 



R4086 : page 339 

VIEWS FROM THE WATCH TOWER 
CURIOSITY A DANGEROUS SNARE 



INCREASINGLY the evidences multiply which 

show the power of the fallen angels in the affairs 

of men. We call attention to the fact that curiosity 

is the "bait" which they generally use to entrap 

their victims. Apparently the human mind is so constituted 

that these "demons" cannot intrude upon it 

except with its consent: hence the resort to curiosity to 

gain the consent of the will to investigate. Then gradually 

the leading is onward into foolishness or perhaps 

to obsession. Mechanical toys which answer all kinds 

of questions are amongst these. They are of various 

designs, but all requiring personal manipulation, and 

all tending to establish reliance in and communication 

with the fallen angels who personate the dead and 

sometimes personate the Lord himself, and give religious 

counsel in the endeavor to bind to themselves the 

confidence of mankind. 

The more absurd the proposition the more likely 
will it be to arouse curiosity. It seems absurd to believe 
that a "Ouija board" can and does answer questions 
correctly. There is reason to doubt that the 
operator may have something to do with the movements, 
and each must try for himself, thus slightly coming 
under the power of these "wicked spirits." (Eph. 6:12, 
margin.) The only safe plan is to have nothing whatever 
to do with "occult powers." They are all "powers 
of darkness"; for the holy angels do not thus communicate 
with man during this Gospel Age, and as "the 
dead know not anything" (Eccl. 9:10) they cannot. 
Hence all such occult powers are of the lying spirits, 
with which men may have communion and fellowship 
only at their peril. 

To our surprise, all that we have written on this 
subject does not keep some of our readers aloof from 
these snares. We have heard recently of some who 
were "not afraid to operate a Ouija board." The Truth 
should and does give courage, but this is not the way 
to exercise it. Our Lord says, "Fear God,"— that is to 
say, "Fear to disobey and to offend God." The Apostle 
says, "Let us fear, lest a promise being left us of entering 
into his rest we should seem to come short of it." 
The Editor of this journal fears not what men or demons 
can do to him, so long as he abides in the loving 
favor of God; but he would fear to disobey the Lord in 
respect to having communication with these demons 
and their various "curious" devices. It is well that we 
not only remember the promises of God; but let us also 
remember to be "obedient children." "All things shall 
work together for good to them that love God— the called 
ones according to his purpose," and the delusions of 
the end of this age will not be such as would deceive 
the very Elect; but we should remember the other 
side also, namely, that such as would have the special 
watch-care and deliverance promised must "abide under 
the shadow of the Almighty." Of such, only, it is written, 



R4087 : page 339 

"A thousand shall fall at thy side— ten thousand 
at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee." 
Indeed we fancy that those of us who have been 
blest with the greater light upon God's plan should be 
the more loyal to him and should be able to stand 
severer tests. 

"WALK BY FAITH, NOT BY SIGHT" 

The Scriptures clearly teach that in the past 
God spake unto the fathers miraculously, and so we 
believe. Yet we would not listen to such "voices" now. 
We should close our minds against all such revelations 
either to ourselves or others. It is now the fallen angels 
that thus seek to commune with us clairaudiently. We 
should, if such were heard, pray at once to God, "Deliver 
us from the evil one." 

"God hath in these last days spoken unto us by his 
Son"— and his chosen apostles. We have their messages, 
and these, we are assured, are "able to make us 
wise unto salvation," and sufficient that the man of 
God should be thoroughly furnished unto every good 
word and work. The Apostle Peter also emphasizes 
this, saying, "We have a more sure word of prophecy 

R4087 : page 340 

unto which we do well to take heed as unto a light 
shining in a dark place until the day dawn and the Day-star 
arise in your hearts." 

We know of one "brother" in the Truth recently 
deceived by the Adversary into foolishness by these 
"voices" which personated God. It is our duty to warn 
all against these "seducing spirits" (I Tim. 4:1) and to 
repeat the caution of God's Word in respect to every 
teaching of men and demons, "If they speak not according 
to this Word, it is because there is no light in 
them"— they are of the darkness while we are children 
of the light. 

We have also warned our readers against those 
claiming gifts of the Spirit, including "unknown 
tongues." Nevertheless we have just heard of a dear 
"brother" who was very nearly captured, ensnared, thus 
by the Adversary. He attended a meeting where "the 
faithful" evidently became obsessed in some degree. 
He went to the altar, submitted his will and had already 
begun to feel a power coming into his arms, which were 
becoming rigid, when another "brother" went to his 
rescue. Surely "holy-rolling" trances, fits and frenzies 
are contrary to the holy Spirit as exhibited by Jesus 
and his apostles, and denominated "the spirit of a 
sound mind." 

There is much more excuse for the world and the 



nominal Church than for the Truth people along these 

lines. We cannot understand how anyone who has read 

carefully and prayerfully the six volumes of DAWN-STUDIES 

could be in doubt as to any of these delusions. 

The explanation of falling into such a trap would 

surely be that the person had to some extent neglected 

the study or the practice of the Truth and had measurably 

lost its spirit. Let us remember that our Lord 

has provided the full armor for all the soldiers of the 

cross in this "evil day," but that it remains for us to 

put it on and use it if we would resist the evil one in 

our Redeemer's name. All these should know the source 

of such pranks and communications— they should not 

be curious. And if they do recognize their source and 

still dally with them instead of being active and zealous 

in showing forth the light of Truth, it implies that 

they are not appreciative of the great privileges they 

enjoy. Just such we must suppose the Lord will wish 

to sift out as not "more than conquerors." 

AS THE SERPENT BEGUILED EVE 

We have mentioned Satan's use of human curiosity 
to entrap the mind. We refer now to mother Eve's seduction 
by him from loyalty to God. It was the sight 
of the serpent eating without harm the fruit forbidden to 
her and Adam that aroused her curiosity. The matter 
seemed to contradict the divine threat that the eating 
of that fruit would to Adam and his race mean, "Dying 
thou shalt die." Too late she found that she had been 
deceived and that not the effect of the fruit, but the reward 
of disobedience, was death. So with us, the danger 
is in leaving God to hearken to and connive with demons 
—the disloyalty— the neglect of our own grand 
opportunities in this "harvest" time. 

By this we do not mean to be understood as condemning 
all curiosity and investigation of proper matters, 
of which there are many. We cannot even condemn 
the world for having curiosity respecting things 
occult, for they have not the Word of God to guide them 
as have we. But surely those who have tasted 
the good Word of God and the powers of the age to 
come, and been made partakers of the spirit of holiness, 
—these are well nigh inexcusable for curiosity along the 
lines occult. We should always keep in memory that 
"Secret things belong to God, but things revealed belong 
to us and to our children always." The revelation 
granted to us in the Word of God is so complete as to 
leave no room for legitimate curiosity respecting any 
of the works of darkness. Any attempt to investigate 
them tells of our lack of faith in the divine Word! 

A SIGN OF OUR TIMES 



COMPARE 2 TIM. 3:1-4 

"The Roman Catholic Bishop of Elphin, in Ireland 
(Dr. Clancy), in a pastoral letter read a few weeks ago 
in his diocese, reveals a sad state of things in modern 
Irish life in that part of Ireland. The Bishop writes: 
"The absence of reverence for God and of respect for 
the awful sacredness of an oath are unhappily prominent 
features of modern Irish life. Cursing, blaspheming, 
profane and ribald language of the most revolting 
character assail the ears of the passers-by in our towns 
and villages, and the utter disregard for truth, even 
under the sanction of an oath and the solemn surroundings 
of our law courts, has become so frequent and so 
flagrant that, as a consequence, our religion is dishonored 
and our faith brought into contempt."— Exchange. 



R4087 : page 340 

THE LESSON OF SAMSON'S LIFE 

-JUDGES 16:21-31.-DECEMBER 1.- 

Golden Text:— "Be strong in the Lord and 
in the power of his might."— Eph. 6:10. 

MANY have wondered that three chapters of the 

Old Testament have been devoted to the 

story of Samson— great, strong, good-natured, 

witty. Still more strange it has seemed to some of 

us that his name should appear in the list of faith-heroes 

enumerated by the Apostle in the book of Hebrews, chapter 1 1 . 

Here his name appears with those 

of Abraham, David, Gideon, "who through faith subdued 

kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained 

promises, stopped the mouths of lions." No other similar 

character is mentioned in the Scriptures; he stands 

unique amongst the Bible heroes. Dr. Lang remarks:— 

"His irony, his grim laughter as well as his feats 
of strength are duly recorded. The story is strange, 

R4087 : page 341 

pathetic— one over which we smile and sigh, one of 
boisterous mirth and fearful sorrow— such wit, such 
folly, such force, such feebleness, comedy so grotesque 
and tragedy so awful." 

Those who have not learned to rightly divide the 
Word of Truth— those who have not learned to study 
Scripture dispensationally— will surely be perplexed 
when they think of Samson as one of the saints of God, 
and then attempt to measure such saintship with the 
teachings of Jesus and the apostles. Meekness, gentleness, 
patience, long-suffering, brotherly kindness, love, 



Samson no doubt possessed in some measure, as might 
any natural man; but most evidently he was not begotten 
of the holy Spirit— not, therefore, one of the sons of 
God in the sense that Jesus and his followers are recognized 
in the Scriptures. The same is true in considerable 
measure of all the ancient worthies. No such 
standards were set before them as are set before us of 
this Gospel Age. They were not called to the high calling 
of a change of nature from human to divine. They 
were not begotten again to be New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus. The time for this was not yet. Christ, the 
forerunner on this heavenly narrow way, had not yet 
come. The sacrifice of atonement had not yet been 
offered, and none therefore could come unto the Father 
as sons or receive the begetting of his Spirit. The very 
highest rank possible to the most noble of that time 
was that they might be called servants of God. Moses 
was faithful as a servant over his house, and Samson 
and the others belonged to that house of servants. So, 
then, we must not think to copy Samson nor to set his 
life as a standard for our children or others. We are 
to assign him the place in the divine plan which the 
Scriptures give him, and then his life and his doings 
will be seen in their proper light and not prove a 
stumbling-block to us. 

THE MISSION OF SAMSON 

Samson's parents were consecrated people of God in 
the fullest sense that it was possible for them to be at 
the time. They believed in God, trusted him, and desired 
that in some way their son might be used of him 
in his service. They and their son, had they lived during 
this Gospel Age, under its light and privileges, no 
doubt would have been saints of a high order in the 
Church. Samson's special consecration to the Lord was 
followed by a Nazarite vow, such as is described in 

R4088 : page 341 

Numbers 6:2-6: it included total abstinence from 
grapes, wine and all intoxicants, permission of 
the hair to go uncut, and the avoidance of contamination 
with dead bodies. Many took such a vow temporarily, 
but Samson and John the Baptist apparently 
voluntarily took the vow for life. And here it is well 
to remember that through all the vicissitudes of his 
peculiar career there is no intimation that Samson ever 
violated this vow. In its observance we have a testimony 
to his faith and his loyalty to God— in harmony 
with God. In this respect at least he was an overcomer 
of a high order; and all the faithful, all the overcomers 
of this Gospel Age, who have taken the vows of the 
cross and the narrow way in the footsteps of Jesus, 
should be able to appreciate very highly the loyalty of 
Samson to his vow. If we are similarly faithful to the 



observance of our vows we may be sure of a place in 
the heavenly Kingdom. 

SAMSON JUDGED ISRAEL TWENTY YEARS 

We have seen the child Samson consecrated to the 
Lord's service; we have seen his acceptance of this 
consecration in his taking of the Nazarite vow. Some 
have confused this vow with the statement that our 
Lord was called a Nazarene. This is a mistake. The 
people of the city of Nazareth were called Nazarenes, 
but those who took the special vow were called the 
Nazarites. Our Lord was not a Nazarite. He took no 
vow respecting his hair or the use of grapes and the 
fruit of the vine. He was a Nazarene, because for 
years his home had been in that city. 

The Scriptures indicate also that God accepted 
Samson for his service. Now the question arises, In 
what way could God use him? What service could he 
render? Would God send him to preach the Gospel? 
No, there was no Gospel, no good tidings, no message 
to declare yet. That message could not go forth until 
first of all the Redeemer had come and the satisfaction 
for our sins had been made. Thus the Scriptures declare 
that Christ brought life and immortality to light 
through the Gospel— life eternal, life for the world of 
mankind, for all who eventually would receive the 
goodness of God through Christ, and be restored by 
him to the full of human perfection. For these the 
eternal life is the divine intention. More than this, our 
Lord brought immortality to light as the special gift of 
God to that special class, which— called during this 
Gospel Age, in the dark time when the way is narrow 
and difficult— has been obedient to the heavenly calling, 
and, laying aside every weight, runs with patience 
the race set before it. For these the divine provision 
is glory, honor and immortality. But these things were 
not available either to Jews or Gentiles in Samson's 
day, and hence there were no missions or ministries of 
grace and truth as we have these now. However, God 
had a work to be done at that time, as we shall see, and 
he used Samson as his agent in connection with that 
work. 

After settling in Palestine the Israelites did not 
remain earnest and loyal to God and inspired with the 
promise made to Abraham, that through their nation 
God intended to bless all nations under the leadership 
of Messiah. When more or less of lack of faith with 
idolatry came in, God allowed them to be oppressed by 
the heathen nations on either side of them. At the time 
in question the Philistines had, by divine permission, 
conquered them and reduced them to a kind of slavery, 
by not permitting them to have any except the very 
crudest of tools and by not allowing amongst them 
blacksmiths, whose trade at that time was largely the 
forging of swords and spears and other implements of 



warfare. Thus the Israelites were unarmed, while the 
Philistines, their oppressors, were well armed. And 

R4088 : page 342 

while the Israelites were learning a lesson from their 
captivity they were also losing their courage. The 
Lord, knowing their condition, was preparing for their 
deliverance, and he accepted the consecration of Samson 
and made of him his agent for the raising of a 
patriotic spirit amongst the people, for their invigoration 
by hope, and for the paralyzing to some extent 
of the power of the Philistines, so that the Israelites 
might gradually begin to recover themselves from their 
bondage and to look again to the Lord for the deliverance 
which he was willing to grant them on their return 
to his favor. Samson's great strength, considered 
by the people in its relationship to his Nazarite vow, 
would be a continual lesson to them of the power of 
God. They could see that the Lord was quite able to 
accept of all who were consecrated to him, and to make 
them mighty indeed to the overthrow of their enemies. 
Had the lesson been rightly applied we may readily 
suppose that all the children of the Israelites would 
have been similarly consecrated, and that the people 
would have been looking forward to the Lord's mighty 
deliverance of them; but they were slow to learn. 

Samson judged Israel after the proper meaning of 
that word "judging" in the original, but not according 
to the usual acceptance of the word today. He judged 
Israel in the sense of avenging wrongs that they sustained 
upon the enemies who committed those wrongs. 
Samson was not merely a warrior because of his love 
of fighting; he was a patriot, he was a firm believer in 
the Oath-Bound Covenant, he was hoping for the deliverance 
of Israel from all antagonists, and for the 
nation's exaltation as God's people, to be his mighty 
power in the world for the blessing of all nations. He 
was therefore opposed to everything that opposed the 
Israelites; and the Philistines being their oppressors 
and opponents he directed his energies against them. 
Their wealth was gained largely from the extensive 
wheat-fields lying between the mountains of Judea and 
the Mediterranean Sea, and in order to injure them financially 
Samson on one occasion took peculiar means 
for setting fire to these wheat-fields owned and operated 
by the Philistines for their own profit. It was not a 
joke, although the means used were peculiar, unusual. 
Samson was a general in the field of battle, and in his 
own person and in his own ingenuity he represented 
infantry, cavalry and artillery, using every means at 
his command to break the forces of the oppressors and 
to deliver his people, judging their oppressors or 
penalizing them, injuring them, punishing them, and 
to that extent helping to deliver Israel. 

The abject servility of the Israelites is manifested 



by the fact that, instead of cooperating with Samson 

and with him claiming the divine promises for the possession 

of the land of Palestine and the overthrow of 

all opponents, they so feared the Philistines and had so 

little faith in God that they were even willing to deliver 

Samson to the Philistines, and did deliver him bound. 

He allowed the binding and delivery, knowing his ability 

to break the bonds and to put to flight those who 

thought they had him in their power, and he did so. 

What a lesson again to the faint-hearted, that they 

should have courage to accept the Lord's promises and 

be obedient to his directions. They had already been 

in the land for a long time, but had failed to conquer 

it because of lack of faith, whereas with the proper 

faith one might have chased a thousand and two 

might have put ten thousand to flight. 

SAMSON A BLIND PRISONER 

When we remember Samson's zeal for God and for 
his people, when we remember his faithfulness to his 
vow as a Nazarite, when we remember his great 
strength— which enabled him with no other weapon 
than the jawbone of an ass to fight a large company of 
his enemies and to slay about a thousand of them— his 
undoing by a woman carries with it a great lesson. The 
Philistines directly and indirectly planned the seduction 
of their powerful enemy, using as a decoy the 
beautiful Delilah, and the man who was so strong in 
other respects was found vulnerable from this point of 
attack. 

What a lesson to Spiritual Israelites! How we also 
should realize that the great Adversary will be on the 
alert to use any snare or trap for the undoing of those 
who are faithful soldiers of the cross. If we were to 
draw an analogy as between Samson's temptation and 
the temptation of the Body of Christ it would imply 
that we should be specially on guard against the blandishments 
of the world and the Adversary through the 
nominal Church, which figuratively is called a woman 
—more, she is described in the Scriptures as a harlot. 

It was when Samson rested his head upon the lap 
of Delilah that he was shorn of his hair and of his 
strength— a condition of his vow being broken. Similarly 
those who are strong in the Lord and in the power 
of his might through their faithfulness to the vows of 
consecration as followers of the Lord Jesus are in danger 
of going to sleep in the lap of the modern Delilah, 
Churchianity. A spirit of drowsiness is their spirit, 
of rest from the activities and self-sacrifices of their 
vow, a spirit of slumber; and with that spirit goes their 
strength. Is there not in some respects an analogy between 
the experiences of Samson and the experiences 
of the Church of Christ? Consider the activities of the 
early Church and the victories they gained in the name 
and strength of the Lord. Consider how the Adversary 



entangled and seduced the Church, and how for a considerable 

time the stupor and drowsiness and ease and 

worldliness were upon those who vowed to be faithful 

to the Lord and his service. Consider how the strength 

of the Gospel message was lost while in that drowsy 

condition in the "dark ages." Consider how the eyes 

of our understanding were put out even as Samson lost 

his natural sight. Consider that even since the Reformation 

time the Church has been to a large extent under 

the blinding influence of the Adversary, a slave to 

Churchianity and the world, even as Samson was the 

slave of the Philistines. As their slave Samson was 

used instead of a horse to turn a great wheel for grinding 

R4089 : page 343 

their food; and thus indeed the Church has been 
grinding food of a certain kind for many while still a 
slave to the world and under its blinding influences. 

THE DEATH OF SAMSON 

Here our lesson really begins. The Philistine worshipers 
of Dagon had called for a great religious festival 
in honor of their god, whom they credited with the 
success of their warfare not only upon the Israelites 
but their sea victories against the Sidonians and 
Egyptians. Samson was a prisoner in their prominent 
city, Gaza, where the festival was to begin in a great 
temple. In the midst of their hilarities Samson was 
brought forth as an exhibit of the power of their idol, 
of their god Dagon, over all enemies. They would have 
this one who had slain thousands to sing and play on 
an instrument and dance before them, and after he had 
thus made sport for them he stood between the two 
main pillars upon which the center of the structure 
rested and where he was in full view of the thousands 
who were in the temple proper itself, and also from 
the roof of it could be seen by about three thousand 
congregated thereon, the prominent men and women of 
the nation, the lords of the Philistines. Samson, still 
full of the spirit of his consecration, still full of the desire 
to serve God and his nation, entreated that the 
sacrifice of his life in the Lord's cause might be acceptable 
and might be used at this time in the slaughter 
of all the principal people of the Philistines, and 
thus signify a greater opportunity for the Israelites to 
be released from their slavery than any other means 
that could be thought of or made available at the time. 
The Lord was pleased to accept the sacrifice, and Samson, 
exerting his great natural strength combined with 
whatever the Lord was pleased to additionally grant, 
the two great central pillars of the structure gave way, 
the whole edifice came down with a crash, the three 
thousand people on the roof as well as the materials of 
the building serving as the executioner of the hour; or, 



as in the other figure, as Samson's artillery against his 
enemies, who were also the enemies of the Lord and 
the opponents of the divine program for which Israel 
stood. 

Modern buildings in many respects differ from 
those of ancient times, so that to us it may be difficult 
to imagine the truthfulness of this description. However, 
we have items of history which somewhat correspond. 
Pliny describes two theaters built of wood by 
L. Curio, which he says were large enough to contain 
all the people of Rome, and were supported by a single 
hinge; and if this were to give way, there would have 
been a greater slaughter than at the battle of Cannae. 

We have seen some analogy as between Samson's 
experiences and the history of the Gospel Church: may 
we not carry this analogy farther, and see in the death 
of Samson and its influence an illustration of the closing 
of this Gospel Age, the consummation of the sacrifice 
of the Church and the resulting influence upon the 
world? It is of course hazardous to attempt the reading 
of prophecies or symbols not yet fulfilled. Nevertheless 
we suggest that the Scriptural delineations of 
the future correspond in many respects with the picture 
given us in the life of Samson. Have we not come to 
the time when the Lord's people are recovering a little 
of the strength of the early Church? and have we not 
also come to the time when the worldly wise are feasting 
and rejoicing and giving honor to the god of Evolution, 
and through their Higher Critics denouncing the 
true Israelites and their hopes and the divine testimonies? 
Have we not come very near to the time when 
those who are still faithful to the Lord and the principles 
of his Word are made sport of by the worldly-wise? 
and have we not come to the time when some at least 
of the Lord's true people are ready to put forth all the 
strength in their power through the Volunteer work 
and the Colporteur work, the Pilgrim work, and a 
thousand other energies to move the pillars of error 
which uphold Churchianity? It is appointed for the 
Church to die, to die in sacrifice, to die in the interests 
and service of the Truth— to lay down their lives for 
the brethren, the Israelites indeed, for their deliverance 
from the bondage of the world. The strength of our 
reformation lies in the Abrahamic promise, in our confidence 
in God, and in our vow to do his will. With 
the death of the last member of the Church, the Body 
of Christ, will surely come, as the Scriptures point 
out, the downfall of Churchianity and the present system 
of world power, and all this will but make ready 
for the glorious Kingdom of God's dear Son, though 
the incidentals shall signify a time of trouble upon the 
great ones, the mighty ones, the chief captains of 
earth. 

OUR GOLDEN TEXT 



"Be strong in the Lord and in the power of his 
might." Here we have an exhortation applicable to the 
people of God at all times and under all conditions and 
under all circumstances. It would have applied to 
Samson in his day as a natural man, a servant, and it 
applies to us of today who are New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus, servant-sons of the Most High. If we look back 
to Samson and all the ancient worthies recounted by 
the Apostle, we note that the secret of their strength 
of character, by which they endured and overcame, 
resided in their faith in God and in the promises. And 
so it must be with us. But there is a difference between 
faith and credulity: the latter may give a spirit of energy, 
but will not endure. The former is the power of 
God which enables us to endure all things as good 
soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, soldiers of the Truth, 
soldiers of righteousness, fighting against sin and 
error and all ungodliness, including the artful wiles of 
the Adversary, by which he would deceive us and the 
whole world, misrepresenting the divine character by 
the "doctrines of devils" foisted upon the Lord's people 
during the "dark ages," to the blinding of the eyes 
of their understanding. Now in the Lord's providence 
our eyes are becoming more and more opened, 
in harmony with the Apostle's prayer, "I pray God for 
you that you may be able to comprehend with all saints 

R4089 : page 344 

what is the breadth and length and depth and height; 
and to know the love of God which passeth knowledge." 
-Eph. 3:18,19. 

Hence it is important for us, not merely to believe, 
but to believe the truth. Our Redeemer prayed, "Sanctify 
them with thy truth, thy Word is truth," and the 
Scripture tells us of some who, not having sufficient 
love for the truth, are abandoned of the Lord to believe 
a lie, and through that false faith to find ultimately the 
condemnation of their heart attitude and to be counted 
unworthy a place with the "Very Elect." Let us set 
the Word of the Lord above all other messages: yea, 
more than this, let us prize the divine Word and plan 
above any of our own misconceptions and imaginings. 
Thus we shall be willing to buy the truth at any cost 
and to sell it not for any price. Thus we shall be 
found acceptable to our Lord, and shall be kept strong 
in the Lord and in the power of his might, until our 
trials shall be finished and he shall say, It is enough; 
come up higher; enter into the joys of thy Lord. 



R4089 : page 344 

RUTH'S CHOICE 



--RUTH l:14-22.-DECEMBER 8.- 

Golden Text:— "Thy people shall be my 
people, and thy God my God."— Ruth 1:16. 

MANIFESTLY the chief object in the brief narrative 
of Ruth and Naomi was to preserve 
an authentic record of a link in the chain of 
our Lord's human ancestry. Though a Gentile by 
birth, Ruth was a sincere Jewish proselyte, incorporated 
into the commonwealth of Israel, and as such she 
was recognized of God as one of his chosen people. 
And not only so, but she was also honored with a place 
in the line of our Lord's human ancestry, being the 
great-grandmother of David. The same was true of 
Rahab, also a Jewish proselyte, who became the mother 
of Boaz, the great-grandfather of David. 

The story of Ruth and Naomi is an interesting one 
as an item of Jewish history. It has its lights and also 
its shadows; for the characters were but samples of 
our fallen humanity coming gradually under the influence 
of divine grace. All that was noble in them therefore 
calls forth our admiration and esteem, while the 
blemishes are to be deplored. 

Naomi and her husband Elimelech, pressed by 
hard times and a threatening famine, decided to leave 
the land of Israel and the people of God and try their 
fortunes among the Gentiles in the land of Moab. In 
doing so they were leaving the special privileges of association 
with God's people, and failing also to contribute 
their part toward their comfort and encouragement 
and godly counsel in the time of general distress. 
They were also exposing themselves and their children 
to the unhallowed influences of an idolatrous people. 
This was the part they chose merely for temporal advantage, 
rather than to share the hardships at home 
and trust in the Lord to supply their needs. 

The result of this wrong course was only trouble. 
Elimelech died there, and Naomi was left alone with 
her two sons to rear. By and by the two sons married 
heathen wives who knew not the God of Israel. Then 
they also died; and Naomi, bereft of all but her two 

R4090 : page 344 

daughters-in-law, feeling that the hand of the Lord 
was against her in that she was thus sorely chastened, 
decided to retrace her steps to the land of her nativity, 
and again to cast in her lot with the Lord's people. 

When she had thus, by sad experience, learned the 
needed lesson and determined again to submit herself 
to the Lord's leading, the favor of God began to return 
to her. She found a great comfort and blessing in the 
manifested devotion of Ruth, her daughter-in-law, and 
in her conversion to the Jewish faith. "And Ruth said, 
Entreat me not to leave thee, or return from following 



after thee: for whither thou goest I will go; and where 
thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people shall be my people 
and thy God my God. Where thou diest I will die, 
and there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and 
more also, if aught but death part thee and me.'" 

That this was not a mere impulse on the part of 
Ruth is also manifest from her subsequent course of 
faithfulness to her mother-in-law; and Naomi's appreciation 
and devotion to her interests were just as manifest. 
Evidently though Naomi and her husband had 
erred in judgment and had been faint-hearted they 
were still loyal to God and let their light shine in the 
land of Moab, and both the daughters-in-law had been 
influenced by it, while Ruth was fully converted to God. 

Their kindly reception by the people of Bethlehem 
and the sympathy and kindness shown them were other 
great blessings. And finally the marriage of Ruth to 
Boaz, a man of character, wealth and influence, furnished 
a happy home to the desolate women and Ruth 
was honored of God in the line of our Lord's ancestry. 

The advice of Naomi to Ruth concerning Boaz was 
not of unalloyed wisdom. Such a course today would 
brand any woman as a loose, if not a disreputable, 
character. And that Boaz feared such reproach is also 
clear from his request of Chap. 3:14. In advising such 
a course Naomi again betrayed the weakness of her 
trust in God. But God in kindness had mercy on her 
weakness; and, their hearts being free from evil, God 
overruled all for good. 

The words of Ruth, contained in the Golden Text 
of the lesson, serve to remind us of one of our duties. 
We who by nature were Gentiles (as Ruth was a Moabitess) 
have by God's grace become Spiritual Israelites; 
and should determine that henceforth former conditions, 
interests, pleasures and relationships are gone 
forever. To us "old things have passed away and behold 
all things have become new." 

How forcefully this lesson is brought to our attention 
by the Psalmist's words, which prophetically represent 
the Church, and urge her to "Forget also thy 

R4090 : page 345 

Father's house and thine own people: so shall the king 
greatly desire thy beauty; for he is thy Lord— worship 
thou him." (Psa. 45:10,11.) It is expected that those 
who have had the high honor of betrothal to the great 
King's Son, the one "altogether lovely," will become 
so enchanted with their future prospects as to be almost 
oblivious to the things of this present time, except 
as to "things needful." 

"Only for Jesus! Lord, keep this forever 

Sealed on my heart and engraved on my life! 
Pulse of all gladness and nerve of endeavor, 
Secret of rest and the strength of our strife." 
Next to the Lord himself are his people, and whoever 



loveth not him that is begotten of God does not 

really love God. And to love God and his people means 

that we will delight to meet with them. Where opportunities 

for fellowship in praise, prayer and the study 

of the divine Word exist and go unimproved it marks a 

coldness or at least a lukewarmness of our love for 

God and holy things, which argues unfavorably as respects 

even our sharing the Bridegroom's throne. 

To counteract the influences of sin and worldliness 
and to grow in grace let us resolve to fully cast in our 
lot with the Lord's faithful, saying, in Ruth's words, 
"Thy people shall be my people and thy God my God; 
where thou dwellest I will dwell and there will I be 
buried." 

DWELLING WITH GOD'S PEOPLE 

All of God's people can dwell together in love, in 
fellowship, under the divine care as a "royal priesthood" 
"seated together in heavenly places"— in the 
antitypical Tabernacle's "Holy." So far as our earthly 
abode is concerned we may today live comparatively 
closely, by virtue of the convenient railway and mail 
services. It behooves us all, therefore, to "speak often 
one to another" that, as the Prophet declares, the Lord 
may hear and note and prosper our blessing of one 
another. (Malachi 3:16.) And we suggest that it is a 
partial fulfilment of the injunction that we "make 
straight paths for our feet, lest that which is lame be 
turned out of the way," if we seek such dwelling places 
as will conduce to our occasional interchanges with 
the household of faith. Let us put God first and Christian 
fellowship and growth in grace second and both 
before wealth in all of our reckonings. Thus we will 
best seek first the Kingdom of God and its righteousness 
and find all other things added in proportion to 
our real needs as New Creatures. 



R4090 : page 345 

"SPEAK, LORD, FOR THY SERVANT HEARETH" 

-I SAMUEL 3:6-14.-DECEMBER 15.- 

SAMUEL, the Prophet, is one of the grand, strong 

characters of Old Testament times. The 

story of his early devotion to the Lord and 

his obedience and perseverance in well doing, constitutes 

a grand lesson, not only for young Christians, 

but also for those more advanced in years, including 

parents. As the story of Ruth gives us glimpses of a 

time of life of the Israelites such as is generally obscured 

by the records of wars and troubles, so also 

does the story of Samuel. He was of the tribe of Levi, 



already consecrated to the Lord, and accepted. An 
insight into the deep piety of his parents is given in 
the first chapter of the Book. A child born under such 
circumstances of prayer and devotion to the Lord, 
could not, under natural laws, fail to be noble minded 
and religiously inclined. Would that we could impress 
this thought upon all Christians who become parents 
—that their children should be devoted to the Lord 
from the moment of conception! and daily prayer and 
effort should be made that pre-natal influences might 
all conduce to the highest mental, moral and physical 
welfare of the offspring. "Who can bring a clean thing 
out of an unclean?" asked the Prophet, and he answers, 
"Not one." Our expectation should not, therefore, be 
that the children even of the saints would be absolutely 
perfect; but we are to remember that the Lord accepts 
the heart, the intention, the will; and that agreeably 
to his arrangement of nature, the mind, the intention, 
the will of the parents may be expressed in 
their child. True, the imperfect mind cannot even 
grasp or picture perfect things, but it can approximate 
them, and in that same proportion it can impress that 
approximation of character upon the offspring. 

UNEQUALLY YOKED PARENTS 

There is an old adage that "blood will tell"— that 
is, that culture and good breeding will be marked in 
the offspring. It is surely a fact that character will 
tell. Christians, thoroughly devoted to the Lord and 
seeking day by day to know and to do the divine will, 
and who are under the instruction of the holy Spirit in 
the School of Christ and somewhat developed in grace 
and in knowledge of the truth, whose minds are transformed 
by the renewing of the holy Spirit, and their 
affections set upon things above, will surely mark and 
impress the spiritual qualities of their own hearts upon 
the natural offspring. Such children, well born and 
devoted to the Lord from conception, will, of course, in 
childhood be trained by the same parents in the ways 
of the Lord, in the ways of righteousness, of justice, of 
truth and of love. Thus begotten and thus trained, it 
seems very improbable that they should afterward depart 
from the way of the Lord, or that they should 
permanently remain transgressors, even though temporarily 
misled through temptation. 

While the Lord has directed his children not to be 
unequally yoked together with unbelievers, nevertheless, 
where the yoking or marriage has occurred prior 
to their covenant with the Lord, he has arranged that 
the fruit of their marriage, their children, shall be accounted 
as the Lord's through the consecrated parent; 
and his blessing will accordingly be with the consecrated 
child regardless of the fact that one of its parents 

R4090 : page 346 



was an unbeliever. The Apostle clearly states this in 
I Cor. 7:14. 

It is a serious error— and one into which some 
Christians have fallen— to suppose parentage to be dishonorable 
or sinful, some even claiming that "original 
sin" was of this sort. The Scriptures teach quite to 
the contrary, declaring that "marriage is honorable in 
all, and the bed undefiled." We are to remember, too, 
that the divine plan for the propagation of the race was 
arranged and the command to multiply and fill the 
earth was given before sin entered the world— before 
the disobedience in Eden. The Apostle severely reprimands 
those "forbidding to marry," and distinctly says, 
in his letter to Timothy, "I will, therefore, that the 
younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, 
give none occasion to the Adversary to speak reproachfully." 
-I Tim. 5:14. 

R4091 : page 346 

Neither is this in conflict with his declaration in 
I Cor. 7, that "he that marrieth doeth well, but he 
that marrieth not doeth better." In his letter to Timothy 
he is speaking of the younger persons of the congregation; 
whereas in his advice in Corinthians he is 
addressing such members of the Church as had made 
a full consecration of themselves to the Lord, and were 
seeking to run in the race course toward the mark for 
the prize. And our advice to others on this subject 
should be strictly along these inspired lines. The advice 
not to marry will usually be found helpful to those 
who have made a full consecration of themselves to 
the Lord, who will find that they can accomplish more 
in the Lord's service free, as far as possible, from 
earthly obligations and division of heart. But for 
others who are not New Creatures, though moral and 
well disposed, marriage is the reasonable and proper 
expectation of life according to divine arrangement; 
it should not be hindered, but should be counseled as 
wisely as possible. 

CONSECRATION OF OUR CHILDREN 

We are to recognize a difference between the consecrated 
parents of Samuel and their prayers for a son, 
and the proper prayers of consecrated people of the 
present time. Only since Pentecost have the Lord's 
people been privileged to be "New Creatures in Christ 
Jesus," begotten of the holy Spirit; and such seek and 
pray for spiritual rather than natural children;— by 
spending their lives as did their Master, seeking to 
transform children of the first Adam into spiritual 
children of God. It is in view of this, and when addressing 
spirit-begotten ones, that the Apostle declares, 
that "he that marrieth not doeth better,"— because he 



will, generally speaking, find the unmarried condition 
most favorable to his new ambitions. 

Born in response to prayer and consecration, Samuel 
was, doubtless, a remarkable boy; and his parents 
showed the sincerity of their prayer in the fact that he 
was early brought to the high priest at Shiloh and formally 
presented to the Lord's service. We read that 
this was when he was "weaned," but are not to suppose 
that it was when as an infant he was weaned from the 
breast; but, rather, interpreting the word on a larger 
scale, we should understand it was when he was weaned 
from his mother, in the sense of being able to get 
along without her care: this was probably when he was 
from ten to twelve years of age. 

We are often surprised that Christian parents, begotten 
of the holy Spirit, do not manifest more of this 
spirit which actuated the parents of Samuel. Many 
seemingly consecrated people hold back their most 
precious possessions, their children, from the Lord, 
and incline to devote them to some worldly calling in 
life— medicine, law, industry. Whether their course is 
prompted by too great humility or too great selfishness, 
it is not our province to determine; but seemingly 
they either have not the faith to believe that the 
Lord would accept their offering, or they cherish, perhaps 
but half unconsciously, a desire to see their children 
prosper after the manner of the world, and fear 
that their consecration to the Lord might in some 
manner blight their earthly prospects. What a great 
mistake! Do not such parents know that it is their 
privilege to present themselves to the Lord and all 
they have, including their children? and do they not 
know, too, that "The blessing of the Lord, it maketh 
rich, and he added no sorrow with it"? (Prov. 10:22.) 
Can they not realize that it is better to be a door-keeper 
in the house of the Lord than to dwell in the tents of 
wickedness? and that greater happiness would accompany 
a devoted life, even though spent in poverty, 
than could come through any other course, even though 
surrounded by every luxury? Have they not learned 
these lessons from their own experiences? and can 
they not apply them likewise to their own children? 

"TRAIN UP A CHILD" 

Samuel ministered to Eli in the temple; that is, he 
served the high priest— who was specially the Lord's 
servant and representative— in his dwelling apartments 
which were close by the tabernacle,— for the 
temple was not yet built. Samuel's parents, in thus 
subjecting him early in life to the duties of a servant, 
were really putting him in a most excellent school. In 
our opinion it is a mistake to suppose that the early 
years of life— from ten to eighteen— should be largely 
spent in play; not only is the wisdom of bringing children 
early into positions of responsibility, and more 



or less of routine and drudgery, exemplified in the case 

of Samuel, but it is also exemplified in the cases of 

many of the prominent people of this land today. Mr. 

Carnegie, whose fame is world-wide, entered early 

upon the drudgery of life as a telegraph messenger. 

Mr. Edison, whose fame as an electrician is also world-wide, 

began life's drudgery as a newsboy. And thus 

it is in perfect accord with the experiences of today in 

worldly things that we perceive that the consecration 

of Samuel as a servant of Eli at an early age had probably 

much to do with the firmness and grandeur of his 

character when, subsequently, he became the Lord's 

Prophet, and the last and the greatest of Israel's 

judges. 

R4091 : page 347 

Our observation is that there is no more common 
mistake made by parents than that of supposing their 
children could not properly understand or appreciate 
religious things at an early age— say twelve years. 
The experience of Samuel and our own experience and 
that of many others assure us that some of the deepest 
religious sentiments may be experienced as early 
as twelve years of age. This should be watched for 
by the parents and should be cultivated with much more 
care than the tenderest flowers in their gardens. The 
flowers of veneration, spirituality, hope, faith, trust, 
in the child-mind need and should have tenderest care 
and watering and weeding and assistance. The parent 
by nature and by divine direction occupying a 
responsible position as gardener to these, must appreciate 
flowers in the hearts of his own family; and if he 
neglect his responsibilities he is culpable and will 
surely suffer, not only disappointment in respect to his 
children in the future, but suffer also in that he will be 
the loser of certain blessings in his own heart; because 
it is a part of the divine arrangement that he that watereth 
others shall himself be watered. 

Public responsibilities and duties, and trying to 
save other people's children, can never excuse any 
Christian parent from his responsibilities toward his 
own children; nor can he shift his responsibilities 
upon Sunday School teachers. His neglect of duty 
will surely work to his own disadvantage as well as to 
the disadvantage of his offspring; and if in the past 
he has been negligent in this matter he cannot too soon 
rectify matters, though he will need to pray for and to 
seek to exercise greater wisdom in order to overcome 
his past neglect. 

Dr. Haslett, in his Pedagogical Bible School, submits 
the following as the sum of his findings from 
various statistics:— 

Out of 8,424 conversions— 
5,054 occurred between the ages of 12-20 years. 



3,183 16-25 " 

187 " at 25 years and over. 

GOD'S MOUTHPIECE TWELVE YEARS OLD 

The story of the Lord's first message to Samuel is 
beautiful in its simplicity. The boy evidently was 
accustomed to obeying the calls of Eli for various services 
at various times, and to this end had his sleeping 
apartments near by, Eli being advanced in life, about 
seventy-eight years. Three times the Lord called Samuel, 
and he answered, "Here am I," and went to Eli. 
It was after the third call that Eli instructed him to 
say, "Speak, Lord; for thy servant heareth." 

The record is that for a long time such a message 
from the Lord had been "precious," that is, scarce: 
Eli, although a good man, and sincere and faithful and 
kind in his dealings with Samuel, had been too lax in 
his dealings with his own sons, who were priests and 
had much to do with the services of the Tabernacle, 
and who, therefore, in every sense of the word should 
have been pious and exemplary men. The Lord had 
already sent Eli a warning message respecting his sons 
who were profligate and open transgressors, not only in 
financial affairs, but also in morals. Eli should have 
realized his responsibilities and should have checked 
their wrong course and, if necessary, should have dismissed 
them from the service of the Tabernacle even 
though they were his own sons; but in proportion as 
he had grown weak in mind and body, they had grown 
strong, self-willed and impious, and the old man seems 
not to have had the necessary strength of character to 
deal with them. The Lord's message delivered to 
Samuel was in respect to Eli's family and the punishment 
that should come upon them for their sins, which 
were much more grievous in view of the fact that they 
were the exemplars and instructors of the people. 

A KIND AND INDULGENT PARENT 

There are two kinds of unfaithful parents: 

(1) The harsh, cruel, wicked, who not only inbreed 
an evil disposition, but inculcate the same by precept 
and example. If both parents be of this stripe the 
child's condition is almost a hopeless one for the present 
life. The restitution conditions of the Millennium 

will be needed to eradicate the taint. Yet where one 
parent belongs to God the result may under divine 
providence be the reverse— the child may not only be 
better born, but discerning the evil of his parent's 
course may thereby be repelled and prepared to take 
the opposite course. 

(2) Some "kind and indulgent parents" are very 
unfaithful to their trust. With our children partakers 
of the general weaknesses of the race, a kindness and 
indulgence which allow noxious weeds to develop in 



their characters is gross unkindness, very reprehensible 
in the sight of God and those in accord with his Word. 

R4092 : page 347 

Indeed, it is possible that this term, "kind and indulgent 
parent," is frequently used very inappropriately. 
In many instances it would be more truthful if less 
polite to say, "A weak and incompetent parent." 

Surely all proper parents from the divine viewpoint 
will be kind to their children, and all such should 
be glad to be indulgent also, to the extent that the best 
interests of the child will permit— and not one inch 
further. But while the correcting rod must not be 
spared when necessary nor used when unnecessary, 
nor too severely— yet the best rule where possible, 
where the disposition of the child will permit, is the 
rule of love. Beginning early the parents' love combined 
with firmness should so mould the child's mind 
that it would have absolute confidence in the parents' 
love and in their loyalty to God's regulations in all of 
life's interests. To such a child the look of sadness 
and regret or the tear of sorrow on the parent's face 
will be more efficacious than many blows and much 
violent language. 

JUDGE ELI UNFAITHFUL TO GOD 

Judge Eli's weakness as a parent led him to unfaithfulness 
to God. His is not a sample of an "overcoming" 
character: he more nearly represented the 
character of the "Great Company." He had many good 
qualities. No vulgar sin is laid at his door. In many 

R4092 : page 348 

respects he placed the honor of God far beyond his 

personal interests. We see no manifestation of selfish 

ambition on his part opposing Samuel's advancement. 

Indeed to his credit be it noted that he fathered Samuel 

well. He disapproved the course of his sons, but, 

aged, he failed of the courage to denounce their course 

with proper vigor, as the Lord's words seem to intimate. 

We are not to forget, either, that among the 

twelve directly under our Lord's instruction one exercising 

his free will became a traitor. We fear that, 

however trained, those who turn out badly are generally 

not well-endowed in their begettal: though here 

also we remember Satan as an example of a perfect begetting 

and perfect training, which were lost before 

the energy of his ambitions. 

Eli's experience with his wayward sons calls for 
our sympathy, even though he brought his difficulties 
upon himself by reason of his neglect of the early 
training of them in the ways of the Lord, in the ways 
of his righteousness. Doubtless he often looked at the 



faithful lad who ministered to him so patiently and industriously, 

and wished that his sons had been of similar 

disposition; but the time so to wish advantageously 

and profitably was long gone by; they should have 

been begotten in the spirit of consecration, and trained 

in conformity therewith, and the Lord's Word for it is 

that when they were old they would not have departed 

from it. There is a lesson for parents here, too; the 

fact that the Lord's service is to be considered of primary 

importance and is to be defended even at the expense 

of their own flesh and blood. 

THE VOICE OF THE LORD 

In the morning Samuel hesitated to tell his kind 
master, Eli, the unfavorable message he had received 
of the Lord in the night; but Eli was anxious to know 
whatever the Lord had to say, and importuned until 
Samuel told him all. There is a good lesson here for 
the Lord's people— a lesson of humility and kindness; 
the lad might have felt puffed up to think that the Lord, 
who so seldom spoke to any, had now spoken to him; 
he might have felt himself honored and above Eli, in 
that the message spoke of the discomfiture of the latter; 
pride might have made him boastful and inconsiderate 
of the feelings of his master so that he would 
have taken delight in telling him of the calamities that 
would come, and how greatly he had been honored of 
the Lord. Samuel, on the contrary, exhibited the spirit 
of meekness, apparently not even considering the honor 
that had come to him; but, rather, sympathizing with 
his master, he would have preferred not to burden his 
heart with the message of calamity. 

The Lord is speaking now to some of his faithful 
ones through his Word, through his "knock" (Rev. 3:20), 
which tells us of his presence, through the signs 
which mark the incoming of the new dispensation: are 
any disposed now to be haughty and proud and boastful 
because the Lord has permitted them to hear his 
voice and to know something of his plan and of the 
calamities coming upon Babylon? Should they not 
rather be filled with humility so that self would be lost 
sight of entirely? Should not all favored of the Lord 
speak of the trouble coming upon Babylon sympathetically, 
with a disposition to assist to an escape, rather 
than a disposition to gloat over and rejoice in coming 
troubles in which present systems will be completely 
overthrown? 

The Lord speaks in our day in a different manner 
from that in which he spoke in olden times: as the 
Scriptures declare, "God, who at sundry times and in 
divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by 
the prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by 
his Son." (Heb. 1:1,2.) The Word of the Lord is still 
precious and scarce in that it is not, at the present time, 
given to all, but only to a certain class; as it is written, 



"He that hath an ear to hear let him hear." The majority 
of mankind hath no ear to hear at the present 
time, no eye to see the glorious beauty of God's plan. 
As the Apostle explains, "The god of this world hath 
blinded their minds"— earthly things, earthly ambitions, 
earthly hopes, earthly calls and voices, distract 
their attention, fill their capacity; but blessed are our 
eyes for they see, and our ears for they hear, and blessed 
shall we be if, like Samuel, when we hear the 
Lord's message we respond promptly, "Speak, Lord, 
for thy servant heareth." Such as thus respond shall 
be taught of God— by the Word of his grace— the words 
of the Lord Jesus, and the words of his inspired apostles 
—instructed and guided in the understanding of 
these through the holy Spirit, through the various 
helps and channels and agents which the Lord is pleased 
to use— perhaps a tract, perhaps a book, perhaps a 
letter, perhaps a conversation, perhaps a sermon. 

He who would continue to be taught of the Lord 
must continue to listen for his voice, continue to be in 
the hearing and obeying attitude of heart. The difficulty 
with some apparently is that their own wills are 
not fully extinct, dead— that their consecration is not 
complete; hence while consecrated enough to wish not 
to disobey the Lord's voice, they have certain ideas of 
their own respecting what his voice should say, and 
they prefer to interpret his message in conformity to 
their own preferences: they will to do more or less their 
own wills, and will to hear the Lord's voice directing 
them in accordance with their own wills. This is a 
most dangerous situation and is generally accompanied 
by self-conceit and self-assertion and will ultimately 
lead far from the Christian's goal. Let each of us resolve 
by the Lord's grace that we will out of honest 
heart continually seek to hear the pure Word of God, 
and that with a desire to obey it as far as we are able. 



R4092 : page 349 

THE HOLY ANOINTING OIL 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I have several thoughts regarding the typical 
anointing oil which I desire to have your opinion on. 
They have been very faith-inspiring to myself, and so 
I desire to impart them to others, but hesitate to do so 
before laying them before you. 

In Ex. 30:23 we read God's instructions to Moses 
regarding the holy anointing oil, as follows: "Take 
thou also unto thee principal spices, of pure myrrh 500 
shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even 250 
shekels, and of sweet calamus 250 shekels (v. 24), and 
of cassia 500 shekels after the shekel of the sanctuary, 
and of olive oil an hin." 



Notice here it reads "principal spices," in contrast 
to v. 34, same chapter, where it reads "sweet spices" 
used in the incense or holy perfume. So these principal 
spices would represent principal things which 
would go to make up the anointing which we receive 
to become priests and kings with Christ. 

As far as I know the meanings of these spices are 
in no way significant, but compared with other Bible 
verses we may see their significance. In Ex. 31:2-5 we 
have Bezaleel, referred to as the builder of the tabernacle, 
a type of Christ. His ancestry is typical of the 
existence of Christ on the various planes he has lived. 
Bezaleel was son of Uri, he in turn son of Hur, and he 
in turn a son of Judah. Now Judah means praised; 
so was Christ praised in his prehuman existence, referring 
to the glory he possessed with the Father before 
the world was. Hur, the next offspring, is representative 
of Christ's humiliation; as the word Hur means 
grave, so Christ humbled himself even unto death, yea, 
to the ignominious death of the cross, down into the 
grave. From there he came forth with the right to life 
for every human being, and is the Light of the world, 
as Uri signifies light; and now he is the shadow of the 
Almighty, the robe of righteousness provided by God 
for us, as signified in the word Bezaleel, "shadow of 
the Almighty." 

V. 4 says that this Bezaleel could devise cunning 
works to work in gold (the divine nature) and in silver 
(the spirit nature— Great Company) and in brass (the 
perfect human nature), showing Christ can complete 
work in all the planes of existence. V. 5, And in the 
cutting of stones (polishing the jewels), to set them 

R4093 : page 349 

(as the Father pleases), and in the carving of timber 
(the fallen race) to make all manner of workmanship 
(as restitution will produce for the race). This verse 
shows the present condition of the race and the Church, 
the unfinished material. Verse 2, referring to this 
Bezaleel, says, "And I have filled him with the Spirit 
of God, in wisdom and in understanding, and in knowledge 
and in all manner of workmanship." This is the 
typical anointing of Bezaleel; and the antitypical 
anointing of Christ recorded in Isa. 1 1 :2 contains the 
identical component parts as that of Bezaleel, viz.: 
"The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the spirit 
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel 
and might, the spirit of knowledge and fear of the 
Lord." The only difference in the two verses is in respect 
to the terms "counsel and might" and "workmanship," 
but both embody the same idea, i.e., deputyship 
and ability, or how to go about a matter and the ability 
to accomplish the same. These three verses parallel 
as follows: 



EXODUS 30:23 EXODUS 31:3 ISAIAH 11:2 
HOLY ANOINTING OIL BEZALEEL CHRIST 

Filled with the Spirit of Lord rest 
Olive oil, an hin Spirit of God. upon him. 
Myrrh, 500 Wisdom Wisdom 

Cinnamon, 250 Understanding Understanding 
Calamus, 250 Knowledge Knowledge 

Cassia, 500 Workmanship Counsel and might 

In the above parallel we find knowledge parallel 
with calamus and understanding with cinnamon, and 
of each a like quantity is prescribed, even 250 shekels. 
So we would also expect in our anointing from above 
to find our knowledge and understanding equal— that 
is we would have the understanding of all the knowledge 
received of God, so that seeing we might discern 
and hearing we might understand. 

For example, we read in the Scriptures that Christ 
is a corresponding price for our sins. Now, if we fear 
Jehovah we have that knowledge, for the fear of God 
is the beginning of knowledge. (Prov. 1:7.) When we 
see how that Christ became a perfect fleshly man and 
was an exact counterpart of Adam and gave up his life 
for Adam's, we see, or understanding tells us, how he 
is a cover for our sins. So knowledge from God is 
accompanied by its equal of understanding, and this 
is how we have become established in the faith. If 
God gives us knowledge he also gives us a test on that 
knowledge, and fortifies it with the understanding 
thereof. 

Myrrh, which represents and is parallel with wisdom, 
is equal in amount with calamus and cinnamon 
combined, 500 shekels of myrrh and 250 shekels each 
of calamus and cinnamon. So we find God in the 
anointing also gives wisdom equal to our knowledge 
and understanding combined. Wisdom is knowing 
what to do. To illustrate: Knowledge tells us that 
God loves his only begotten Son; understanding tells 
us it was on account of his cheerful obedience even 
unto death that the Father took such delight in him; 
wisdom then draws the inference, that if we would also 
be well pleasing to the Father we must do as Jesus did, 
follow in his steps, get our minds into the same frame 
as Jesus had his, for if this mind is not in us which was 
also in Jesus, we are not pleasing to the Father. 
Again, the knowledge that Jesus died for our sins 
brings responsibility, and the understanding of the 
ransom brings added responsibility, and our responsibility 
is equal to what we see we ought to do, or our 
wisdom. 

Workmanship may also be translated deputyship, 
but never means work or labor. It has the two ideas 
embodied in itself that are expressed in its parallel in 
Isa. 1 1:2, viz., counsel and might. Counsel here means 
advice, or how to do a thing; might here means the 
ability to perform. Now, cassia, which represents 



R4093 : page 350 

workmanship or counsel and might, amounted to 500 
shekels, the same as myrrh, which represented wisdom, 
or knowing what to do. So God, after showing us our 
responsibility or what we should do, accompanies it 
with an equal amount of advice or information how to 
do it, and also enough ability to perform what is expected 
of us. All that is expected of us is to will— a 
full consecration to the Lord and his service— and all 
the rest he will supply in knowledge, understanding: 
knowledge of what we should do and ability and information 
how to do it. With more than this he cannot 
anoint us. 

This mixture of oil and spices was well ground together, 
so that each drop of oil contained the four 
spices in the same proportion as the whole mass; so 
each drop of anointing we receive that comes down from 
above has all its constituents in the proper proportion. 
God gives no knowledge except for a purpose, and 
establishes our faith by giving the understanding 
thereof, then shows us what that knowledge is for, by 
showing us what is expected of us, and also gives us 
the advice and ability needed for the accomplishment 
thereof, and we must make active consecration to complete 
the Lord's will. 

Chap. 30, v. 32, in Rotherham's translation reads, 
"And according to the proportions thereof shall ye not 
make any like it; holy is it." V. 33, "Whosoever compoundeth 
any like [according to the proportions thereof] 
shall be cut off from among his people." This 
would show us that after the same proportions thereof 
no other anointing would be allowed. So we might 
expect many imitation anointing oils, using the same 
ingredients, but not in the same proportions as the 
true anointing oil, having knowledge and understanding 
equal and balanced, and these in turn accompanied 
by their equal of wisdom and counsel and might. 
Some imitations may be so close that only God could 
tell the difference; hence these are false brethren. 

In Eccl. 9:10 we read, "Whatsoever thy hand findeth 
to do, do with thy might; for there is no work nor 
device nor knowledge nor wisdom in the grave whither 
thou goest." The word translated device here is translated 
reason and account in Eccl. 7, verses 25 and 27, 
respectively. All three words are closely related to 
understanding and are the results of understanding. 
Solomon here uses these four— wisdom, knowledge, 
device (or understanding) and works (result of workmanship) 
—to show that the absence of these produces 
physical death, or is the sign of physical death, and 
conversely their presence signifies physical life. So if 
we have been anointed with spiritual wisdom, understanding, 
knowledge and workmanship, or counsel and 
might, and are in a state of activity in our consecration, 



we will have spiritual wisdom, spiritual knowledge, 
and our understanding and counsel will give us 
spiritual device, so we will know how to form character 
and bring forth spiritual fruits, and our spiritual might 
received from God will be the power to bring about our 
spiritual works. If we possess these we will be spiritually 
alive, and if not we will be dead in trespasses 
and sins. Paul, in Col. 1:9,10, prays that the saints 
may be filled with the knowledge of his will, in all 
spiritual wisdom and spiritual understanding— being 
fruitful in every good work and walking worthy of the 
Lord— these very same four again. 

These four produce the fruits of the Spirit, therefore 
they are the principal spices. The odor emanating 
from such a typically anointed one is symbolical of the 
fruits of the Spirit we show forth— the more anointing 
the more fruits; and surely it is desirable to be in the 
presence of one so antitypically anointed. 

The oil being olive illustrates something divine 
and is representative of the divine power and supervision 
used in the anointing of the antitypical priesthood. 
The oil was the means of distributing the spices over the 
body, and each drop carried the four spices in the same 
relative proportion as that of the whole mass. So 
whatever amount of anointing a member in Christ receives 
from the Head, it has its constituents of knowledge, 
etc., in their proper relative proportions. The 
oil may be the Bible, which carries all these four elements 
of the anointing to us, God's power being used 
in connection therewith in anointing us. 

Hoping I have not wearied or bothered you, dear 
brother, but not wanting to have it for myself, I considered 
it my duty to communicate this to you. I have 
hesitated much in writing to you, but have done as I 
considered it my duty. Thanking you for all the blessing 
received from you and asking an interest in your 
prayers that I may remain in Christ to the end, 

Your brother in Christ, M. E. RIEMER-Mo. 



R4093 : page 350 

SOME INTERESTING LETTERS 
DATE OF NEHEMIAH'S COMMISSION 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

With reference to first complete paragraph of Vol. 
II., p. 67, the following facts, culled from "Tregelles on 
Daniel," regarding Ussher's position in the matter of 
the date of Nehemiah's commission, may be of interest 
to WATCH TOWER readers, seeing that he is deservedly 
considered as an authority on chronology. 



"Archbishop Ussher drew up a scheme of chronology 
which is commonly followed rather for convenience 
than for absolute accuracy. About a hundred and fifty 
years ago Bishop Lloyd undertook to affix Ussher's 
dates to our English Bibles, but in this instance (Nehemiah's 
commission) he made a considerable alteration, 
substituting another date of his own, so as to 
adapt the reign of Artaxerxes to his own theory. 

The date which stands in our Bibles for the 20th 
year of Artaxerxes is B.C. 446. This makes the commencement 
of his reign B.C. 465; but the date fixed by 
the best and most nearly contemporary historian will 
put the matter in a different light. Thucydides mentions 
that the accession of Artaxerxes had taken place 
before the flight of Themistocles. This authorizes us 
to adopt Ussher's date and to place the commencement 

R4094: page 351 

of the reign 473 or 474 B.C. This would give 

the date of 454 or 455 B.C. as his twentieth year and 

the date of the commission." 

It appears that Archbishop Ussher was the first to 
establish the date of Nehemiah's commission as 454 
B.C. as a result of lecturing on the 70 weeks of Daniel 
in Trinity College, Dublin, in 1613. Other critics who 
support the date given in DAWN II. are Vitringer, Kruger 
and Hengstenberg, as well as Tregelles, above 
quoted. With much love, I remain, 

Yours in the Lord, J. P. BURNS, --England. 

"SCRIPTURE STUDIES" AS CHRISTMAS GIFTS 



DEAR FRIENDS :- 

It might interest you to know that we are already 
offering the books for "Christmas gifts." We find that 
many secure their Christmas presents several months 
ahead, and that this month is the one in which many 
are very pleased to secure "such a beautiful, appropriate, 
and above all such a reasonable [in price] gift!" 
Often we can get orders for several sets in one home, 
in view of the fact that the books make such splendid 
gifts. Today we got more than one order on this account. 
We mention this because we think it might 
help wonderfully during the next six weeks in securing 
orders from people who would perhaps not buy for 
their own use. We say, "Many are taking them for 
gifts, and it is of course a compliment to a friend's intelligence 
to give him a book, and especially a work of 
this kind, and you get the entire three for only 98c!" 

With much Christian love and appreciating more 
and more the great privilege of laboring in the harvest 
field, we are, Yours in Him, 

J. AND L. HUTCHINSON, -Colporteurs. 



THE WATCH TOWER BIBLES 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

I wish to thank you for the copy of the new Bible 
you have so kindly sent me. It is needless for me to 
tell you that I am delighted with it, not only because 
of its elegant binding and compact form (such that it 
will easily go into the side-pocket of an ordinary coat), 
but especially because of the extraordinary helps for 
Bible study that it provides. In the 220 pages of abbreviated 
DAWN comments there are 1 1,608 references to 
the DAWNS and booklets; or, in other words there are 
that many Scripture explanations utilized. 4793 texts 
are examined— about one-seventh of the total number 
in the Bible. 

Just here let me say that I have been deeply impressed 
in gathering and compiling these explanations 
to note how perfectly they are in accord with each other 
and with the Word itself. This beautiful harmony of 
thought and expression speaks very significantly of the 
fact that the Lord of the Harvest has exercised close 
supervision of his message. Few works have ever been 
subjected to such a critical analysis, and nothing but 
the TRUTH could stand before the word-by-word and 
clause-by-clause method which was used. It now remains 
to be seen whether the Truth people, with their 
sharp eyes, will find that my representation of your 
works has been as faithful and as accurate as your 
representation of the Scriptures has been! If they find 
a whole lot of mistakes I will take refuge in the thought 
that I did the best I could and that it was a hurried job 
—only about 1400 hours of labor altogether. 

Sister Seibert has done a grand work in the "Epitome 
of the Faith." The first thing I did when I got 
the Bible was to read every word of it. I cannot conceive 
how it could be more complete in plan, orderly in 
arrangement or concise in statement. I have already 
made use of it on two occasions with excellent results, 
and am sure it will be greatly appreciated. 

I feel sure this new Bible will have a very rapid 
sale, as I do not see how any one who is really in the 
Truth can afford to go without it. 

Your brother and servant in Christ, 

CLAYTON J. WOODWORTH. 

CHARITY BEGINS AT HOME 



DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Being my Pastor in a very special sense to me, and 
knowing of your deep interest in all who understand, 
even to a limited degree, the Harvest Message, I am 



taking the liberty to write you on a subject that has 
been on my mind for a long time. 

I am sorry, very sorry to say it, but many times I 
have found, on close acquaintance with the brethren in 
the Truth, men who professed full consecration, that 
they neglected their families so very badly relative to 
the Truth. Seemingly anxious to spread the Truth 
amongst their friends and neighbors, yet they made no 
provision for their wives, so that they could attend the 
meetings, and would even talk before their families in 
such a way as to leave the impression that maybe the 
Truth was not for their wives and children. 

I confess this is beyond my comprehension— how 
a man with brains enough to comprehend the Truth, 
and after reading the six volumes of MILLENNIAL 
DAWN and the TOWER, could or would do or say such! 

A man can leave all the cares of the home and the 
care of the children to a perhaps not too strong wife, 
and spend all of his spare time while at home reading; 
and Sunday morning, instead of helping his wife and encouraging 
her, just get up and eat, dress and leave, 
and let her know he expects a hot dinner when he returns 
from the class, and it is no wonder she cannot 
go. It certainly doesn't look fair to me. Just nominal 
Church people do better than that. 

From the depths of my heart I pity the man who 
has the Truth and objects to his children attending the 
nominal Church Sunday school and makes no effort to 
teach his children and never has family prayer unless 
some of the Colporteurs or Elders call on him. These 
things are so. I wish I could believe otherwise. 

Several cases have come to my personal knowledge 
where the wife was really hungering for fellowship with 
the class and believed all the Truth she could understand, 
and whose husband, while himself attending the 
class every Sunday, was the real cause that hindered 
her. I feel confident a special, pointed article from 
your pen would do good to many. 

Yours in the service of the King, , — Tenn. 



page 353 

SEMI-MONTHLY 