Announcements
“THEOCRACY’S INCREASE” TESTIMONY PERIOD
The International Assembly for 1950 at New York city! This starts of the Testimony Period entitled “Theocracy’s Increase”. And so many from all parts of the earth will begin August, the Testimony month, with attendance at the assembly. But whether at the assembly or not, all adherents of The Theocratic Government will loyally take part in the world-wide testimony. The book “Let God Be True”, now published in 20 languages, will be the leading offer for the month, on a contribution of 35c. Where it is not available, another bound book to correspond should be offered to the people. Surely our readers will want to work for The Theocracy to increase its devoted subjects by circulating the literature which advertises that Government and thus help others to come under its benign sway. Let any reader write us who wants assistance to get started witnessing and needs references and instructions. We count on the report of every participant in the Testimony Period. So make your report at the close of August and thus give proof in your case of The Theocracy’s general increase.
“WATCHTOWER” STUDIES
Week of September 3: “Serving with the Servant,” ¶1-17 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1950.
Week of September 10: “Servant’s Care of the Master’s Goods,” ¶1-19 inclusive, The Watchtower August 1, 1950.
“THE WATCHTOWER”
The Watchtower is a magazine without equal in the earth, and is conceded this rank by all that have been faithful readers thereof during its more than seventy years of publication. The Watchtower has increased in importance with the progress of the years, and never has it been more valuable than today, at this world crisis, when the destiny of each intelligent human creature is being decided. The getting of correct information and instruction, just such as required for the times, to decide your course wisely to a happy destiny, was never more vital than now, for “where there is no vision, the people perish”. Informed persons well acquainted with the consistent contents of The Watchtower agree that those who want to gain life in peace and happiness without end should read and study it together with the Bible and in company with other readers. This is not giving any credit to the magazine’s publishers, but is due to the great Author of the Bible with its truths and prophecies, and who now interprets its prophecies. He it is that makes possible the material that is published in the columns of this magazine and who gives promise that it shall continue to publish the advancing truths as long as it continues to exist for the service of the interests of his Theocratic Government. Carefully and prayerfully read this issue of The Watchtower. Then do not delay to mail in your subscription, that you may receive it regularly, twice a month, twenty-four copies the year. Subscription rates are shown above.

