A Realistic Solution—Is It Possible?
CRIME appears to be a permanent fixture of modern society. Despite well-meaning efforts of social workers, law-enforcement personnel, and criminal rehabilitation professionals, the world is becoming a more dangerous place. Is there a solution?
The Bible shows that a big change is coming. This will not come through the efforts of human governments. All human rulers are limited, no matter how noble their goals. They just do not have the power and resources to root out the cause of crime or to establish a permanently secure system.
The change the Bible speaks of will be implemented by our Creator. As the Maker of the universe, he has the power and the legal right to do what humans cannot. The Bible describes him as “the One who is reducing high officials to nothing, who has made the very judges of the earth as a mere unreality . . . , he also being vigorous in power.” (Isaiah 40:23-26) What changes does God promise, and how do these give us real hope for a better world?
Psalm 37:10 informs us of God’s promise: “Just a little while longer, and the wicked one will be no more; and you will certainly give attention to his place, and [the wicked] will not be.” God intends to get rid of those who are incorrigibly wicked and have no intention of changing. However, he will not destroy all people. To those who are willing to become meek, humble, and peaceable, the psalmist promises: “Hope in Jehovah and keep his way, and he will exalt you to take possession of the earth. When the wicked ones are cut off, you will see it.” With the wicked ones gone, those remaining will enjoy an “abundance of peace”—a world free from crime of any sort.—Psalm 37:11, 34.
Change of Mind and Heart Needed
Simply destroying the wicked and saving good people is not enough to resolve the problem of crime once and for all. Crime is often the result of improper training of people’s hearts and minds. However, that is where God’s government will excel. Practical instruction and education will be provided in order to train people so that they will love righteousness. Isaiah 54:13 says: “All your sons will be persons taught by Jehovah, and the peace of your sons will be abundant.”
The results will be truly satisfying! The Bible speaks pictorially of the changes in people who may once have had animallike characteristics. It says: “The wolf will actually reside for a while with the male lamb, and with the kid the leopard itself will lie down, and the calf and the maned young lion and the well-fed animal all together.” Why? “Because the earth will certainly be filled with the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters are covering the very sea.” (Isaiah 11:6, 9) However, you and your family do not need to wait for the future for such changes. How so?
You Can Benefit Now
There are people who are now making the changes necessary to prepare for a crime-free world. They are already putting on a new personality, the type of personality that God wants in people who will live in his new world. (2 Peter 3:13) They do this by applying Bible principles in their lives. Notice the interesting description the Bible gives: “You should be made new in the force actuating your mind, and should put on the new personality which was created according to God’s will in true righteousness and loyalty.”—Ephesians 4:23, 24.
Colossians 3:12-14 further describes the positive qualities that many honesthearted individuals are cultivating now. It says: “As God’s chosen ones, holy and loved, clothe yourselves with the tender affections of compassion, kindness, lowliness of mind, mildness, and long-suffering. Continue putting up with one another and forgiving one another freely if anyone has a cause for complaint against another. Even as Jehovah freely forgave you, so do you also. But, besides all these things, clothe yourselves with love, for it is a perfect bond of union.”
Would you like to receive help to put on the new Christian personality? Millions of people around the world are already doing so with the help of Jehovah’s Witnesses. At meetings held regularly in Kingdom Halls, and at large conventions, even people who were violent criminals have learned how to put on a peaceful personality.a If you would like to benefit from such an excellent Bible educational program, do not hesitate to contact the publishers of this magazine. They will be happy to help you to be among the people who are preparing now to live in God’s crime-free new world.
[Footnote]
For examples, see the May 8, 2001, issue of Awake! pages 8-10.
[Pictures on page 10]
Millions are receiving education for life in a crime-free world

