Branch Letter
Dear Kingdom Publishers:
We thought you would be interested in the theocratic progress in New York city these days and we are happy to share some thoughts with you in this regard. Some thrilling developments are taking place. For example, there are now 266 congregations, with a total of 26,285 publishers, including 878 pioneers. With 63,813 persons at the Memorial this March, this means that one out of every 124 persons in New York city attended the Memorial. The Bethel family contributes much to the activity of the New York city congregations, and there are currently 346 members of the Bethel family who serve as elders in the various congregations.
A concerted effort is being put forth to reach every individual in this huge metropolis with the good news. To illustrate: 21 brothers and 5 sisters spend a minimum of two hours weekly visiting the prisons in the city. This program is carried out in cooperation with the New York City Department of Correction and is already producing fine results. At one prison a regular study with an average attendance of 8 is conducted in the Truth book each Wednesday evening. In some prisons, cell-to-cell witnessing is possible, and brothers are diligent in making return visits, conducting studies, giving Bible lectures, and showing the Society’s films. As a result, one inmate, after studying for several months, made his dedication to serve Jehovah, and three months after his release he was baptized at a circuit assembly. In one prison the captain of the guards, who was once associated with Jehovah’s people, has also begun to attend meetings again and is now participating in the field service.
Also, a number of the brothers are making calls on ships docked in port and much literature in a number of different languages is regularly placed. Additionally, a number of pioneers have been working the business territory, and one of these met a lawyer who took several books. The following week the pioneer made a return visit. Upon examining the Aid book the lawyer said: “This is just what I need.” On a later visit the man divulged that he was already using the Aid book to explain Bible thoughts to his secretary and receptionist. Great praise is being given to Jehovah’s name as a result of all these marvelous efforts.
Your brothers,
BROOKLYN BRANCH OFFICE

