Choose Life-Follow God’s Way?
1 How wonderful it is to be alive today, sharing in the worship of our heavenly Father, Jehovah! Those of us who have been in the truth for some years are thrilled to see the many new ones flocking to Jehovah’s family-like organization. (Isa. 60:22) We deeply appreciate seeing their faith, their devotion and their zeal as evidence that they have chosen to follow God’s way, not the ways of this world.​—Compare Deuteronomy 30:19, 20.
2 As we enter the 1976 service year all of us are filled with anticipation for the near future, for our generation. Of course, we cannot set a date as to when the old system is going to end, can we? Jesus plainly said that we do not know the day or the hour when the “great tribulation” is to begin, but obviously we can see that the hour is late. (Matt. 24:34, 36) Appreciating Jehovah’s way, we are convinced that he will not fail to fulfill all the things he has promised his servants. As Paul wrote to the Hebrews: “The word of God is alive and exerts power.” It will accomplish what Jehovah has purposed. Further, Paul wrote: “God is not unrighteous so as to forget your work and the love you showed for his name.” (Heb. 4:12; 6:10) Thus all of us, whether in the truth a short time, or a longer time, are happy to wait on Jehovah, doing his will, day by day.​—Lam. 3:24-26.
3 It is clear that sharing fully in doing Jehovah’s will is the best use of our time and provides evidence of our faith in the fulfillment of Jehovah’s purpose. An important part of the work that he has entrusted to us is preaching the good news. Is it possible that you can widen out your participation in this work? For example, if you are newly associated and have shared thus far only in the tract work or in the distribution of magazines, could you enlarge the scope of your activity? As an illustration, with a view to aiding others to realize that the good news we bring them is really from God’s Word, would you like to learn and then use in the house-to-house work a one-scripture sermon as is contained in this issue of Kingdom Ministry? There are many, including elders, ministerial servants and pioneers, who would be most willing to assist you to get started. The sisters, too, can help in this work, aiding fellow sisters to become more proficient in their field service.
4 The congregation meetings are also included in Jehovah’s loving provisions to aid us to choose life. Have you any idea what a blessing it is for us to hear from you many new ones as you comment at the meetings? Your enthusiasm for expressing the truth is not only encouraging, but faith-strengthening. (Heb. 10:23-25) If, however, you have not yet started to express your faith at the meetings, why not talk this over with someone who can help you in this regard, such as the brother presiding at one of the meetings? In this way, you, too, will show that you have chosen to follow God’s way.
5 One of the basic characteristics of Jehovah’s dedicated Christian witnesses is love, love not only for those on the outside as shown by witnessing to them and by setting a godly example, but love also for those inside the Christian congregation. (1 Pet. 1:22; 4:8) Even if you are new in the truth, have you looked around the Kingdom Hall recently or at your book study group to see whom you can help? Who might need your love, your kindness, your encouragement? Who might need some comfort because of hard conditions at home or because of other problems that have come up recently? So, in addition to your attending meetings and participating in the field service, you can display this marvelous quality of love in many ways, including the attitude you display toward your neighbors and those with whom you may work at secular employment. This loving outlook on your part will give added evidence that you have chosen life by making it your determination to do things in God’s way.
[Blurb on page 1]
Seek Life by Conforming to God’s Way of Salvation.

