Presenting the Good News​—Using the Bible in Introducing Ourselves
1 As you preach from house to house, what main impression would you like to leave? Would it not be that you are a disciple of Jesus, speaking from the Word of God? But for a person to be known as a disciple of Jesus Christ, it stands to reason that he must be equipped and ready to use the Bible in his preaching and teaching activity. Of course, to use the Bible effectively requires preparation, but surprisingly it is no more difficult than going to the doors and just making a brief magazine presentation. To illustrate: Have you ever thought of going to the door, Bible in hand, and saying something like the following?
2 “Hello, I’m sharing a thought from the Bible on the promise of better times for the people. It is from the book of Revelation (21:4), which says of God: ‘He will wipe out every tear from their eyes, and death will be no more.’” There you have a brief, but pointed introduction, and from the Bible you have read God’s words for the benefit of the householder. From there you may either proceed directly to what you have to offer, be it magazines, books or a Bible, or you can go into a more lengthy presentation if the householder permits. The main thing is that you are clearly representing yourself to the householder as a disciple of Jesus speaking from the Bible.
3 Here is another short introduction that you might find effective: “Good morning, I’m glad I found you at home, as I have a brief message for you from your Bible, which I know will bring you comfort in these times of distress. It is here in Proverbs 29:2.” Then read this brief scripture and either go on to make the offer or extend the sermon. It is not necessary to read a long Scripture verse. Often just a part of the verse​—the part you wish to impress on the householder—​is all that is needed, and then move on to the offer you have.
4 How refreshing this can be to those at the doors who will listen! And as you leave the door they will recall that a disciple of the Lord Jesus was at their home, preaching from the Word of God, the Bible. If you try it, we are sure that you will fully enjoy it.
[Blurb on page 8]
Have You Tried Using a One-Scripture Presentation Yet?

