Your Service Meetings
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 14
13 min: Song 6. Brother opening meeting can discuss Deuteronomy 30:19, 20, emphasizing need to seek life by conforming to God’s way of salvation.
15 min: “Presenting the Good News​—Using the Bible in Introducing Ourselves. Audience discussion together with several short demonstrations, if desired.
15 min: “Choose Life​—Follow God’s Way!” Questions and answers. Could interview new ones relative to privilege of sharing in the field service, commenting at meetings and using the Bible in the house-to-house work. Get heartfelt expressions of appreciation.
17 min: Concluding comments. Encourage each one to use Evolution book fully this month. Cover accounts report also highlights of Branch Letter. Tie in comments on ‘True ‘Rehabilitation.’” (7/8/75 Awake!, p. 29) Urge brothers to study for part on Pride and Humility next week. Song 7.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 21
Shun Pride​—Cultivate Humility
15 min: Song 87. Introduction, followed by talk on Watchtower article of August 1, 1975 “Youths, Make Your Life Worth Living.” Highlight the good and proper attitude that Christian youths should have, not being filled with the pride and worldliness of this system of things, but with true humility. Make local application, where possible, to encourage young ones in the congregation. (If there is a qualified younger brother available, a ministerial servant, one who is a good example might be advisable to assign him this talk.)
30 min: Elder discusses with audience the qualities of pride and humility. Pride defined as inordinate self-esteem an unreasoning feeling of superiority as to one’s talents. Humility, just the opposite, means freedom from pride or arrogance. God’s view of pride and humility clearly stated in 2 Samuel 22:28; Psalm 138:6. (1) In Bible times, how did Israel’s King Uzziah show himself to be a proud person, and what was the outcome? (2 Chron. 26:15-21); (2)  How did Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon show himself filled with pride, and what was the result’? (Dan. 4:29-33); (3) What did Nebuchadnezzar come to appreciate? (Dan. 4:37); (4)  On the other hand, why did an angel of Jehovah call Daniel the prophet, a “very desirable man’? (Dan. 10:11, 12); (5)  How did the Lord Jesus Christ show himself to be truly an outstanding example of humility? (Phil. 2:5-8); (6) How will his humility further be shown at the end of his rule of a thousand years? (1 Cor. 15:28). [Cover the above in 15 min.​—Another elder can discuss the balance of this part in 15 min.]
Discuss the following situations and what pride or humility might do for such persons. (The comments in brackets are given to stimulate thinking.) Reproved for wrongdoing: [One might stop association with congregation, keep on in wrong conduct, show arrogant spirit. Or, might keep in even closer association to prevent wrong conduct from occurring again, humble oneself showing he is not arrogant. (Heb. 12:11)] Cannot get along with someone in the congregation: [Refuse to speak, or speak evilly of such to others, slander, backbite. Read and apply Colossians 3:12-14, or consider the course Paul and Barnabas followed when problems arose between them. (Acts 15:36-40)] Have difficulty accepting counsel regarding our children: [Go on defensive, become resentful. spiteful, refuse to listen to or apply counsel. Or, try to understand why counsel given, apply toward children, apply advice from God’s Word. (Ps. 119:18, 105, 130; Prov. 3:11, 12)] Differences between husband and wife or parents and children: [Refuse to talk, husband exercises authority in demanding, unloving way, wife does spiteful things, refuses to cooperate willingly, mocks or belittles husband, children refuse to communicate, think parents old-fashioned. Or, apply wise counsel Ephesians 4:26; 5:22-24, 28, 29; 6:1-4; James 1:19-21.] The lesson to be learned: “God opposes the haughty ones but he gives undeserved kindness to the humble ones.”​—Jas. 4:6.
15 min: Concluding comments. Get observations from audience as to practical application of the material just discussed. What did you learn? How might these points help to prepare us for the future? Song 88.
WEEK STARTING SEPTEMBER 28
12 min: Song 71. Introduction and then talk based on special letter sent to congregations on Awake! of October 8, “A Sound Guide for Modern Living.” Select appropriate information designed to enthuse the brothers for using this magazine in the field. Take some highlights from the letter; also, tell how special issue will be used and by whom, including Bible students.
16 min: Assemblies Enhance Our Appreciation for God’s Word. Chairman discusses 1975 Yearbook, p. 210, par. 3, to p. 233, par. 4, with panel of about six brothers and sisters, including some newer ones. Show how our appreciation for the Bible has been enhanced at notable assemblies through the years.
The panel can be asked such questions as these: (1) During the 1950 Theocracy’s Increase Assembly, how was understanding clarified regarding the “princes” ? (Pp. 213, 214) (2) The 1958 Divine Will International Assembly is memorable for what reasons? (Pp. 216-218) (3) How was the New World Translation made available, and what have been notable features and effects of this Bible version? (Pp. 219, 220) (4) During the international assembly of 1953, what program was announced, and what improvement has resulted as far as our preaching work is concerned? (Pp. 227, 228) (5) At large assemblies since 1966, what new method has been used to impart Bible instruction and counsel? Has this means been effective? (Pp. 233, 234) What lessons were conveyed by the dramas at the district assemblies this past summer?
Emphasize in conclusion that assemblies provide needed instruction from God’s Word and help us to become better preachers of the good news. Hence, we do well to show our appreciation for God’s Word by reading and using it diligently and by assembling regularly with our fellow worshipers of Jehovah.
10 min: Are You Discerning? Suggest some short demonstrations highlighting the matter of discerning the circumstances as we talk to people at the doors and elsewhere. Get comments on each situation. (1) Have publisher witnessing but oblivious to the fact that the householder just got out of bed, is not awake at all and is totally unreceptive to what the publisher is saying. But publisher just keeps on talking, not discerning. (2)  Have a person very kindly say he is not interested today. Publisher thanks him and offers to return on another occasion. Does this show discernment? (3) Have irate individual definitely say he is NOT INTERESTED AT ALL. Publisher says rather boldly, “What aren’t you interested in? I haven’t even told you why I’m here.” Undiscerning publisher then proceeds on with presentation and householder walks away. Stress being discerning and flexible in preaching work, leave people in a pleasant mood as far as it depends on you.
22 min: Awake! presentation. “Take Notice of Him.” Are you wondering how best to present the subscription offer? If you are newly associated with Jehovah’s people and have not yet tried a one-scripture presentation, we recommend the following:
“Hello, almost everyone I meet would like to have a sound guide for living in these modern times. The Bible offers such counsel in Proverbs 3:5, 6. [Read.] Awake! shows how to do this in a modern world and what real hope exists for the future.” If the householder is interested and seems willing to listen to more, you could read verses one and two of Proverbs, chapter three. If you discern that it would be best to bring matters to a conclusion, you could refer to the title of the special Awake! and/​or make brief comments from an article that would be appropriate. When describing the Awake! subscription offer, you might want to say: “I’d be very happy to arrange for you to receive this outstanding magazine for just $1.50 a year. Awake! is truly one of a kind, for other newsmagazines tell what’s happening today, but only Awake! points to the remedy​—God’s kingdom. I’m sure you would enjoy having it along with these three free booklets.’ (If you would feel more comfortable going along with an experienced publisher listening for a few times before trying this on your own, fine.) Get comments from audience regarding use of presentation, especially from newer publishers, if they feel moved to share in this type of work for first time. Concluding comments. Song 58.
WEEK STARTING OCTOBER 5
12 min: Song 70. Introduction and discussion between brother and publisher who wants to share in field service for the first time. Utilize points from “Question Box” stressing proper conduct and good appearance in the field service.
15 min: “Hospitality​—A Mark of True Christianity.” Questions and answers.
10 min: “Helping the New Publishers.” Animated discussion of points in article by two brothers.
 5 min: Stress use of special Awake! magazine with Bible students, perhaps demonstrating how magazines could best be used by them.
18 min: “What the Churches Do Not Tell You.” (6/15/75 Watchtower, pp. 355-358) Informative, lively talk by qualified elder, emphasizing key scriptures supporting true worship as relating to God and Christ, life after death, the Christian view of politics and a wicked system to end. Help publishers to see how to use points in local territory. Song 65.

