From Our Readers
Races Unite  The series “Will All Races Ever Be United?” (August 22, 1993) helped me to see how racism got its start and how it has been passed down from one generation to another. It also helped me understand why not all Christians have necessarily overcome all their prejudices. In the past I found this to be very discouraging. But now I appreciate that it takes time to rid oneself of such bad inclinations. I’m looking forward to God’s righteous new world, where race will no longer be an issue.
C. W., United States
Making Cards  Thank you for the article “Let’s Send a Card.” (August 8, 1993) My grandma has been making cards for many years and sends them to all of us grandchildren. I am 13 years old and have been making cards myself for about two years. Using pressed flowers, as your article suggested, works very well. I learned that if you put some glue on top of the flowers and then sprinkle some glitter on top, it makes for a very nice effect.
J. B., United States
Disabilities  Few articles about disabilities have been as realistic as the article “Young People Ask . . . How Can I Cope With My Disability?” (June 8, 1993) After having served for some years as a minister at the branch office of Jehovah’s Witnesses in Rome, Italy, I was involved in a serious car accident that damaged my spinal column. Simple things like walking and holding a glass of water suddenly became difficult. Overnight I needed someone to help me get up, get dressed, climb stairs, and so forth. After a long period of anger, sadness, self-​pity, and silent tears, I finally came to grips with the situation and realized I had to make the best of it. With the support of a dedicated physical therapist, parents, and friends, my condition has improved, and I have continued serving at the branch. Believe me, in spite of disabilities, one can still be very active and useful!
A. E., Italy
Rock Collecting  As a doctor, I read with great interest your article “Treasure Hunting With a Difference.” (July 8, 1993) I noticed, however, that when you talked about the use of a hammer, you did not make any mention of protective wear for the eyes. This is very important, as small fragments of a stone can easily be kicked up by a hammer, and these can be very dangerous to one’s eyes.
G. T. W., England
We appreciate this helpful safety tip.​—ED.
Sense of Smell  I really enjoyed the article “Our Versatile Sense of Smell.” (July 22, 1993) Three years ago I did a school science project on this subject. Many people just do not realize how important the olfactory system is. Thank you for showing so many people how truly awe-​inspiring the sense of smell is.
L. T., United States
Animal Tales  I am a 20-​year-​old Zulu who loves learning about the wonders of creation. I deeply appreciated your article “The Silent Swooper.” (March 8, 1993) Among the Zulus, owls are considered birds of ill omen and are believed to be connected with witchcraft. When people see an owl, they will drive it away. Your simple and informative article was therefore appreciated.
Z. P. M., South Africa
 Thank you for the article “Jumping Musicians of the Insect World.” (April 8, 1993) Grasshoppers are often synonymous with plague. But the article aroused my sympathy for this insect​—and also increased my reverence for our meticulous and wise Creator.
V. P., Brazil

