Watching the World
More Concern Over Blood
Australian medical researchers are concerned that a potentially fatal virus may have contaminated the nation’s blood supply. The human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV-1) is a “cousin” of the AIDS virus and can cause a rare form of leukemia and diseases of the nervous system. It is common in Japan, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands, and Australia (among Aboriginals). According to reports, two Australian men have already died of the leukemia associated with the virus, and a third has been diagnosed as suffering nerve damage. HTLV-1 is spread in the same way as AIDS, namely through sex relations, intravenous drug use, breast-​feeding, blood transfusion, and childbirth. The director of the New South Wales Red Cross Blood Transfusion Service says that the ingredients “are clearly present” for the transmission of the virus through blood transfusion, according to The Courier Mail, a Brisbane newspaper. The virus has been detected in at least six blood donors in Australia.
Ulcers and Smoking
“According to information from the World Health Organization, about 10 percent of the world’s population had, have, or will have an ulcer”, says gastroenterologist Dr. Thomas Szego from the Albert Einstein Hospital in São Paulo, reports Jornal da Tarde. Although gastritis (inflammation of the stomach) may lead to ulcers, “mild gastritis is part of the normal aging process of the stomach,” continues the account. Nevertheless, such things as prolonged stress, fasting, and alcohol or medicine abuse can irritate the stomach. However, Dr. Szego warns: “If I had to select a single factor as the most harmful to the stomach, I would choose the cigarette. It is very bad for the gastric mucous membrane.” He adds: “Along with saliva, the smoker swallows cigarette residues, increasing acid secretion and reducing the stomach’s defenses.”
The Wolf Returns
The gray wolf has returned to France after a 50-​year absence, says the French magazine Terre Sauvage. Although these wolves once thrived there and in all of Europe, they were almost entirely eliminated from Western Europe through hunting, poisoning, and loss of habitat. Protected in Italy since 1977, a small wolf population survived in Italy’s Apennine mountains. With the formation in 1989 of the Mercantour National Park in southeastern France and the presence of its now abundant herds of chamois, wild sheep, and deer, wolves are apparently recolonizing France from across the Italian border in search of their natural prey and greater territory. Although wolves have been officially protected in France since 1989, Italian biologist Luigi Boitani notes: ‘The greatest danger for the wolf is man’s deep-​rooted fear of them.’
Cheap Power
Tractor power has revolutionized farming. And, of course, it has profited the automotive and oil industries. However, the use of draft animals is still popular. The magazine Farmer’s Weekly reports on one of the largest citrus estates in the world, near the South African town of Potgietersrust, which breeds its own mules for transport. Draft animals do not require specialized knowledge to maintain, nor do they require the import of expensive spare parts and fuel. “They can be fed crop residue and grazed on available land,” explains Farmer’s Weekly. Animal power, the magazine concludes, should be “used on a far larger scale in large engineering, construction and road building/​maintenance projects in rural areas in Africa than is currently the case.”
Counterfeit Ferraris
Bank notes, checks, tapes, and designer handbags and jeans are normal in the repertoire of skilled counterfeiters. But recently Italian police have even discovered a trade in imitations of an automobile, the classic Ferrari. Using original spare parts, drawings, and plans, mechanics who once worked for the famous automobile manufacturer were specializing in “perfect” reproductions of models produced in the ’50’s and ’60’s and selling them to collectors as genuine. Considering the prices on the international classic-​car market, it was “a multi-​million dollar con trick,” reports La Repubblica.
Millions of Street Children
“Worldwide more than 100 million children live on the streets, and at least half of them use drugs,” reports the World Health Organization. A study of large cities, such as Rio de Janeiro, Manila, Lusaka, Montreal, and Toronto, showed little difference among them in regard to drug abuse by street children. According to the coordinator of the research, economist Hans Emblad, “seemingly the availability of drugs is the determining factor with regard to the number of drug users.” Yet, he continues, “the authorities, just like most of the social institutions that deal with street children, tend to ignore totally the drug problem.” Although others “try to drive the minors away,” according to Emblad, “the problem is that they have no place to go.” The report in O Estado de S. Paulo adds that street children “want to survive.”
Longest Veil
As many as a hundred bridesmaids were needed to carry the longest bridal veil in the world; 1,000 feet [305 m] of white material “followed” a young couple who are from Naples, Italy, when they made their way to get married before a crowd of curious onlookers. The stylist who created the nuptial train had been wanting to realize this record veil for some time, but until now he had not been able to find a bride who was prepared to wear it. Then he met the Neapolitan bride, and “the dream became a reality,” said the satisfied designer. And the previous record? A veil worn by a French bride, which measured some 912 feet [278 m].
AIDS Prevention
“There are obvious gaps between the Ministry of Education, teachers, and parents on how to handle AIDS education,” reports the Japanese newspaper Mainichi Shimbun. The controversy is over the ministry’s first pamphlet on AIDS education for high school students, entitled AIDS​—For Accurate Understanding. The pamphlet stated: “The infection [of AIDS] can be prevented if condoms are used properly.” The ministry received many letters and telephone calls regarding the pamphlet, 90 percent of which were critical. Some critics insisted that “controlled sexual behavior should be taught rather than the use of condoms.” A newspaper prepared by a commercial firm for posting on school information boards featured AIDS prevention and was hailed with approval. It emphasized virginity.
Parrot Testimony
A parrot became the key witness in a court in India’s southern state of Kerala. The Indian Express reported the court case involving neighbors who were locked in a dispute over who owned the parrot. To settle the argument, the judge ordered the parrot to appear in court and stand as a witness. Crucial testimony was provided when the cooperative parrot obligingly rattled off the names of the children belonging to the family that had earlier reported the parrot missing. Thanks to the faithful parrot, the district judge decided the case in favor of this family.
Laser-​Gun Tag Games
“The object of the game is to shoot and not to get shot too many times yourself,” reports The Globe and Mail of Toronto, Canada. The traditional game of tag has gone high tech. After ten minutes of shooting others with beams of light in a futuristic, sinister, fog-​filled arena with “pumped-​up music,” one participant described it as “stress-​relieving.” Hundreds of such entertainment centers are popping up in North America, England, Europe, Australia, and Israel. There is growing concern that such amusement encourages violence. University of Calgary sociology professor Robert Stebbins said in The Globe [The Globe and Mail]: “There is a fuzzy line between war games considered problematic and those considered acceptable, such as chess with its castles and armies. The intent is violent.” One teenage player said: “It seems kind of weird to promote a game for pleasure that is associated with war. . . . When you think of the message this gives, it doesn’t seem right.”
The War That Smokes
Because of the war, food and other essentials became scarce in Bosnia and Herzegovina. But in the city of Sarajevo, even after several months of siege, a cigarette factory was able to keep its production line running. According to The New York Times, in that war-​torn country, many grumble more about the lack of cigarettes than about the lack of food, water, or ammunition. People have been willing to pay between $5 and $50 for a pack of cigarettes. The Times noted that anyone who proposed or “tried to enforce a smoking ban in restaurants, offices or anywhere else would surely find himself gazing down the wrong end of a gun.”

