VOL. XXXVII. MARCH 15 No. 6 
A. D. 1916-A.M. 6044 



CONTENTS 

Thoughts of the Memorial Season . . 83 
First-Fruits and After-Fruits . . 83 
Jesus Our Passover Lamb ... 84 
Primary Significance of Bread and Cup 84 
Deeper Significance of Loaf and Cup . 85 
The Celebration in the Kingdom . . 85 
Opposition from Religious World . . 86 

The Ransom and the Sin-Offering ... 87 
Ransom Price and Ransom Work ... 87 
The Sin-Offering is Different . . 88 
The Secondary Sin-Offering ... 88 
Value of Scape Goat's Suffering . . 89 



"Why Persecutest Thou Me?" .... 90 

Conscientious Wrong-Doing ... 90 

St. Paul as a Type 92 

Aeneas and Dorcas 92 

Meaning of the Term Saint ... 92 

Lesson of the Lilies 94 

Passover Proving (Poem) 94 

Interesting Letters 95 

page 82 

PUBLISHED BY 
WATCH TOWER BIBLE AND TRACT SOCIETY 

CHARLES T. RUSSELL, PRESIDENT 
"BROOKLYN TABERNACLE," 13-17 HICKS ST., 
BROOKLYN, N. Y., U. S. A. 

Foreign Agenciesr-British Branch: LONDON TABERNACLE, 
Lancaster Gate, London, W. German Branch: Unterdorner Str., 76, 
Barmen. Australasian Branch: Flinders Building, Flinders St., Melbourne. 
Please address the SOCIETY in every case. 



ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.00 (4s.) IN ADVANCE. 

SEND MONEY BY EXPRESS, BANK DRAFT, POSTAL ORDER, OR REGISTERED. 

FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES BY FOREIGN MONEY ORDERS, ONLY. 



Terms to the Lord's Poor as FolIows:-All Bible Students who, by 
reason of old age, or other infirmity or adversity, are unable to pay 
for this Journal, will be supplied Free if they send a Postal Card 
each May stating their case and requesting its continuance. We are 
not only willing, but anxious, that all such be on our list continually 
and in touch with the STUDIES, etc. 



ALSO FRENCH, GERMAN, SWEDISH AND DANISH EDITIONS. 
SAMPLE COPIES FREE. 



ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MAIL MATTER AT BROOKLYN, N. Y., POSTOFFICE. 
ENTERED AS SECOND-CLASS MATTER AT THE POSTOFFICE DEPT., OTTAWA, CANADA. 



COLPORTEUR'S SAMPLE CASES 

We have on hand some very neat Colporteur Cases which 
hold a complete set of STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, regular edition. 
These Cases are neatly gotten up and much resemble the 
doctor's case. Price, $3; charges collect. 



ARMENIAN STUDIES AND SCENARIO 

We have now the First Volume of SCRIPTURE STUDIES and 
the DRAMA SCENARIO in the Armenian Language. Order as 
needed— usual prices. 



TESCHENDORF NEW TESTAMENTS EXHAUSTED 

Our stock of Tischendorf New Testaments is exhausted. 
We can find none in the United States. We are seeking some 
in Great Britain— thus far without success. The book is published 
in Germany and is not obtainable from there under 
present conditions. 



ANOTHER VOLUNTEER NUMBER OF B. S. M. 

Those who have used the first Volunteer matter of the 
season and who are, therefore, properly ready for our second 
number for 1916 volunteering, will please notice that it will 
be ready for them shortly and that orders may be sent in at 
once. The leading article in it will be "What Is A Christian?" 
This article seems to appeal to a very large number of intelligent, 
conscientious, thinking people, and, we believe, will 
be a means of doing much good. 

Regular Volunteer matter is sent "Collect," thus insuring 
prompt delivery; but the Society reimburses the transportation 
expense on receipt of the bill for same. 



I. B. S. A. BEREAN BIBLE STUDIES 
FOR THE MONTH OF APRIL 

Questions from Manual on SERIES THIRD of 
"STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES" 
STUDY IV-V. 

Week of April 2 Q. 40 to 46 Week of April 16 Q. 1 to 8 

Week of April 9 Q.47 to 52 Week of April 23 Q. 9 to 15 

Week of April 16 Q. 1 to 8 

Question Manuals on Vol. III., STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 5c. each; 
or 50c. per dozen, postpaid. 



R5869 : page 83 

THOUGHTS ON THE MEMORIAL SEASON 

"For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do 
show the Lord's death till He come."— 1 Corinthians 1 1:26. 

THE Passover season, as celebrated by the 
Jews, is approaching, beginning this year 
on the 17th of April. But the interest of 
Christians in this season centers especially 
in the slaying of the lamb, which preceded 
the Passover Feast, and which typified the 



Lamb of God, Christ Jesus. Our celebration 

of this Passover season, therefore, relates 

to the great Antitype. At this time we 

as Christians commemorate the greatest 

event of all history, the sacrificial death of the Savior of 

the world. Our celebration this year properly begins on 

the evening of April 16th, after six o'clock, which is the 

beginning of the 14th of Nisan. 

We greatly regret that, while millions of professed 
Christians and Jews will in some formal ceremonies and 
in a perfunctory manner celebrate at that season this 
most important event, but few of either religion discern 
the real significance of the celebration. Could their minds 
be thoroughly awakened to its true significance, there 
would be a religious revival such as the world has never 
yet known. But, as St. Paul declares, "The god of this 
world hath blinded the minds" of many; and even some 
whose eyes of understanding are partially opened, St. 
Peter describes as being blind and unable to see afar off. 
They are unable to see the deep things of God in respect 
to these ceremonies, which have been celebrated for now 
more than three thousand years, in type and antitype. 

The Israelites were commanded to celebrate the Passover 
as the first feature of the Law and as one of their 
greatest memorials as a nation. Therefore we find that 
in some degree the Passover is celebrated by Jews in all 
parts of the world, even by those who claim to be 
agnostics. They still have a measure of respect for the 
Passover as an ancient custom. But is it not strange that 
with the bright minds which many of our Jewish friends 
possess, they have never thought it worth while to inquire 
as to the meaning of this celebration? 

Why was the Passover lamb slain and eaten? Why 
was the blood sprinkled upon the door-posts and lintels? 
Of course, God so commanded; but what was the reason, 
the motive, behind the Divine command— what lesson, 
what object? Truly a reasonable God gives reasonable 
commands; and in due time Jehovah will cause His faithful 
people to understand the significance of every requirement. 
If the Jew can realize that his Sabbath day is a 
type of a coming Epoch of rest and blessing, of release 
from toil, sorrow and death, why cannot he see that 
similarly all the features of the Mosaic institution were 
designed of the Lord to be foreshadowings of various 
blessings, to be bestowed "in due time"? 

FIRST-FRUITS AND AFTER-FRUITS 

Blessed are those whose eyes can see that Jesus was 
indeed "the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of the 
world"; that the cancellation of the world's sin is to be 
effected by the payment of man's penalty, by the application 
of Jesus' sacrificial merit in due time for the sins of 
all mankind. Only the Church have as yet received of 
the merit of Jesus' death. Greatly favored are those who 
can see that as the whole world lost Divine favor and 



came under Divine sentence of death, with its concomitants 

of sorrow and pain, so it was necessary that a 

satisfaction of Justice should be made before this sentence, 

or curse, could be removed; and that therefore, as 

the Apostle declares, "Christ died for our sins"— "the Just 

for the unjust," that He might bring us back to God. 

Thus He opened up a new way— a way to life everlasting. 

R5870 : page 83 

The Scriptures call the Church of Christ "the Church 
of the First-borns," "a kind of First-fruits unto God of 
His creatures," "the First-fruits unto God and the Lamb." 
(Hebrews 12:23; James 1:18; Rev. 14:4.) These expressions 
imply that ultimately there will be others of 
God's family later born; they imply after-fruits. Christian 
people in general seem to have overlooked these 
Scriptures, so far as making application of them is concerned, 
and have generally come to believe that only those 
are ever to be saved who are designated in the Bible as 
the First-fruits— that there will be no after-fruits. 

But the Passover type indicates that it was God's purpose 
to save all Israelites; and that as a nation they represented 
all of mankind that will ever come into harmony 
with God and be granted everlasting life in the Land of 
Promise. Let us note that there were two Passovers— 
the one in which only the first-borns were passed over; 
and another greater one at the Red Sea, when by Divine 
Power the whole nation of Israel was miraculously delivered 
and led across the channel of the Sea especially 
prepared for them by the accentuation of winds and tides. 
These passed over dry-shod and were saved; while the 
hosts of Pharaoh, representing all who eventually will go 
into the Second Death, were overwhelmed in the Sea. 
The passover at the Red Sea pictures the ultimate deliverance 
from the power of sin and death of every 
creature of Adam's race who desires to come into accord 
with the Lord and to render Him worship, all who will 
ever become a part of Israel; for not one Israelite was 
left behind in Egyptian bondage. 

R5870 : page 84 

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE FIRST-BORNS 

But this passover is not the one which we are about to 
celebrate. We are to celebrate the antitype of the passing 
over of the first-borns of Israel by the angel, in the land 
of Egypt. Only the first-born ones of Israel were endangered 
on that night in Egypt, though the deliverance of 
the entire nation depended upon the salvation, the passing 
over, of those first-borns. So only the First-borns of the 
sons of God from the human plane, the Church of Christ, 
are now being passed over during this night of the Gospel 
Age; only these are in danger of the destroying angel. 
These are all under the sprinkled blood. 



We see, in harmony with all the Scriptures, that the 
"Little Flock," "the First-fruits unto God of His 
creatures," "the Church of the First-borns," alone is 
being spared, passed over, during the present Age. We 
see that the remainder of mankind who may desire to follow 
the great antitypical Moses, when in the Age to follow 
this He shall lead the people forth from the bondage 
of Sin and Death, are not now in danger of eternal destruction- 
only the First-borns. 

The Church of the First-borns are those of mankind 
who, in advance of the remainder of the race, have had 
the eyes of their understanding opened to a realization 
of their condition of bondage and their need of deliverance 
and to God's willingness to fulfil to them all of His 
good promises. Furthermore, they are such as have 
responded to the grace of God, have made a full consecration 
of themselves to Him and His service, and in 
return have been begotten of the Holy Spirit. With these 
it is a matter of life or death whether or not they remain 
in the Household of Faith— behind the blood of sprinkling. 

For this class to go forth from under the blood would 
imply a disregard of Divine mercy. It would signify that 
they were doing despite to Divine goodness; and that, 
having enjoyed their share of the mercy of God as represented 
in the blood of the Lamb, they were not appreciative 
of it. For such, the Scriptures declare, "There 
remaineth no more a sacrifice for sins"; "Christ dieth no 
more." They are to be esteemed as adversaries of God, 
whose fate was symbolized in the destruction of the first-borns 
of Egypt. The Church of the First-borns, through 
the begetting of the Holy Spirit and the greater knowledge 
and privileges which they enjoy in every way, have 
a far greater responsibility than has the world; for they 
are the only ones yet in danger of the Second Death. 
This is the lesson of the Passover type, and applies only 
to true Christians. 

By and by the night of sin and death will have passed 
away, the glorious Morn of deliverance will have come, 
and The Christ, the antitypical Moses, will lead forth, 
will deliver, all the people of God— all who, when they 
shall come to know, will be glad to reverence, honor and 
obey the will of God. That Day of Deliverance will be 
the entire Millennial Age, at the close of which all evil and 
evil-doers, symbolized by the hosts of Egypt, will be 
utterly cut off in the Second Death— destruction. 

JESUS OUR PASSOVER LAMB 

The Apostle Paul clearly and positively identifies the 
Passover Lamb with our Lord Jesus, saying, "Christ our 
Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us keep the 
feast." He informs us that we all need the blood of 
sprinkling, not upon our houses, but upon our hearts. 
We are to partake of the Lamb; we must appropriate to 
ourselves the merit of Christ, the value of His sacrifice; 
we must also eat of the unleavened bread of Truth, if 



we would be strong and prepared for the deliverance in 
the Morning of the New Dispensation. Thus we put on 
Christ, not merely by faith; but more and more we put on 
His character and are transformed into His glorious image 
in our hearts and lives. 

We are to feed on Christ as the Jews fed on the literal 
lamb. Instead of the bitter herbs, which aided and 
whetted their appetites, we have bitter experiences and 
trials which the Lord prepares for us, and which help to 
wean our affections from earthly things and to give us 
increased appetite to feed upon the Lamb and the unleavened 
Bread of Truth. We, too, are to remember that 
we have here no continuing city; but as pilgrims, 
strangers, staff in hand, we are to gird ourselves for our 
journey to the Heavenly Canaan, to all the glorious things 
which God has in reservation for the Church of the First-borns, 
in association with our Redeemer, as kings and 
priests unto God. 

Our Lord Jesus also fully identified Himself with the 
Passover Lamb. On the same night of His betrayal, just 
preceding His crucifixion. He gathered His Apostles in 
the upper room, saying, "With desire have I desired to 
eat this Passover with you before I suffer." It was necessary 
that as Jews they should celebrate the Passover 
Supper on that night— the night of the anniversary of the 
slaying of the Passover Iamb in Egypt, of the saving of 
the typical first-borns from the typical "prince of this 
world"— Pharaoh— the same date on which the real Passover 
Lamb was to be slain. But as soon as the requirements 
of the type had been fulfilled, our Lord Jesus instituted 
a new Memorial upon the old foundation, saying, 
"Do this in remembrance of Me." 

PRIMARY SIGNIFICATION OF THE BREAD AND THE CUP 

We recall the circumstances of the first Memorial— 
the blessing of the Bread and of the Cup, the fruit of the 
vine; and our Lord's declaration that these represented 
His broken body and shed blood, and that all His followers 
should participate, not only feeding upon Him, but 
being broken with Him; not only partaking of the merit 
of His blood. His sacrifice, but also laying down their 
lives in His service, in cooperating with Him in every 
and any manner, that they might later share all His 
honor and glory in the Kingdom. How precious are these 
thoughts to those who are rightly in tune with our Lord! 

In presenting to the disciples the unleavened bread as 
a memorial, Jesus said, "Take, eat; this is My body." 
The evident meaning of His words is. This symbolizes, or 
represents. My body. The bread was not actually His 
body; for in no sense had His body yet been broken. In 
no sense would it then have been possible for them to 
have partaken of Him actually or antitypically, the sacrifice 
not being as yet finished. But the picture is complete 
when we recognize that the unleavened (pure, 
unfermented) bread represented our Lord's sinless flesh 



—leaven being a symbol of sin under the Law, and especially 
commanded to be put away at the Passover season. 
On another occasion Jesus gave a lesson which 
interprets to us this symbol. He said, "The Bread of 
God is He which cometh down from Heaven, and giveth 
life unto the world." "I am the Bread of Life." "lam 
the living Bread which came down from Heaven; if any 
man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever; and the 
Bread that I will give is My flesh, which I will give for 
the life of the world. "-John 6:33,35,51. 

In order to appreciate how we are to eat, or appropriate, 
this living Bread, it is necessary for us to understand 
just what the bread signifies. According to our 
Lord's explanation of the matter, it was His flesh which 
He sacrificed for us. It was not His prehuman existence 
as a spirit being that was sacrificed, although that was 

R5870 : page 85 

laid down and its glory laid aside, in order that He might 
take our human nature. It was the fact that our Lord 
Jesus was holy, harmless, undefiled and separate from 
sinners— without any contamination from Father Adam, 
and hence free from sin— that enabled Him to become the 
Redeemer of Adam and his race, that permitted Him to 
give His life "a Ransom for all, to be testified in due 
time."— 1 Timothy 2:3-6. 

When we see that it was the pure, spotless nature of 
our Lord Jesus that was laid down on behalf of sinners, 
we see what it is that we are privileged to appropriate. 
The very thing that He laid down for us we are to "eat," 
appropriate to ourselves; that is to say. His perfect human 
life was given to redeem all the race of man from condemnation 
to death, to enable them to return to human 
perfection and everlasting life, if they would; and we are 

R5871 : page 85 

to realize this and accept Him as our Savior from death. 
The Scriptures show us, however, that if God would consider 
all past sins canceled, and should recognize us as 
having a right to human perfection, this still would not 
make us perfect, nor give us the right to eternal life. 

In order that any of the race of Adam might profit by 
the sacrifice of Jesus, it was necessary that He should 
rise from the tomb on the Divine plane of life, that He 
should ascend to the Father and deposit the sacrificial 
merit of His death in the hands of Justice, and receive 
from the Father "all power in Heaven and in earth." As 
relates to the world, it was necessary also that in the 
Father's due time He should come again to earth, a 
glorious Divine Being, then to be to the whole world a 
Mediator, Prophet, Priest and King, to assist back to 
perfection and to harmony with God all who will avail 
themselves of the wonderful privileges then to be offered. 

It is this same blessing that the Gospel Church of this 



Age receive by faith in their Redeemer; namely, justification 
by faith— not justification to a spirit nature, which 
we never had and never lost, and which Christ did not 
redeem; but justification to human nature, which Father 
Adam possessed and lost, and which Christ redeemed by 
giving His own sinless flesh. His perfect human life, as 
our Ransom-sacrifice. The partaking of the unleavened 
bread at the Memorial season, then, means to us primarily 
the appropriation to ourselves, by faith, of justification to 
human life-right— a right to human life— with all its 
privileges, which our Lord at His own cost procured for 
us. Likewise the fruit of the vine symbolizes primarily 
our Savior's life given for us. His human life. His being, 
His soul, poured out unto death on our behalf; and the 
appropriation of this by us also signifies, primarily, our 
acceptance of Restitution rights and privileges secured 
by our Lord's sacrifice of these. 

DEEPER SIGNIFICANCE OF THE LOAF AND THE CUP 

Now let us note that God's object in justifying the 
Church by faith during this Gospel Age, in advance of the 
justification of the world by works of obedience in the 
Millennial Age, is for the very purpose of permitting this 
class who now see and hear, who now appreciate the great 
sacrifice which Love has made on man's behalf, to present 
their bodies a living sacrifice, and thus to have part with 
the Lord Jesus in His sacrifice— as members of His Body. 
This deeper meaning of the Memorial He did not refer to 
directly. It was doubtless one of the things to which He 
referred when He said, "I have yet many things to say 
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now; howbeit, when it, 
the Spirit of Truth, shall come, it will guide you into all 
Truth, and will show you things to come."— John 16:12,13. 

This Spirit of Truth, the power and influence of the 
Father bestowed through Christ, speaking through the 
Apostle Paul, clearly explains the very high import of 
the Memorial; for St. Paul says, writing to the consecrated 
Church, "The Cup of blessing for which we give 
thanks, is it not the participation of the blood of Christ? 
The Loaf which we break, is it not the participation of the 
Body of Christ?"— the sharing with Christ as joint-sacrificers 
with Him even unto death, that thereby we might 
be counted in with Him as sharers of the glory which He 
has received as the reward of His faithfulness?— "For we, 
being many, are one Loaf and one Body."— 1 Corinthians 10:16,17. 
—Emphatic Diaglott. 

Both views of this impressive ordinance are very important. 
It is essential, first of all, that we should see our 
justification through our Lord's sacrifice. It is proper 
then that we should realize that the entire Christ, the entire 
anointed company, is, from the Divine standpoint, a 
composite Body of many members, of which Jesus is 
the Head (1 Corinthians 12:12-14), and that this Body, 
this Church, as a whole must be broken— that each member 
of it must become a copy of the Lord Jesus and must 



walk in the footsteps of His sacrifice. We do this by 
laying down our lives for the brethren, as Jesus laid down 
His life— directly for His Jewish brethren, but really for 
the whole world, according to the Father's purpose. 

It is not our spiritual life that we lay down, even as 
it was not Jesus' spiritual life that He laid down. As He 
sacrificed His actual, perfect being. His humanity, so we 
are to sacrifice our justified selves, reckoned perfect 
through Jesus' merit, but not actually so. Likewise the 
Loaf and the Cup represent suffering. The grains of 
wheat must be crushed and ground before they can become 
bread for man; they cannot retain their life and 
individuality as grains. The grapes must submit to the 
pressure that will extract all their juices, must lose their 
identity as grapes, if they would become the life-giving 
elixir for the world. So it is with the Christ company. 
Head and Body. Thus we see the beauty and force of 
St. Paul's statement that the Lord's children are participants 
in the one Loaf and the one Cup. But it is His 
blood, the virtue of His sacrifice, that counts. Our blood 
has virtue only because of His merit counted to us, only 
because we are members of His Body. 

Our Lord distinctly declares that the Cup, the fruit of 
the vine, represents blood; that is, life— not life retained, 
but life shed, given, yielded up— sacrificed life. He tells 
us that this life poured out was for the remission of 
sins; and that all who would be His must drink of it, must 
accept His sacrifice and appropriate it by faith. They 
must receive life from this source. It will not do for 
any to claim an immortality outside of Christ. It will 
not do to declare that life is the result of obedience to 
the Law. It will not do to claim that faith in some great 
teacher and obedience to his instructions will amount to 
the same thing and bring eternal life. There is no way 
to attain eternal life other than through the blood once 
shed as the Ransom-price for the whole world. "There 
is none other name given under Heaven or amongst men 
whereby we must be saved." (Acts 4: 12.) Likewise 
there is no other way by which we can attain to the new 
nature than by accepting the Lord's invitation to drink 
of His Cup, and to be broken with Him as members of 
the one Loaf, to be buried with Him in baptism into His 
death, and thus to be with Him in His resurrection to 
glory, honor and immortality.— Romans 6:3-5; 2:7. 

THE CELEBRATION IN THE KINGDOM 

On the occasion of the institution of the Memorial 
Supper, our dear Lord, as usual, had something to say 
about the Kingdom, the theme of His every discourse. 

R587 1 : page 86 

Those to whom He had promised a share in the Kingdom 
if faithful, He reminded of His declaration that He would 
go away to receive a Kingdom and to come again and 



receive them to Himself to share in it. He now adds 
that this Memorial which He was instituting would find 
its fulfilment in the Kingdom, that He would no more 
drink of the fruit of the vine until He should drink it 
anew with them in the Father's Kingdom. 

Just what our Lord meant by this statement might be 
difficult to determine positively, but it seems not inconsistent 
to understand Him to mean that as a result of 
the trials and sufferings symbolized in His Cup, there 
will be jubilation in the Kingdom. "He shall see of the 
travail of His soul and shall be satisfied." He will look 
back over the trials and difficulties endured in faithful 
obedience to the Father's will, and will rejoice in these as 
He sees the grand outcome— the blessings which will come 
to all mankind. This jubilation will be shared by all His 
disciples who have drunk of this Cup, first in justification, 
then in consecration and sacrifice with Him. These have 
His promise that they shall reign with Him; and when 
the reign shall have begun, when the Kingdom shall have 
been established, looking back they shall praise the way 
that God has led them day by day, even unto the end of 
their earthly course, and even though it has been a "narrow 
way," a way of self-sacrifice, a way of self-denial. 

Our dear Master's faith stood the test of all these 
trying hours which He knew to be so near the time of 
His apprehension and death. The fact that He rendered 
thanks to the Father for the bread and the cup is indicative 
of a joyful acquiescence in all the sufferings which the 
breaking of the bread and the crushing of the grapes 
implied. Already He was satisfied with the Father's arrangement. 
In line with this spirit was the singing of a 
hymn as they parted, a hymn of praise no doubt, thanksgiving 
to the Father that His course on earth was so 
nearly finished, and that He had found thus far grace 
sufficient for His need. 

In considering the events of those solemn hours which 
followed the Memorial Supper, let us follow the Redeemer 
to Gethsemane, and behold Him "with strong cryings 
and tears" praying "unto Him who was able to save Him 
out of death"— expressive of our Master's fear of 
death lest in some particular He might have failed to 
follow out the Father's Plan, and therefore be thought 
unworthy of a resurrection. We note that our Lord was 
in some way comforted with the assurance that He 
had faithfully kept His consecration vow, and that He 
would surely have a resurrection as promised. 

We behold how calm He was thereafter, when before 
the high priest and Pilate, and Herod and Pilate again. 
"As a Iamb before her shearers is dumb, so He opened 
not His mouth" in self-defense. We see Him faithful, 
courageous to the very last; and we have His assurance 
that He could have asked of the Father and could have 
had more than twelve legions of angels for His protection. 
Bui instead of petitioning for aid to escape His 
sacrifice. He petitioned for help to endure it faithfully. 
What a lesson is here for all His footstep followers! 



On the other hand, we recall that even amongst His 
loyal disciples the most courageous forsook the Master 

R5872 : page 86 

and fled; and that one of them, in his timidity, even denied 
his Lord! What an occasion is this for examining our 
own hearts as respects the degree of our own faith, our 
own courage and our willingness to suffer with Him who 
redeemed us! What an opportunity is thus afforded for 
us to buttress the mind with the resolution that we will 
not deny our Master under any circumstances or conditions— 
that we will confess Him not only with our lips, 
but also by our conduct. 

OUR OPPOSITION TO BE FROM RELIGIOUS WORLD 

We are shocked with the thought that it was Jehovah's 
professed people who crucified the Prince of Life! and 
not only so, but that it was the leaders of their religious 
thought, their chief priests. Scribes and Pharisees and 
Doctors of the Law, rather than the common people, who 
were responsible for this dreadful deed. We remember 
the Master's words, "Marvel not that the world hate you; 
for you know that it hated Me before it hated you." We 
see that He referred to the religious world; and realizing 
this, we know that it will be the religious world that will 
hate us. His followers. We are not to be surprised, then, 
that opposition to the Truth and persecution of the light-bearers 
should come from the most prominent exponents 
of so-called Christianity. This fact, however, should not 
cause us to hate either our own opponents or those who 
persecuted our Lord to the death. Rather we are to remember 
the words of the Apostle Peter respecting this 
matter: "I wot that in ignorance ye did it, as did also 
your rulers."— Acts 3:17. 

Ah, yes! Ignorance and blindness of heart and mind 
is at the bottom of all the sufferings of Christ— both Head 
and Body. The Father permits it to be so now, until the 
members of the Body of Christ shall have filled up that 
which is behind of the afflictions of their Head. (Colossians 1:24.) 
Soon, as our dear Lord declared, those who 
now partake of His broken body and are broken with Him 
in the service of the Truth, those who now participate in 
His Cup of suffering and self-denial, will drink with Him 
the new wine of joy in the Kingdom, beyond the veil. 
With that glorious Morning will begin the great work for 
the world's release from the bonds of sin and death— the 
great work of uplifting, the "Times of Restitution of all 
things spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since 
the world began."— Acts 3:21. 

The thought before the mind of each of those who 
participate in the Memorial service should be that expressed 
in the words of St. Paul, "If we suffer with Him, 
we shall also reign with Him; if we be dead with Him, 
we shall also live with Him"; "for our light afflictions. 



which are but for a moment," "are not worthy to be compared 
with the glory that shall be revealed in us." 
(Rom. 8: 18.) With these thoughts respecting the passing 
over of our sins as the First-borns through the merit of 
the precious blood, and our share with our blessed Lord 
in all His experience of suffering and of glory, we may 
indeed keep the Passover feast with joy, notwithstanding 
the trials and difficulties. So doing, continuing faithful 
as His followers, very soon we shall have the great privilege 
of leading forth the Lord's hosts— all who ultimately 
shall hear and know and obey the great King— out of the 
dominion of sin and death, out of Egypt into Canaan. 

THE COMING ANNIVERSARY 

According to custom, the New York and Brooklyn congregation 
will this year meet to celebrate the great event 
which is so full of precious significance to all the saints 
who have come into an appreciation of Present Truth. We 
recommend that the dear friends in various parts of the 
world neglect not this blessed Memorial. We do not advise 
the leaving of the smaller groups to meet with larger 
companies, but rather that each little company, or band. 
meet together as is its usual custom; for this seems to 
have been the course of the early Church. Let us "keep 
the Feast," with joy of heart, but with due appreciation 
of its solemnity, not only as relates to our Lord's sacrifice 

R5872 : page 87 

for us, but also as relates to our own covenant to be dead 
with Him. We recommend that the leaders of each company 
make arrangements to obtain unleavened bread, and 
either unfermented grape juice, or raisin juice, or other 
fruit of the vine. Our recommendation is against the 
use of fermented wine, as being a possible temptation to 
some weak in the flesh, though provision might be made 
for any, if there be such, who conscientiously believe that 
fermented wine was meant to be used. 

We recommend that these little gatherings be without 
ostentation. Decently, orderly, quietly, let us come together, 
full of precious thoughts respecting the great 
transaction we celebrate. Let us not have our attention 
too much taken up with forms and ceremonies. Let us in 
this, as in all things, seek to do that which would be pleasing 
to our Lord; and then we shall be sure that the service 
will be profitable to all who participate. 

We have heretofore suggested that none are to be 
forbidden to partake of the emblems who profess faith 
in the precious blood and full consecration to the Lord. 
As a rule there will be no danger that any will accept the 
privilege of this fellowship who are not earnest of heart. 
Rather, some may need to be encouraged, since wrong 
views, we believe, are sometimes taken of the Apostle's 
words concerning those who "eat and drink damnation 
(condemnation) to themselves, not discerning the Lord's 



body." (1 Corinthians 1 1:29.) For the sake of these 
timid ones, who, we trust, will not forego the privilege 
of commemorating this great transaction, we would explain 
that to our understanding the class mentioned by 
the Apostle is composed of those who fail to realize t lie 
real import of the sacrifice, and who recognize this service 
as a mere ceremonial form. The failure to investigate and 
learn what this signifies, brings condemnation, reproof. 

We trust that the occasion will this year be a most 
precious and profitable one to all the saints. As we are 
approaching the end of our course, the great importance 
of our Calling, its responsibilities and privileges, should 
be impressed more and more upon our hearts and minds. 
We are living in wonderful times. We know not what a 
day may bring forth. Then let us walk with great carefulness, 
with great soberness, yet with joy and rejoicing, 
knowing that our deliverance draweth nigh; and that, if 
faithful, soon with our Beloved Bridegroom we shall 
partake of the wine of joy in His Kingdom and be forever 
with Him. 



R5872 : page 87 

THE RANSOM AND THE SIN-OFFERING 

NOTWITHSTANDING all that we have written 

on the subjects of the Ransom and the 

Sin-Offering in the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES, 

in THE WATCH TOWER and in the 

TABERNACLE SHADOWS, it would appear that 

some of our dear readers are not yet clear 

in respect to these matters. Some even confuse 

themselves and others by hinting that 

"Brother Russell has changed his views— or 

that the STUDIES IN THE SCRIPTURES contradict 

THE WATCH TOWER. These are harmful mistakes. 

Should our views change we will state the change in no 

uncertain terms. We therefore make a renewed effort to 

make plain what we believe to be the proper interpretation 

of these subjects. 

"The Ransom-Price relates to the valuable thing itself; 
namely, the blood or death of Christ— a ransom price 
sufficient for the payment of the penalty of one member 
of the human family or of all, as it may be applied."— 
Z'09, p. 309. 

The Ransom views the matter of man's recovery 
from sin and death as a purchase— a Redemption. The 
basis of this thought is the Divine Law, "an eye for an 
eye, a tooth for a tooth, a man's life for a man's life." 
(Deuteronomy 19:21.) Adam and his entire race of 
thousands of millions are in dire distress through sin 
and its penalty. God has provided a recovery by a Ransom 
process— purchasing back from their fallen condition. 

Our first thought naturally would be that to redeem. 



or purchase back, the right of humanity to life, would 
mean that each member of Adam's race must be purchased 
by the life of another person, holy, harmless, unsentenced. 
But looking deeply into God's Plan we find 
that only one man was tried before the Divine Court- 
namely, Father Adam; that only Adam was sentenced to 
death; and that all of his children go into death, not because 
of their individual trial and death, but simply 
because Adam, having failed to maintain his perfection, 
was unable to give his children more life or rights than 
he possessed. And so it has been throughout the entire 
period of six thousand years from the time of Father 
Adam's sentence until now. 

Here we see a wonderful economic feature connected 
with the Divine Plan. God would not permit more than 
one member of the human race to be tried and sentenced 
to death; for His purpose from the beginning was that 
the sacrifice of one life should redeem the entire human 
race. By one man the whole trouble came; by another 
Man the whole trouble will be rectified. This the Apostle 
points out, saying, "As by a man came death, by a man 
comes also the resurrection of the dead; for as all in 
Adam die, even so all in Christ shall be made alive— 
every man in his own order."— 1 Corinthians 15:21-23. 

R5873 : page 87 

Thus we see the value of Jesus' death— that it was 
not merely for Adam, but included all his posterity. We 
see, too, how necessary it was that Jesus should be "holy, 
harmless, undefiled and separate from sinners"; otherwise. 
He, like the remainder of the race, would have 
been under a Divine death sentence. Because all of 
Adam's race were involved in sin and its penalty it was 
necessary to find an outsider to be the world's Redeemer; 
and that outsider, whether angel, cherub, or the great 
Michael Himself, the Logos, must exchange the spirit 
nature for the human nature in order to be a corresponding 
price— a Ransom for the first man. 

It was not a God that sinned; hence the death of a 
God could not redeem. It was not a cherub that sinned; 
hence the death of a cherub could not redeem. It was a 
man who sinned, and the ransom for him must be furnished 
by the death of a man. It was for this cause that 
the great Logos, in carrying out the Divine Plan for 
human redemption, left the glory which He had with the 
Father before the world was, humbled Himself and became 
a man, "was made a little lower than the angels, 
for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor 
[the perfection of human nature]; that He, by the grace 
of God, should taste death for every man."— Hebrews 2:9. 

RANSOM PRICE AND RANSOM WORK 

If we have established clearly what a ransom is, and 
that Jesus was the only One suitable to be a Ransom for 



Father Adam, our next point is to show from the Bible 
that He did give Himself as a Ransom. We have the 
word of Jesus Himself on the subject (Matthew 20:28); 
and also St. Paul's testimony, "the Man Christ Jesus, 

R5873 : page 88 

who gave Himself a Ransom-price for all, to be testified 
in due time." (1 Tim. 2:6.) This proves that the 
giving of the price sufficient to ransom Adam and all his 
race was accomplished in Jesus' death at Calvary. 

But the work of ransoming Adam and his race is much 
more than merely the providing of the Ransom-price. 
The thought connected with the word Ransom goes beyond 
the mere giving and appropriating of the price. It 
includes the recovery of Adam and his race from the 
power of sin and death. Manifestly, this work has not 
yet been accomplished; indeed, it has scarcely begun. 
The only disposition thus far of the Ransom, the merit, 
has been its imputation to the Church, and this only by 
faith. The Church is not yet glorified as a whole— not 
yet delivered from the power of sin and death completely. 
Manifestly, then, it will require the entire thousand years 
of Messiah's Kingdom to ransom, to deliver, to set free, 
from the power of sin and death, Adam and all his children. 
Consequently, the Ransom work, which began more 
than eighteen centuries ago, is still to be accomplished. 

There is no difficulty about the Ransom-price; for 
that price has been in the hands of Justice for nearly 
nineteen centuries. But it has been unapplied as respects 
the world and only imputed to the Church that has been 
called out from the world during this Gospel Age. The 
full completion of the Ransoming work will include what 
the Bible speaks of, saying, "I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave." (Hosea 13:14.) Nor will the Ransoming 
work be fully accomplished when the last member 
of the race has been delivered from the power of the 
grave; for there will still be a great resurrecting work 
to be done— a raising up out of imperfection of mind, 
morals and physique, to the full image and likeness of 
God, lost through Adam's disobedience and redeemed by 
the precious blood at Calvary. 

THE SIN-OFFERING IS DIFFERENT 

With the thought of the Ransom before our minds, we 
now investigate the subject of the Sin-Offering, remembering 
to keep the two subjects separate and distinct. 
"The Sin-Offering shows the manner in which the Ransom-price 
is applicable, or effective, to the cancelation of 
the sins of the whole world." (Z '09, 309.) The Sin-Offering 
does not require so long a time for its accomplishment 
as does the Ransom. We have already seen 
that the Ransoming work has been in progress nearly 
nineteen centuries, and will be in progress nearly ten 
centuries in the future, or a total of twenty-nine centuries. 



But the Sin-Offering will all be completed before 
the glorious Reign of Christ begins. His Church then 
being with Him in glory. 

The Sin-Offering of Israel's Atonement Day shows 
us the same sacrifice of Jesus which constitutes the Ransom-price, 
but it is a different picture; for it shows how 
God appropriates the merit of Christ in behalf of human 
sins. This matter was pictured in that feature of the 
Law which provided the Day of Atonement. The sin-offerings 
were its principal feature. There were two. 
First was the bullock of sin-offering, which was furnished 
by the priest himself, the blood of which was made 
applicable to the priest's own family and tribe. This we 
see represented the death of Jesus, and the primary imputation 
of His merit to the Church of the First-borns. 

This Church consists of two classes. First, is the 
priestly class, who, like the High Priest, are especially 
devoted to God and His service, who "present their bodies 
living sacrifices, holy and acceptable to God, their reasonable 
service." (Romans 12:1.) In the type these were 
pictured both by Aaron's sons and by the body of 
Aaron, he being the head. Thus the Apostle speaks of 
Christ as being the Head of the Church, which is His 
Body, we being "members in particular of the Body of 
Christ."-! Corinthians 12:27. 

Second, there is the other class of the Church which, 
although making the same Covenant of Sacrifice, fail to 
go on obediently to lay down their lives in the Lord's 
service. They do not draw back to sin and to death, but 
neither do they go on to the sacrificing stage: hence they 
constitute a secondary class, servants of the first class. 
These were typified in the Levites, who were the servants 
of the priests. These are not to be in the Throne with 
the sacrificing Priests, the Royal Priesthood, but are to 
serve God in His Temple. They are not to have the 
crowns of Glory, but will be granted eventually palms 
of victory. And all not found worthy of a place in either 
of these classes will die the Second Death. 

In this picture the Lord shows us a special imputation 
of the merit of Jesus for the sins of His consecrated 
people only; and that these, justified by the merit of 
Jesus, are thus qualified through His merit to be sharers 
with Him in His glorious priestly functions. 

THE SECONDARY SIN-OFFERING 

The secondary Sin-Offering of the typical Atonement 
Day was called the Lord's Goat. It was not provided by 
the typical High Priest, as was the bullock, but was taken 
from the people. Indeed, two goats were taken at the 
same time, as representing the two classes of the Church. 
The sacrificing class or priestly class were represented by 
the Lord's goat. The less zealous of the Church, the 
antitypical Levites, were represented in the second goat— 
the Scape Goat. It was the Lord's Goat class, the under 
priesthood, that constituted the secondary Sin-Offering. 



The account says that the Lord's Goat was sacrificed 
and was in every way dealt with in precisely the same 
manner as the bullock, which preceded it. Thus the type 
tells us that the Church must walk in the footsteps of her 
Lord, sacrificially even unto death. We should remember 
that the blood of the bullock was not applied for the sins 
of the people, but merely for the sins of the high priest's 
family and tribe— typically for the Church. We should 
also notice that this secondary Sin-Offering, the Lord's 
Goat, was not offered for the same persons; for they 
needed no further offering. It was offered by the high 
priest as a secondary part of his own original offering; 
and its merit was made applicable to all the people, to 
bring atonement to all. 

In the antitype, the High Priest, Jesus, completed His 
own personal Sacrifice at Calvary. Forty days later He 
ascended up on High, and appeared before the Mercy 
Seat and presented the merit of His Sacrifice, not for 
the world, but for the Church. As the Apostle writes, 
"He appeared in the presence of God for us," the Church 
—not for the world. (Hebrews 9:24.) This is in full 
accord with what we have just seen in the type. 

Ever since Pentecost the Lord has been accepting the 
consecrated persons represented in the two goats; and 
those sufficiently zealous He has accepted as His members, 
and has been offering them up as a part of His own 
Sacrifice. Soon He will have finished this work— when 
the last member of His Body shall have been found faithful 
unto death. The next step in the antitype will be for 
the High Priest then to present again at the Mercy Seat 
the blood of the antitypical Lord's Goat as His own blood 
—otherwise, the sacrifice of His Church as part of His 
own Sacrifice. This He makes applicable to the sin of all 
the people— the original sin of all the people. 

At that moment, which we believe is in the near future 
now, the Father will turn over to the Son all the people, 
their sins fully forgiven so far as the original transgression 

R5873 : page 89 

is concerned. Forthwith Messiah's Kingdom, established 

in power and great glory, will begin to deal with 

the world for its rescue from sin and death, for the ultimate 

uplift to human perfection of all who are willing 

and obedient to the regulations of His Kingdom. 

PUNISHMENT FOR SINS AGAINST LIGHT 

Meantime, there will be other sins of the world not 
included in the Adamic transgression. The Sin-Offerings 
are merely for Adam's sin and all the various weaknesses 
and imperfections which flow from that original sin. The 
other sins will be such as are not to be attributed to 
human weakness, but which represent more or less of sin 
against knowledge, against light. Full, wilful sin against 



R5874 : page 89 

full light would bring upon the sinner the Second Death. 
But only a few have had full light, full knowledge, full 
opportunity; and hence very few indeed will have sinned 
the sin unto death. 

Wherever the light of the Gospel has gone, however, 
a certain measure of knowledge has gone, and a certain 
measure of responsibility accrues; and God intimates that 
He keeps a very exact accounting with all. Every sin 
must receive a just recompense of reward. The penalty 
of Adam's sin has reached down in a general way over 
the whole race for six thousand years; but the penalty 
must be paid for the other sins of which we speak, sins 
which were more or less wilful, more or less against light 
and knowledge and which have not been previously expiated, 
but which have been accumulating since Pentecost. 

Before the New Dispensation can rightly be ushered 
in with all its blessings, the world's accounts must be fully 
squared. It will be the settlement of these accounts 
against the world which will bring the great Time of 
Trouble such as never was since there was a nation— the 
Time of Trouble which we believe has begun in the present 
war, and which will progress until the great catastrophe 
of anarchy will complete it in the near future. 
Then the accounts of Justice having been squared in that 
great Time of Trouble, the blessings of Messiah's Kingdom 
will immediately begin. 

THE VALUE OF THE SCAPE GOAT'S SUFFERING 

However, God is a very strict Accountant. As He 
is sure to count against the world all wilful disobedience, 
and especially all persecutions of His Church, so also He 
is willing to give the world credit on account wherever 
possible. This, we believe, is intimated in the picture 
given us of a work which followed the Sin-Offerings; 
namely, the confessing over the head of the scape goat 
certain transgressions of the people, and the sending 
away of the scape goat into the wilderness. 

Understanding that this scape goat represents some 
of God's consecrated people who have failed to live up 
to their privileges, we understand this to signify that 
these will go into a great Time of Trouble, as represented 
in Revelation 7: 14. There they are represented 
as coming up out of great tribulation and washing their 
robes and making them white in the Blood of the Lamb. 
Those tribulations coming upon the Great Company 
class, the Levite class, are not tribulations for wilful 
sins, but tribulations for the destruction of the flesh, in 
harmony with the Covenant entered into by this class, a 
Covenant of Sacrifice, which they failed to keep. The 
sufferings of this Great Company class, we understand, 
therefore, go as a credit to the world to square the account 
of the world's sins against light and especially 
against God's people. The Time of Trouble will be especially 



against the hypocrites, but the Great Company 

Class will have their portion with the hypocrites and be 

bearers of a certain share of punishment due the world. 

That we may clearly note the character of sins for 
which the world is held responsible, let us recall the 
statement of Rev. 6:9-1 1, "I saw under the altar the 
souls of them that were slain for the Word of God and 
for the testimony which they held; and they cried with a 
loud voice, saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, 
dost Thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth? and white robes were given unto 
them"; and they were told that they should wait "a little 
season," until their brethren, who also were persecuted, 
should have the persecutions accomplished in them. 

Thus the same idea respecting the Divine requirements 
in the end of the Gospel Age is given to us that 
Jesus specified in regard to the Jews in the end of their 
Age. He said that all the righteous blood shed on the 
earth from the time of Abel down, would be required of 
that generation— to square the accounts. (Matthew 23:34-36.) 
In the great time of trouble with which the 
Jewish Age ended, those accounts were squared up to 
that time. Similarly we expect that all the remaining 
accounts of the world will be squared during the culmination 
of the great Time of Trouble— just before us. 

THE INAUGURATION OF THE NEW COVENANT 

The Apostle, in contrasting the typical and the antitypical 
Sin-Offering, declares that Jesus, not by the blood 
of bulls and of goats, but by His own blood, accomplishes 
the blessings. (Hebrews 9:1 1-15.) And again, the sacrifices 
of the antitypical High Priest are styled the "better 
sacrifices"— in the plural. This points us back to the 
institution of the Jewish Covenant arrangement, where 
Moses took the blood of bulls and goats and inaugurated 
the Law Covenant, sprinkling first the Tables of the Law, 
and afterwards the people, with the blood.— Exod. 24:3-8. 

The question arises. Why did Moses use the blood of 
bulls— plural— and of goats— plural; whereas in the type 
of Leviticus 16 the blood of one bullock and the blood of 
one goat alone was used? We reply that there was really 
but the one antitypical bullock, the one Man Christ Jesus 
who died for us; and that there is really but one antitypical 
Goat, the one Church, which is accepted by the 
Lord as His Body, and is associated with, and part of. 
His sacrifice. But in the inauguration of the Law Covenant, 
more than one animal of each kind was necessary 
because of the multitudes of the people of Israel who 
were to be sprinkled with that blood. The blood of one 
bullock and of one goat would not have been sufficient; 
hence the statement, bulls and goats— in the plural— and 
yet not definitely stated as to how many; for it was really 
the one bullock and the one goat duplicated as many times 
as was necessary to provide a sufficiency of blood for the 
sprinkling of all the people. 



In the antitype, when the New Law Covenant will be 
inaugurated by Messiah's Kingdom, the blood of Christ, 
as represented in the blood of Jesus and also in that of 
His associated sacrifices, the Church, will be used in 
sprinkling, or satisfying the Divine Law, first of all. 
This will be the basis for the turning over, to the Kingdom 
of Messiah, of the whole world by the Father. Then 
will progress the work of sprinkling all the people with 
the blood— the work of cleansing mankind— giving all 
men the benefits secured by the redeeming blood. 

THE ANTITYPICAL ATONEMENT DAY 

We trust that from the foregoing our readers will see 
clearly the distinction between the Ransom which Jesus 
gave and its application; and the Sin-Offerings of this 
Gospel Age and what they signify. We wish now to impress 
a further point; namely, that the Sin-Offerings were 
associated with the Day of Atonement for sin in the type 

R5874 : page 90 

and in the antitype. The antitypical Day of Atonement 
began with our Lord Jesus and His sacrifices. The entire 
Gospel Age has been a part of this Day of Atonement. 
This Day will witness the full completion of all the sin 
atonement and more; for all of the Millennial Age will 
be a part of the antitypical Atonement Day. 

The sacrifices of the Day of Atonement are merely 
the means to an end. The end to be attained is the blessing 
of the world, and the bringing of the world back to 
at-one-ment, or harmony, with God. That work will require 
all of the Millennial Age. It will include the 
teaching of the world, the restoration of mankind to all 
that was lost in Adam and redeemed at Calvary. The 
Sin-Offerings of the Atonement Day merely represent 
God's Purpose in the use of the Sacrifices which must be 
completed before the world's at-one-ment with God can 
begin to go into effect. 

So, then, let us hope that all will henceforth see clearly 
that the Sin-Offerings of the Atonement Day and its 
Sacrifices constitute a picture of the processes by which 
God accomplishes the world's blessings; while the Ransom 
is entirely distinct, and shows the work of Jesus 
alone and its ultimate effect for mankind throughout the 
whole wide world. 



R5874 : page 90 

"WHY PERSECUTEST THOU ME?" 
-APRIL 2.-ACTS 9:1-31.- 
A NOTABLE ILLUSTRATION OF ZEAL WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE-REPROVED 



FROM ON HIGH-SAUL'S DEEP CONTRITION AN EVIDENCE 
OF GENUINE REPENT ANCE-HIS EYES OF UNDERSTANDING 
OPENED-ST. PAUL'S "THORN IN THE FLESH"- 
THE GREAT APOSTLE TO THE GENTILES A TYPE OF THE 
NATION OF ISRAEL. 

"Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Jesus 
Christ came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am 
chief."-l Timothy 1:15. R.V. 

WHOEVER thinks of Saul's transformation 

from an enemy of Christ and His Church 

to a friend and zealous servant as an experience 

on a par with the conversion of 

sinners is greatly in error. Such conduct 

as is related in today's Study is not the 

conduct of sinners, enemies of God. In our 

opinion, however, the term "conversion" 

would scarcely be appropriate in such a case. 

Saul of Tarsus was either a bad man and a 

hypocritical Pharisee, a money-lover, a self-lover, or 

else an "Israelite indeed," whose aim and object was the 

service of God, and whose persecution of the early Church 

was prompted by his fidelity to God. We believe that the 

latter description is the one which fitted the case of Saul; 

for it is in harmony with his own testimony on the 

subject. -Acts 26:9-1 1. 

If, then, Saul was a true and loyal member of the 
favored nation of Israel, thoroughly consecrated to God 
and serving Him to the best of his ability and knowledge, 
but merely blinded for the time by prejudice and misconception, 
we can no more think of his case as a conversion 
than the cases of the other Apostles. Our Lord chose 
the original Twelve because they were Israelites indeed; 
and He gave them the instruction necessary for His 
service. This He did also for Saul, though in a more 
striking manner. 

The word convert signifies the turning about in an 
opposite direction. But Saul was already going in the 
right direction; namely, in a whole-hearted service of 
God, although his efforts were expended upon the wrong 
thing in that right direction. The Lord merely opened 
his eyes of understanding, and showed him the better how 
his efforts should be used. Saul needed merely to be 
shown aright; and this he demonstrated by as much 
fidelity and energy in the Lord's service afterward as he 
had ignorantly misused previously. 

CONSCIENTIOUS WRONG-DOING 

Saul was one of those Israelites who lived amongst 
the Gentiles, but who occasionally went up to Jerusalem 
to certain of the feasts. (Deuteronomy 16:16.) His home 
was in the city of Tarsus, a notable city of that time- 
said to have been excelled in scholarship only by the cities 
of Alexandria and Athens. Not only had he the advantages 



of a home in such a city, but his family was an 
influential one, as is implied in the fact that he was 
a citizen, not only of Tarsus, but also of Rome. In addition 
to the education of his home city, he had received a 
special course in theology, or Jewish Law, at Jerusalem, 
under Gamaliel, one of the greatest teachers of that time. 

Saul's early training, therefore, and all of its conditions 
were favorable to producing in him a breadth and 
refinement of thought equaled by few. These conditions, 
combined with his honesty of heart and his zeal for God, 
although not at first according to knowledge, fitted him 
to become just what the Lord subsequently made him; 
namely, "a chosen vessel" unto the Lord, to bear His name 
before the Gentiles and kings and the children of Israel. 

Apparently the circumstances connected with the 
stoning of St. Stephen only incited Saul to greater energy 
in stamping out what he believed to be a very injurious 
doctrine— heresy. Our own experience confirms the 
thought that an earnest, conscientious opponent is more 
to be respected than a cold, indifferent professed friend. 
We are reminded of our Lord's words, "I would that thou 
wert cold or hot. So then because thou art lukewarm, 
and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of My 
mouth." (Revelation 3: 16.) Let us have respect, therefore, 
for all who are warm-hearted and zealous, remembering 
that there is more hope of their being pleasing to 
God, and being accounted worthy to receive the Truth, 
than for the lukewarm. 

Under the arrangements of the Roman government, 
the Jewish priesthood was granted considerable power, 
and had come to exercise very much of the power subsequently 
used by the Popes of Rome. The religious 
rulers had power to authorize arrests and imprisonments 
for the infraction of their rules and regulations. Saul, 
exercising the same respect to law and authority which 
subsequently marked all of his dealings and teachings as 
a Christian, did not attempt to take matters into his own 
hands in regard to the persecution of the Christians, but 
went about it in the manner recognized as legal— under 
the sanction and authority of the highest religious 
tribunal. Let us remember that nearly all persecutions 
have been sanctioned by some human law, and regulate 
ourselves according to the Divine code. 

THE THREE ACCOUNTS HARMONIZED 

The account given in today's Study regarding the 
opening of the eyes of Saul's understanding is that of 
St. Luke, and was doubtless received directly from the 
Apostle Paul himself, with whom St. Luke traveled for 
a time. Two other accounts are given by St. Paul himself. 
(See Acts 22:6-1 1; 26:12-20.) The three accounts 

R5874:page91 

are in practical agreement, and show only such variations 



as might reasonably be expected, considering the fact that 
they were delivered under different conditions, as it was 
sought to emphasize or elaborate different points. 

Had the three accounts been exactly alike, word for 
word, there would have been just ground for supposing 
a special preparation of the text with this harmony in 
view. When rightly viewed, even the seeming discrepancy 
of the account is additional evidence of the truthfulness 
of all. The account itself being simple, we need to give 
attention only to those points which apparently conflict. 

All three accounts say that Saul himself heard a voice, 
saw a light and fell to the ground. One account adds 
that all with him fell to the ground as well. The account 
in our lesson declares that the men of his company "stood 
speechless, hearing a voice, but seeing no man." Another 
account says, "They beheld indeed the light, but they 
heard not the voice of Him that spake to me." These accounts 
can be harmonized in this way: Saul himself was 
evidently the center of manifestation— "a great light 
shone round about me." Doubtless his companions saw 
something of this light in a general way, but they did not 
see the source of the light. They did not see the glorious 
body of our Lord Jesus Christ— "seeing no man." Saul, 
however, saw the glorious body of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
as he himself subsequently testified.— 1 Corinthians 15:8. 

Although no one but Saul was smitten to the ground, 
the others, who stood speechless and terrorstricken, no 
doubt soon kneeled reverently about their leader. Respecting 
the voice— Saul and all with him heard a sound, 
"the voice," but only Saul could distinguish the words— 
which were meant for him alone. A similar case is recorded 
in John 12:28,29. In one sense of the word Saul 
and all of his companions heard the sound, or voice; but 
in another sense of the word Saul alone heard the voice. 
We use this same form of expression in our daily conversation. 
If some one addresses us in a low or indistinct 
voice, we say that we did not hear. We mean that 
although we heard the voice, we did not understand or 
comprehend what was said. 

OPENING OF SAUL'S MENTAL VISION 

Saul's feelings, as he heard from the Lord of Glory a 
reproof of his misdirected zeal, can be better imagined 
than described. Nevertheless, we can but admire the 
promptness with which he at once ceased his opposition 
and placed himself on the side of the One whose cause 
he had so recently persecuted. We can imagine him praying, 
"Lord, teach me! In my blindness and ignorance I 
have been fighting against Thee, the Only Begotten of the 
Father, the Messiah, while verily I thought that I did 
God service. Having made such a great mistake, I am 
thoroughly humbled. I can no longer trust either to my 
own wisdom or to the wisdom of those in whom I have 
heretofore confided— the chief priests, the scribes and the 
Pharisees. Now, Lord, I come to Thee. Show me how I 



can undo some of the great wrong which I have done 
ignorantly. Show me; and I will gladly and promptly 
follow and obey." 

How deep a hold the matter took upon Saul's mind 
may be judged from the fact that for three days he 
neither ate nor drank. He could not think lightly of his 
own blinded course. Deep contrition is always a good 
evidence of genuine repentance of wrong. No doubt his 
thoughts were busy; for he was well educated in the Law 
and in the Prophets and was familiar with what he had 
learned concerning the Nazarene. It is reasonable to suppose 
that those three days of blindness and fasting were 
days of prayer and reflection, during which he diligently 
compared the testimony of the Law and the Prophets 
with what he knew of the Nazarene and His teachings. 
Saul's natural sight had been destroyed; but his mental 
vision had been opened, and he now saw matters in a 
new and wonderful light. 

AN ILLUSTRATION OF DIVINE METHODS 

In a previous lesson the name Ananias was associated 
with ungodliness and falsehood. But in today's Study we 
find another Ananias of a totally different character— a 
true servant of the Lord. His hesitation to go to Saul 
does not seem to have been caused by opposition or by 
faithlessness, but rather a reasonable caution. He had 
heard of Saul, and possibly also knew Saul's host to be 
an enemy of the Cause of Christ. Therefore he wished 
to assure himself that he had not misunderstood the Lord. 
But the Lord graciously made the matter clear to him, as 
He always does to His faithful ones; and Ananias promptly 
fulfilled his mission. 

Here again is an illustration of Divine methods. The 
Lord sent upon this important errand one who apparently 
was a very humble member of the Church. He did not 
send St. Peter, St. James and St. John, the Apostles, from 
Jerusalem, with great pomp and show to receive the 
penitent enemy of the Cross and to make a public triumph. 
He merely used a ready and willing instrument that was 
nearby. This should be a lesson to us that the Lord is 
both able and willing to use in His service the humble 
ones who are ready and willing. 

The scales which fell from Saul's eyes would seem to 
indicate that a certain portion of the eye had been destroyed 
by the great light; and the healing may be said 
to have been in a natural way. Although informed that 
he received his sight, we are not informed that his eyes 
were made whole. Indeed, it seems evident, from subsequent 
statements, that to his dying day his eyes never recovered 
soundness, and his sight was never again normal. 

It has been surmised, and with good reason, that the 
continued weakness of his eyes constituted what the 
Apostle terms "a thorn in the flesh." (2 Corinthians 12:7-10.) 
Although under the power of the Holy Spirit 
he was granted many gifts of the Spirit, amongst which 



was the gift of healing, and although he exercised this 
gift of healing upon many (Acts 19:1 1,12), yet the Lord 
did not relieve him from his own weakness in this respect. 
This must have been all the greater trial; for it would seem 
all the more strange that he who could heal others could 
not heal himself— that he who had Divine power for the 
blessing of others of this way should not have the Divine 
power for his own blessing. 

To St. Paul's petition our Lord's answer was, "My 
grace is sufficient for thee; My strength is made perfect 
in weakness." The noble Apostle exclaims, "Most gladly 
therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the 
power of Christ may rest upon me." Thereafter he never 
requested the removal of this "thorn." 

Several incidents in St. Paul's experience confirm this 
conclusion: (1) Although an educated man, he seldom 
wrote his own letters; and of the one letter which he did 
write, although one of the briefest, he remarks, "Ye see 
how large a letter I have written unto you with my own 
hand." (Galatians 6:11.) The Greek would even give 
the thought that these words apologize for the use of 
very large characters in the writing— such as a semi-blind 
person would use. (2) When standing before the 
tribunal of the chief captain, St. Paul declared that he 
did not know Ananias as the high priest; whereas, if his 
eyesight had been good, he could not have well helped 
knowing the high priest, on account of his gorgeous apparel. 

R5874 : page 92 

(Acts 23:5.) (3) In writing to the Galatians he 
tells them (4:15) that, when he first met them, their love 
unci sympathy for him were such that they would willingly 
have plucked out their eyes for him— an expression which 
would be meaningless unless his eyes were defective. 
After a few days in which to gain strength from his 
fasting and from the nervous excitement incidental to 
his experiences— days of communion with those whom he 
had come to persecute, and whom now in his renewed 
condition of mind he recognized and fellowshiped as dear 
brethren— Saul promptly began to preach Christ as the 
Son of God— publicly using the opportunities afforded in 
the Jewish synagogues. The account of his enlightenment 
in the Gospel is that of a most noble character, which 
commands the respect of every class in every time. 

ST. PAUL AS A TYPE 

We are inclined to regard the Apostle Paul as in some 
sense of the word a figure, or likeness, or type of his race 
—Israel— and the opening of their eyes of understanding 
which is now shortly due to take place. Amongst the 
Jews are many who seem to be Israelites indeed, merely 
blinded, as both the Prophet and the Apostle have described. 
(Romans 1 1:7-12.) That nation, whose blinding 
took place in the Fifth Thousand-year Day, and which 



has been blinded throughout the Sixth Thousand-year 
Day, is to have its eyes opened on the Third Day, which 
will be the Seventh Thousand-year Day— the Millennial 
Day. "After Two Days will He revive us; in the Third 
Day He will raise us up."— Hosea 6:1-3. 

During all this time Israel has also been without food 
or drink of a spiritual kind. Israel also is to be a chosen 
vessel in the Lord's hand as connected with the earthly 
agencies in bearing the Message which shall bless the 
Gentiles and all the families of the earth. We are near 
to the time for the opening of Israel's eyes. When that 
time shall have fully come, the Lord will send some 
Ananias, whose touch under Divine favor shall bring 
sight. The name Ananias signifies, "Jah is gracious." 



R5875 : page 92 

AENEAS AND DORCAS 

-APRIL 9.-ACTS 9:32-43.- 

ST. PETER'S PREACHING TOUR-VISITING THE SAINTS-A TERM 

MUCH MISUNDERSTOOD-A PARALYTIC HEALED AT LYDDA 

-ST. PETER CALLED TO JOPPA-DORCAS AWAKENED FROM 

THE SLEEP OF DEATH-A BEAUTIFUL CHARACTER-THE 

FRIEND OF THE POOR -PURPOSE SERVED BY THESE TWO MIRACLES. 

"In all things showing thyself an example of 
good works."— Titus 2:7. 

PERSECUTORS never like persecution for 

themselves. Those who have the mind of 

Christ are never persecutors. They feel it 

to be their bounden duty not to assist things 

which they believe to be wrong; they may 

even find it necessary or expedient to denounce 

the wrong, to show up its inconsistencies, 

and in some instances to name 

the active agents in wrong teachings and 

wrong doings— as the Apostles have done in 

their writings. But as for persecuting others, the Lord's 

people can take no part in this. They are hindered by the 

spirit of love, the mind of Christ, which directs that we 

should do to others as we would have them do to us— the 

Golden Rule, our "perfect law of liberty." 

The persecution which scattered the disciples throughout 
all Judea, and of which Saul of Tarsus was one of the 
leaders, subsided shortly after he became a Christian, and 
was followed by a period of rest, recuperation, edification. 
While Saul's changed course may have had something to 
do with this, in all probability a trouble which arose about 
this time between the Jews and their Roman rulers had 
more to do with it. 

About the year 38 A.D. the Emperor Caligula, who had 



but recently come into his office, promulgated an edict that 

his statue should be set up in various quarters of the 

empire and worshiped. When the Jews learned that it 

was the intention to put these statues in Jerusalem, and 

even in the Temple itself, as well as elsewhere, their indignation 

and trouble knew no bounds. They gathered in 

great masses, young and old, to entreat the local governor 

to intercede for them that such a desecration of their 

Holy Temple and Holy City and Holy Land should not 

be permitted. While the governor made every effort to 

have the Emperor change the edict, the most he could 

accomplish was a command to leave the Temple untouched. 

But many altars were raised to the Emperor 

outside of its gates; and news came that all the synagogues 

of Alexandria had been turned into temples to Caesar. 

This state of affairs lasted until January 24, 41 A.D., 

when Caligula was murdered. 

A SEASON OF SPIRITUAL GROWTH 

It is not surprising that such outside persecution and 
interference with their own religious rites and liberties 
caused the Jews to relax their persecutions of the Christians, 
and thus brought about the period of rest mentioned 
in today's Study. The record says that the churches 
were edified. We get the thought, therefore, that this time 
of peace was a time of upbuilding amongst the little 
groups of the Lord's people in Palestine. There is a two-fold 
sense in which the Church may be built up or edified; 
in numbers and also in the fruits and graces of the Holy 
Spirit. Apparently the infant Church was edified in both 
ways; for the declaration is that the believers walked in 
the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit. 

The Scriptures declare that "the fear of the Lord is 
the beginning of wisdom." (Psalm 111:10.) This is not 
a selfish fear, not a fear that the Lord will eternally torment 
or otherwise unjustly deal with His creatures, but 
a reverence of the Lord which recognizes His greatness 
and His goodness, and fears to do aught that would be 
displeasing to Him or that would separate from His love 
and favor. This proper kind of fear, which is the beginning 
of wisdom, will never be lost so long as the wisdom 
is maintained. 

But reverence of God was not the only grace developed 
in the early Church. To it was added the comfort 
of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the spirit, 
mind, disposition of God. This the primitive Church was 
cultivating, developing it in their hearts, walking in it— 
that is, living it. The word comfort signifies united, 
cemented; and the thought of the statement as a whole is 
that not only was the Church multiplying in numbers 
and being built up together as God's holy Temple, but that 
the various "living stones" were being cemented or bound 
together by the Holy Spirit. 

MEANING OF THE TERM "SAINT" 



From our Study we learn that although the Apostles 
made Jerusalem the headquarters for their work, nevertheless 
they went hither and thither throughout Judea, 
meeting with the Lord's people scattered by the previous 
persecution, and forming little congregations everywhere. 

R5875 : page 93 

In one of his tours St. Peter came to Lydda, the chief 
city of the Plain of Saron (Sharon), about ten miles 
southeast of Joppa. His special mission, we are told, was 
the visiting of the saints. 

This word "saints" signifies holy ones, those set apart, 
sanctified believers in Christ. There is much opposition 
to the use of the word today, attributable, we believe, to 
two reasons. One is that the vast majority of professing 
Christians well know that they are not saints, not sanctified, 
not living as near to the Lord as they could live- 
not separate, even in heart, from the world, the flesh and 
the Devil. Such persons have strong reasons for disliking 
the word "saints," realizing that it would exclude 
them and nearly all of their friends and special associates 
in Christian work. 

Another reason for opposition to the word "saints" is 
the fact that in the Dark Ages it became customary for 
the Roman and Greek Catholic churches to canonize, or 
legally set apart as objects of reverence, certain persons 
respecting whom, after several centuries had elapsed, 
nothing especially evil was remembered, but only things 
esteemed as honorable and praiseworthy. The word saints 
thus became separated from living Christians; and, indeed, 
this may have been because there were few Christians 
so faithful as to be representatives of saintship. 

Still another reason why some dislike the term "saints" 
is that they consider it to be rather boastful— some would 
even say hypocritical. Having lost sight of the doctrine 
of Justification by Faith, in its proper application, they 
have become accustomed to think of all Christians as 
"miserable sinners" and to pray for them as such— overlooking 
the fact that there are some in whom "the righteousness 
of the Law is fulfilled," because these "walk not 
after the flesh, but after the Spirit," the merit of Christ 
covering all their unwilling shortcomings.— Romans 8:4. 

The Lord's people, however, are to remember to apply 
and to take pleasure in all the names and practises authorized 
by Apostolic usage. Thus the term "saint" certainly 
approves itself to us. Almost all of the Epistles of the 
New Testament are addressed to the saints; and those 
professing Christians who cannot properly apply the term 
to themselves cannot properly apply to themselves the exceeding 
great and precious promises contained in those 
Epistles; for all the promises are addressed to the saints, 
are meant for the sanctified in Christ Jesus. Let it be 
borne in mind, however, that the word "saint" does not 
signify actual perfection merely, as in our Lord's case, but 



also those reckoned holy through Him; and that the 
Apostles, who were saints and who classed themselves 
with the saints of God, declared respecting themselves, 
"We also are men of like passions with you."— Acts 14:15. 

The term "saints," then, properly applied in the 
Church, refers to those who, although originally "children 
of wrath, even as others," have been rescued from that 
condition of condemnation, have been washed, cleansed, 
and thus brought into accord with God through the forgiveness 
of their sins and through the covering of their 
weaknesses and blemishes; and who have become the 
"sanctified in Christ Jesus" by making full consecration of 
themselves to live, not perfect lives— an impossibility 
while in the flesh— but as nearly perfect as they may be 
able, the Lord's grace making them continually "holy, acceptable 
to God," through the merit of Christ Jesus. Let 
us never be ashamed of this name "saints," if it present 
before our minds saintship, holiness, separateness from 
the world; for this is the very thought which should be 
there continually. It is a thought which will enable us 
the better to live separate from the world, as the Master 
indicated.— John 17:16. 

The healing of AEneas, the paralytic, was a very 
notable evidence of the power of the Lord, similar to the 
healing at the Beautiful Gate of the Temple. (Acts 3:1-1 1.) 
Here, as always, St. Peter made sure that none 
should think that the power which he exercised was his 
own. He distinctly affirmed that Jesus the Messiah, whom 
their rulers had crucified, had performed the cure, and 
therefore was not dead, as they had supposed, but risen. 

The fame of this miracle spread abroad and resulted, 
we are told, in the drawing of many unto the Lord and 
to the Church. Thus did the Lord establish the Church 
and attract to it those who were in the right attitude of 
heart, using miracles then, as now He uses other means. 
Those miracles, as heretofore pointed out, cannot have 
lasted much longer than the Apostles themselves; for the 
miraculous gifts of the Spirit were granted only through 
the laying on of the hands of the Apostles, and The 
Twelve had no successors, St. Paul taking the place of 
Judas. The Heavenly Jerusalem had twelve foundations, 
and no more; and in them were written the names of the 
twelve Apostles, and no others.— Revelation 21:14. 

ANOTHER NOTABLE MIRACLE 

One of the saints at Joppa was a woman apparently 
of means and education. If her name represented her 
appearance, she was very beautiful; for Tabitha in the 
Syriac language, Dorcas in the Greek, signifies graceful, 
beautiful. But this woman was famed for a grace and 
a beauty entirely separate and distinct from whatever she 
possessed of these qualities naturally. Hers was the 
beauty of a meek and quiet spirit, full of love and helpfulness. 
Evidently she was a burning and shining light 
for the Lord in that vicinity. She did what she could. 



She served the Lord, His brethren and all who needed 
help. According to the best opportunities afforded her 
she helped the poor, particularly widows, who as a class 
were at that time apt to be in a very trying position, especially 
if poor. 

The Greek text indicates that Dorcas had been in the 
habit of assisting the poor with garments, etc., doubtless 
assisting them also with words of encouragement and 
helpfulness, and ministering to them the Truth. Under 
these circumstances it is not strange that her death should 
have produced sorrow, especially amongst the beneficiaries 
of her charities and amongst the numerous friends which 
a beautiful. Christlike spirit of this kind is sure to make. 

Apparently Dorcas took sick and died suddenly, at 
about the time that others of the saints at Joppa heard 
that St. Peter was at Lydda and had cured AEneas. Immediately 
they sent for the Apostle, probably with no 
thought that he would perform such a miracle as that of 
bringing Dorcas back to life, but rather with the thought 
that they had lost a highly esteemed member of their little 
group and that St. Peter could give them some consolation 
at this time. In those days there was neither telegraph, 
telephone nor mail service; and consequently some 
of the brethren became the messengers to take the word to 
the Apostle— to request his presence without delay. 

St. Peter went at once with them to Joppa. As he 
entered the death-chamber, he saw an affecting scene. 
Poor widows and others were lamenting the loss of their 
friend, and showing the garments which she had made 
for them. This was surely a noble tribute to the usefulness 
of her life. No millionaire has ever left monuments 
which will endure so long, or which will reflect so much 
glory upon his character, as were left by this humble 
woman. And even the humblest and poorest of us may to 

R5875 : page 94 

some extent emulate her example and leave behind us 
when we die some such monuments of love and some such 
testimonies of appreciation. 

It is sad indeed when any, especially of those who have 
named the name of Christ, die and leave none who sincerely, 
truly, mourn for them and miss them. Such a 

condition testifies to a life that was either selfish or misunderstood. 
We who are looking forward to the close of 
our journey, and that before very long, should see that 
our lives are spent day by day in such a manner that 
some will be the happier for them; and that our decease 
will be recognized by some, at least, as a loss. 

St. Peter's most notable miracle was the bringing of 
Dorcas back from the portals of death. Like the other 
miracle recorded in our lesson, it was peculiar to that time 
and for the purpose of the establishment of the Church. 
We are not to suppose that it was the Lord's purpose that 
all of His people during the Gospel Age should be thus 
snatched back from death, or that they should all be relieved 



from beds of sickness, or that they should all have 

powers such as the Apostle here exercised. There is a 

ministry of evil— of calamity, sickness, death, etc.— which 

has often been valuable indeed to the Lord's people, inculcating 

various lessons and developing various fruits 

of the Spirit— meekness, gentleness, patience, long-suffering, 

brotherly kindness, love. 



R5874 : page 94 

LESSON OF THE LILIES 

"Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow."— Matthew 6:28. 

FEAR and anxiety are amongst the most serious 

foes of our human family. They wear 

upon the gray matter of the brain; they produce 

nervous exhaustion and are very injurious 

to health. For those who would 

seek to walk in the Divine path which God 

has marked out for the Gospel Church, fear 

and anxiety are special hindrances. The 

Savior had this fact in mind when he spoke 

thus to His disciples. He would have His 

followers to be without worry, to be restful of heart. But 

He would not have them be without carefulness. There 

is a carefulness which is entirely proper, yea, necessary, 

on our part, but not this extreme worry— this inability to 

enjoy the blessings of the present moment because of 

thoughts, fears, respecting tomorrow. When the Apostle 

said (Philippians 4:6), "Be careful for nothing," he was 

not referring to a proper care and sense of responsibility, 

but to an anxiety which would rob the soul of rest and 

peace, and which would indicate a lack of faith in the Lord 

R5875 : page 94 

and in His care for His people. The word rendered "careful" 
here is from a Greek word meaning over anxious. 

In giving a forceful lesson to His disciples on trustfulness 
in God, the Master used the illustration of the 
lilies of the field. The lilies of Palestine are quite common 
—rather a small flower, many of them red. They persist, 
live, grow, notwithstanding that no special provision is 
made for their cultivation, and that they are trodden down 
by those who pass through the fields. Yet they develop 
and mature and blossom, and have an exquisite organism, 
which microscopic examination shows is very beautiful. 
Jesus declared that even Solomon in all his glory was not 
arrayed like one of these. There is a perfection in the 
texture of a flower that is wonderful. The finest clothing 
cannot approximate the delicate structure of the flower, 
created by an Infinite Hand. 

The lesson seems to be that although the flowers may 



be in an unfavorable environment, unable to do for themselves 

or to take any anxious thought in the matter, nevertheless, 
God's providence has so arranged for them that 
they thrive and become very beautiful. These lilies did 
not look up and wish that they might become great trees, 
nor wish that they might climb up higher in the world 
and nearer the sun, as do the vines. On the contrary, 
they were content with the lot chosen for them by their 
Infinite Creator.— Matthew 6:30. 

THE LESSON OF TRUST IMPERATIVE 

And so God's people are to take a lesson from the 
lilies. They too are to be content with the Lord's arrangement 
for them— as the poet expresses it: 
"Content whatever lot I see. 
Since 'tis my God that leadeth me." 
In proportion as we approximate this condition it will 
give us peace and rest of mind. We are not to worry, and 
not to be slothful, but are to be diligent, "fervent in spirit 
serving the Lord," doing with our might what our hands 
find to do. When doing this, we are to be content and 
trustful that He will work out all things for our good. 
He wishes us to learn this important lesson of trust. 

Those who neglect to learn this lesson will be unprepared 
for the great work God has in mind for our future 
under Messiah's Kingdom. God will not have any in that 
Kingdom, we are sure, who are not full of trust. As the 
flowers flourish under God's providential care, so are all 
of His people to flourish— to grow in knowledge and 
beauty of spirit, in beauty of character. And this is not 
accomplished by some great things that they do, but by 
the spirit in which they meet the little things, the every 
day experiences of life. God's people are to grow steadily, 
though unobtrusively. 

The lily would always have a humble place; it would 
never be great like a tree. So it is with us here in the 
flesh. And the Lord puts each one in the place He designs 
for him. We shall learn better the lessons for the 
future by being placed under humble conditions now, 
where we may grow, where our entire loyalty to the 
Father's will may be fully tested, where all the beauties 
of our character may be the most fully developed. 



PASSOVER PROVING 
John 18:11; Psalm 116:13. 

The Cup my Father pours 

Shall I not drink? 
And precious, holy thoughts 

Shall I not think? 
And if His Love doth send 

Less joy than pain. 



And if all friends forsake. 
Shall I complain? 

If foes misrepresent 
And work me woes. 

Shall I not rest content 
Since Father knows? 

If where once friend I had 

I Judas find. 
Still Jesus holds me in 

His love entwined. 
He knew the love and loss 

Of faithless friend; 
He'll know each step I take 

Unto the end. 
His love enfolds me fast— 

I cannot fall. 
The Cup my Father pours— 

I'll drink it all. 

Hattie O. Henderson. 



R5875 : page 95 

INTERESTING LETTERS 
GERMAN SOLDIER'S NIGHT WATCHES 

BELOVED BRETHREN:- 

I wish to thank you for your labors in sending me THE 
WATCH TOWER and letters "To the Brethren in the Field," for 
it is joy to me to let you know with what eagerness I look 
forward to your mail. To me it is a holiday and a day of 
special grace whenever I receive anything which bears the 
stamp, "W. T. B. & T. Soc'y." I imagine myself in the midst 
of my brethren, reminiscences are being awakened, and before 
my mental eye appear forms so dear to my heart. While they 
all differ in form and character, in one thing they are all 
alike, that is the new mind. Gentle are their steps, their 
actions, their language, injuring none; but nevertheless full of 
power and firmness. These are my brethren in God's family, 
as I have come to know them. 

While we are separated in the flesh, the ties of Christian 
love unite us all the more firmly. 

A few hours ago in our march we passed through fields 
of corpses, and now night has settled. I am lying in my tent; 
not far distant, along the ridge of the forest, 21 -cm. howitzers 
are hurling their destructive projectiles, while about a mile 
and one-half further on rattles the gunfire of the infantry. 
The mere sound of it makes me shudder. To sleep is impossible. 
A rattling in my pocket, and the last WATCH TOWER, 
the Herald of Christ's Presence, has fully awakened me. I 
am reminded of the sixth verse of the 63rd Psalm: "When 
I remember Thee upon my bed, and meditate upon Thee in 



the night watches." O what peace fills my heart, and what 
precious hours of communion with my Father are my portion! 

Weeks ago I passed through Lemberg. The engineer of 
a machine shop to whom I spoke concerning the hope of the 
Jews, assured me that they are waiting for the Messiah. Only 
as I rode by on horseback was it possible to speak to some 
of the Jews. I laid my hand upon their shoulders and shouted 
into their ears: "Your Messiah is coming; I have been asked 
to tell you"! Astonishment, tears of joy and God-speed— and 
onward went the march. 

How far we still have to journey I know not; the Lord 
knows. But we well know that 

"Soon our conflicts and toils will be ended; 

We'll be tried and tempted no more. 
And mankind of all ages and nations 

Shall be blessed in that triumphant hour." 
Therefore, while we have such a glorious hope, let us who 
are His and are called by His Name, continue steadfast till 
we shall see Him whom we have loved so long. 
Faithfully your brother, MAX VON DER STEIL. 
(From German WATCH TOWER.) 

"THOU CROWNEDST THE YEAR" 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

Greetings in the name of our Redeemer from the Class in 
St. Louis, with best wishes of the Season— a Merry Christmas 
and Happy New Year increased a hundredfold to you and 
the Bethel family! 

We wish to report to you the progress made by the Class 
during 1915, which now numbers about two hundred and 
fifty consecrated members. Seventy-six of these symbolized 
their consecration this year and two hundred and three partook 
of the Memorial supper. 

Twenty-three meetings are held weekly for Bible study, 
praise, prayer and testimony, etc. A number of public meetings 
have been held, in the Odeon, our best auditorium, and 
other halls, with a total attendance of about ten thousand. 

The PHOTO-DRAMA was again presented here this month. 
the Coliseum being used with most thorough publicity; eight 
performances were given with an average attendance of three 
thousand. The EUREKA DRAMA was sent out for one month 
to small towns near St. Louis, giving twelve performances 
with an average attendance of two hundred and fifty. Great 
interest was manifested. 

The pieces of literature distributed by the Class this year 
totals one million. 

We feel that every effort has been made to witness to the 
Truth in the city of St. Louis. It appears now that a clearly 
marked line is drawn between those who are friendly and 
those who reject and slander the Truth. 

We are indeed thankful for the great privilege that is ours 
and pray our Heavenly Father's continued blessing and guidance 
as we seek to do His will, knowing that it is all His 
work and that we can do nothing of ourselves. Our prayers 
are offered daily for you and all colaborers in the Master's 



service. With much Christian love, 
Your brother and fellow servant, 

J. H. HOEVELER, Secretary. 

BRETHREN HELP IMPOSTORS 

DEAR BROTHER RUSSELL:- 

From time to time, in the Pilgrim service, I come across 
the trail of certain "false brethren" who appear to make it 
their business to travel from Class to Class, borrowing money 
from the brethren, with the plea that they are bound for a 
certain Colporteur field, etc., and have just run short of funds. 
These "gentlemen" seem to be fairly well posted on the main 
points of the Truth, and can talk glibly about Brother Russell 
and the Pilgrims, although, if the brethren were a little 
more cautious, frequent slips would betray these frauds. 

One of these men recently passed west through Montana, 
doubtless bound for the Pacific coast. He succeeded in bilking 
a number of the brethren. The plan followed is to secure 
the name of one of the brethren at some farther point, then, 
upon arrival, to "pump" this brother for detailed information 
about the other brethren in the Class— their financial standing, 
etc. This information is all too frequently advanced with 
surprising freedom. 

In my judgment such information furnished to strangers 
(even though pretended brethren) is wrong. The Bible 
House plan of giving out no information about the brethren, 
their names, addresses, etc., especially to strangers such as 
the above, could profitably be followed by all the brethren. 

Might it not be well, dear Brother, to repeat the warnings 
that have appeared from time to time in THE WATCH TOWER 
against these "false brethren" that the Classes may again be 
put on their guard? 

With assurance of my deep appreciation of your labors of 
love on behalf of all the flock, I am 

Your fellow-servant in the one Hope, 

W. A. BAKER.-Montana 

A DEDICATED TOY BANK 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

Please find enclosed our "Good Hopes" for 1916, and also 
$10 as part payment toward the same. We are very anxious 
to serve our dear Master, but there is so little we can do, 
although if we are a little more alert and thoughtful we can 
increase our donation to the "Good Hopes." 

At the beginning of the year we decided to have a toy 
bank and dedicate it to the interest of our "Good Hopes" 
(aside from our regular donation) and drop into it such 
money as should be saved on special occasions; for instance, 
if we walk to Prayer Meeting instead of riding, we drop in 
10 cents; or if one of the brethren pay our car fare, another 
nickel goes into the box; or if we decide to have some 
refreshments and for this reason deny ourselves, another 10 
or 20 cents goes into the box. Sometimes we have taxed 
ourselves a certain amount for foolish words or actions, etc. 



It was to my surprise on opening the bank today to find 
$2.98, which was accumulated within less than a month! So 
we expect by His grace to continue this plan and see how 
the dear Lord will bless our feeble efforts. Oh, that we 
could do more to manifest our appreciation of his unspeakable 
blessing to us! 

The time is almost over in which we shall have the privilege 
of ministering to the "Feet" of Him, because the last 
one of the "Feet" members will soon be glorified, and then 
they will not need our help. May God's blessing be upon 
you all! 

Faithfully yours in the One Hope, 

SHIELD H. TOUTGIAN AND WIFE. 

EUREKA DRAMA SHOWN IN STATION 

DEAR BRETHREN:- 

I read your regrets in THE TOWER about the EUREKA 
DRAMAS lying idle and I regret the matter also. We try to 
make use of ours when we can, but the weather has been cold 
and expenses high. 

February 1, 2 and 3 my wife and I took the DRAMA to 
Black River, Mich. The three days cost us $8.43, and we 
were entertained free, at that. A French Catholic family 
entertained us and we gave the DRAMA in the R. R. Depot, 
which was a good place. It was well warmed. The stereopticon 
and graphophone were side by side, inside the ticket 
window. We had all the light we wanted for operating, 
while the auditorium was quite dark. We had as fine pictures 
with gas as I ever saw. 

In a town like Black River the passing of the EUREKA 
DRAMA was a great event and I believe other R. R. Depots 
could be obtained free of charge. Several persons walked 
five miles and back again every night to see the DRAMA! The 
audience was very quiet and needed no reminder. I am sure 
the Lord's hand was in the whole matter. We had about 
eighty persons each night. Yours in the service, 



page 96 

International Bible Students Association Classes 
STUDIES AND LECTURES BY MEMBERS OF THE PEOPLES PULPIT ASSOCIATION 



page 97 
