Highly Esteem Jehovah’s Beautiful Name
1 Satan defamed God’s name when he induced our first parents to sin. The Devil insinuated that Jehovah had lied to Adam. (Gen. 3:1-5) Since the divine name is linked with God’s ability to fulfill his word, Satan’s allegation was the height of slander. By progressively fulfilling his divine purpose, Jehovah has cleared his name of reproach and made it beautiful.​—Isa. 63:12-14.
2 We are the people whom Jehovah has ‘called by his name.’ (Acts 15:14, 17) This gives us the opportunity to show how we feel about its sanctification. We find Jehovah’s name to be truly beautiful, as it represents everything good, kind, loving, merciful, and righteous. We are filled with awe at the greatness of God’s glorious name. (Ps. 8:1; 99:3; 148:13) What should we be moved to do?
3 Sanctify God’s Name: God’s name cannot be made holier than it already is. But by our clean conduct and Kingdom preaching, we can demonstrate that we hold God’s name in the very highest esteem. Let us exclaim: “Give thanks to Jehovah, you people! Call upon his name. Make known among the peoples his dealings. Make mention that his name is put on high.” (Isa. 12:4) How can we do this?
4 We can take advantage of every opportunity to proclaim Jehovah’s name and all that it stands for. Whether formally or informally, from house to house or from store to store, on the street or on the telephone, our preaching activity honors Jehovah. When we find interested ones who listen, we should make definite appointments to call back and teach them more about Jehovah. That means we must keep those appointments without fail and persevere in our efforts to start home Bible studies. Happily, every year hundreds of thousands are coming to know, respect, and sanctify Jehovah’s beautiful name.
5 Our wholehearted participation in the work of sanctifying God’s name clearly shows where we stand on the issue Satan raised in Eden. This is the most noble, honorable work we can perform. Let us highly esteem and zealously praise Jehovah’s beauteous name!​—1 Chron. 29:13.

