What Will You Say to a Buddhist?
1 In some lands more than half of those getting baptized are from a Buddhist background. What is attracting these ones to the truth? How can you present the good news to a Buddhist?
2 Show Genuine Concern: Many former Buddhists have said that it was not profound reasoning that attracted them to the truth. Rather, they were touched by the genuine personal concern shown to them. An Asian woman living in the United States was so impressed with the friendliness of the sister who called on her that she agreed to study. She could not speak English well, but the sister was patient. When the woman was tired or unable to study, the sister would simply make a friendly visit and arrange for the next session. Eventually the woman, her two sons, and her aged mother got baptized. She returned to the land of her birth and assisted many others to learn the truth. One of her sons now serves at the branch office. What blessings resulted from reflecting Jehovah’s ‘kindness and love for man’!​—Titus 3:4.
3 Buddhist Thought: Buddhists generally are tolerant of other ideas, but they do not consider it necessary to adhere to specific dogma. So their individual beliefs vary. A common theme in one branch of Buddhist teaching is that life is full of suffering, but by means of enlightenment, one can stop the continuous cycle of rebirth into unsatisfactory lives. It is said that to be liberated from this cycle, one must achieve Nirvana, a state that cannot be described because it is not a place or an event but, rather, a void in which pain and evil are nonexistent. (See What Happens to Us When We Die?, pages 9-10.) What does this tell us? That it would be counterproductive to engage people in debates on Buddhist philosophy. Instead, discuss common problems that are of concern to all.
4 Emphasize Mutual Interests: Since Buddhists generally equate life on earth with suffering, the concept of everlasting life on earth may strike them as absurd. Still, all of us share the desire to enjoy happy family life, to see suffering eliminated, and to know the meaning of life. Note how such mutual needs can be highlighted.
5 You might try this introduction:
▪ “Today we live in a world where many innocent people suffer. What do you believe is needed to bring an end to pain and misery for all? [Allow for response.] There is an ancient promise that is very comforting to me. [Read Revelation 21:4.] Of course, that time has not yet come, but when it arrives, we would like to see it, wouldn’t we?” Then offer a publication that explains how suffering will end.
6 To an older person, you could say:
▪ “Perhaps you are as concerned as I am about the current flood of degraded ideas and the effect that these are having on our children. Why is there such an increase in immorality among young people? [Allow for response.] Did you know that this was foretold in a book that started to be written long before the founding of the Muslim, Christian, and Hindu religions? [Read 2 Timothy 3:1-3.] Note that these conditions prevail despite continuous learning. [Read verse 7.] This publication helped me to understand the truth that most people never learn. Would you like to read it?” Offer an appropriate book or brochure.
7 Buddhists generally respect the Bible as a sacred writing. So read from it directly. (Heb. 4:12) If the person feels uneasy about the influence of Western culture, mention to him that all of the Bible writers were Asians.
8 Which Publications Work Best? Published especially for Buddhists, the tract Will Suffering Ever End? is printed in Chinese, Japanese, Sinhalese, and Thai. In addition, many publishers have successfully used the following literature: the books Mankind’s Search for God, The Secret of Family Happiness, and Questions Young People Ask​—Answers That Work; the brochures “Look! I Am Making All Things New,” and What Is the Purpose of Life​—How Can You Find It?; and, if still available, Kingdom News No. 35, Will All People Ever Love One Another? Most Buddhists who are now learning the truth study the Require brochure first and then the Knowledge book.
9 Although Buddhist missionaries are said to have arrived in Athens nearly 400 years before Paul preached there, it is uncertain whether he ever met a person influenced by Buddhist thought. However, we do know how Paul felt about witnessing to people of all sorts. He made himself “the slave to all” so that he “might by all means save some.” (1 Cor. 9:19-23) We can do the same by showing personal interest in people and by emphasizing the hope that we hold in common as we witness to everyone we meet.

