Get to Know Your Brothers
1 The Bible describes a true friend as a person who sticks closer than a brother, who is constant in his love and loyalty, and who comes to the aid of his companion during distress. (Prov. 17:17; 18:24) We will have no shortage of such friends in the congregation if we put forth the effort to get to know and to love one another.​—John 13:35.
2 Fine opportunities to get acquainted with our brothers are afforded before and after the meetings. Why not arrive early and linger afterward so that you can enjoy warm and lively fellowship? Seek out a variety of brothers to converse with, including older experienced ones and younger or timid ones.
3 Initiate Conversations: Go beyond saying just a passing greeting to your brothers. You can initiate a conversation by sharing an experience in the field ministry, a point of interest in a recent magazine, or a comment about the meeting just concluded. You can learn much about your brothers by being a good listener, encouraging them to talk about their experiences and things they are learning. Just asking how one came to know Jehovah may reveal much. Some have been through faith-strengthening experiences in their lives, while others are enduring situations right now that may be hard for many to imagine. Realizing this will help us, as true friends, to be sensitive and responsive to the needs of others.
4 Befriend One Another: After the death of her child, a sister found it hard to sing Kingdom songs that mention the resurrection. She recalls: “One time, a sister who was sitting across the aisle saw me crying. She came over, put her arm around me, and sang the rest of the song with me. I felt so full of love for the brothers and sisters and so happy that we had got to the meetings, realizing that’s where our help is, there at the Kingdom Hall.” We should befriend our brothers by offering them solace when it is needed and encouragement at all times.​—Heb. 10:24, 25.
5 As this old world becomes ever more oppressive, let us resolve to get to know our brothers better. This interchange of genuine encouragement will prove to be a blessing to all.​—Rom. 1:11, 12.

