Service Meetings for September
Week Starting September 7
Song 28
10 min: Local announcements. Selected Announcements from Our Kingdom Ministry. Review the box “A Suggestion.”
15 min: “We Can Do Greater Works.” Questions and answers. Encourage all to set reasonable goals for the new service year and to work hard to achieve them.​—See Our Ministry, pages 116-18.
20 min: “Pioneers Assist Others.” An elder explains that in addition to the training provided in the Theocratic Ministry School, arrangements have been made for pioneers to help others personally in the ministry. He raises questions based on the article and invites comments from the audience, especially from pioneers and publishers who have been involved in the program. Consider how to get the best results from it. Pioneers may relate how they have enjoyed and benefited from sharing in assisting others. Publishers who have been helped may tell how they appreciate this loving provision and mention points that helped them achieve greater success and joy in the ministry.
Song 172 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 14
Song 160
10 min: Local announcements. Accounts report.
15 min: What Does God Require of Us? A talk. We begin studying this brochure next week at the book study. Encourage all to prepare in advance and attend every session in order to get familiar with the brochure and learn how to study it with others. Read the paragraph under “How to Use This Brochure.” Use material in the January 15, 1997, Watchtower, pages 16-17, to emphasize the importance of teaching with the questions, scriptures, and illustrations in the brochure. Book study conductors should set a good example for those who conduct home Bible studies, by not talking too much and not bringing in extra details.​—See Our Kingdom Ministry, June 1996, page 3, paragraph 5.
20 min: How Did We Do Last Year? The secretary and service overseer review the congregation service report and meeting attendance figures for the past year. They point out positive aspects of the report and focus on areas where improvement can be made. Was there 100-percent participation in service during August? Outline what goals the elders will concentrate on in coming months, including helping all to become regular publishers. Share appropriate points from the last report by the circuit overseer.
Song 144 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 21
Song 122
10 min: Local announcements. Theocratic News.
15 min: Local needs.
20 min: “Get to Know Your Brothers.” Questions and answers. Include comments on October 1, 1988, Watchtower, pages 10-11. Encourage all to take the initiative to get better acquainted with one another.
Song 34 and concluding prayer.
Week Starting September 28
Song 17
12 min: Local announcements. Remind publishers to turn in service reports for September. Encourage all to make plans to do more house-to-house work in October to increase magazine distribution. Refer to October 1996 Our Kingdom Ministry, page 8, for suggestions on how to prepare presentations. Demonstrate an offer with the current magazines, and show how to mention the donation arrangement to the householder. Pick up a supply of magazines for weekend activity.
20 min: “Overseers Taking the Lead​—The Service Overseer.” A talk by the service overseer. After reviewing his duties, he explains specific ways the congregation can cooperate to increase the scope and effectiveness of the ministry locally.
13 min: What Makes a Good Congregation Publisher? Talk, with some audience participation. It is not necessary to have superior abilities or talents; instead, it is most desired that all of us have a willing attitude that reflects love, humility, zeal, and appreciation. Invite audience to give reasons why the following are desirable: (1) a cheerful spirit, (2) regular attendance and participation at meetings, (3) willingness to accept and fulfill assignments, (4) cooperation with elders and the arrangements made for the congregation, (5) sincere interest in rendering assistance to others, and (6) regular participation in field service and reporting promptly every month.
Song 25 and concluding prayer.

