We Are Witnesses All the Time
 1. What can we learn from the account of Jesus’ witnessing to the woman at the well?
1 Jesus had been walking for hours. He was tired and thirsty. While his disciples went to buy food, he sat down at a well outside a Samaritan city to rest. Jesus was not in Samaria to preach; he was only passing through on his way to Galilee to continue his ministry there. Nonetheless, he took the opportunity to witness to a woman who was getting water. (John 4:5-14) Why? Jesus never stopped being Jehovah’s “faithful and true witness.” (Rev. 3:14) We imitate Jesus by being Jehovah’s Witnesses all the time.​—1 Pet. 2:21.
 2. How may we prepare to witness informally?
2 Be Prepared: We can be prepared to witness informally by carrying literature with us. Many publishers keep tracts on hand and place them with store clerks, gas station attendants, and others whom they come in contact with throughout the day. (Eccl. 11:6) A sister who travels frequently makes sure she always has a pocket-size Bible and a Bible Teach book in her purse, and she tries to start a conversation with those sitting next to her.
 3. How may we start a conversation?
3 Start a Conversation: When witnessing informally, we do not have to introduce a Scriptural subject at the outset. Jesus did not begin the conversation with the woman at the well by identifying himself as the Messiah. He simply asked her for a drink, awakening her curiosity. (John 4:7-9) One sister found that a similar approach enables her to start a conversation when she is asked if she enjoyed celebrating a holiday. Instead of replying that she did not share in the celebration because she is one of Jehovah’s Witnesses, she says, “I’ve made a personal choice not to celebrate.” The curious questioner usually asks why, allowing the sister to witness.
 4. Why does Matthew 28:18-20 motivate you?
4 Although Jesus finished his zealous earthly ministry, he continues to be very interested in the preaching work being carried out as he did. (Matt. 28:18-20) Therefore, like our Exemplar Jesus, we are Witnesses who are ready to give public declaration of our faith anytime.​—Heb. 10:23.

