“Be Aglow With the Spirit”
 1. What characteristic should mark our preaching?
1 No aspect of our Christian service should become stagnant. Rather, we are encouraged to “be aglow with the spirit” and to “slave for Jehovah.” (Rom. 12:11) However, there are many things that can diminish our zeal for our ministry. How can we “stir up like a fire” our zeal and enthusiasm for our Kingdom service?​—2 Tim. 1:6, 7.
 2. What relationship does personal Bible study have with a zealous ministry?
2 Personal Bible Study: An effective Kingdom preacher is one who loves God’s law and is deeply touched by the truths found therein. (Ps. 119:97) When Bible treasures are found during personal study, this stirs our hearts and intensifies our zeal. Love for the Provider of such truths and our desire to share good news with others moves us to offer praise to God and publicly declare his name. (Heb. 13:15) Clearly, presenting the good news in earnest reflects our deep appreciation for its value.
 3. How can God’s spirit influence our ministry?
3 Pray for God’s Spirit: An effective ministry is not accomplished in our own strength. Genuine zeal comes from a free flow of God’s spirit. (1 Pet. 4:11) Drawing closer to the Source of “dynamic energy” will give us the spiritual fortitude to witness boldly. (Isa. 40:26, 29-31) When the apostle Paul faced adversity in his ministry, he “obtained the help that is from God.” (Acts 26:21, 22) Jehovah’s invigorating holy spirit can help us to be aglow in our ministry, so we should pray for it.​—Luke 11:9-13.
 4. Zeal can generate what fine results, yet what cautions are in order?
4 Fiery zeal for Kingdom preaching often generates greater zeal among fellow Christians. (2 Cor. 9:2) In the territory, individuals are more likely to respond to a message that is presented with enthusiasm and conviction. Zeal, however, must always be accompanied by tact and mildness. (Titus 3:2) At all times, we seek to dignify the householder and respect his freedom of choice.
 5. What inspired admonition should we endeavor to apply?
5 As Kingdom proclaimers, may we always “be aglow with the spirit.” Let us cultivate zeal through personal Bible study and fervent prayer to Jehovah, the one who can supply us with dynamic holy spirit. In this way, we can zealously carry out our ministry “with holy spirit and strong conviction.”​—1 Thess. 1:5.

