





Is Purgatory Mentioned in the Bible?


The Bible’s answer
No, it is not. The Bible does not contain the word “purgatory,” nor does it teach that the souls of those who have died are purified in purgatory.a Consider what the Bible teaches about sin and death and how it contradicts the doctrine of purgatory.
  Faith in the blood of Jesus, not time in a so-called purgatory, purifies a person from sin. The Bible says that “the blood of [God’s] Son Jesus cleanses us from all sin” and that “Jesus Christ . . . freed us from our sins by his blood.” (1 John 1:7; Revelation 1:5, New American Bible) Jesus gave “his life as a ransom for many” to pay for their sins.​—Matthew 20:28, NAB.

  People who have died are unconscious. “The living know that they are to die, but the dead no longer know anything.” (Ecclesiastes 9:5, NAB) A person who has died cannot feel anything and therefore cannot be cleansed by any fire of purgatory.

  There is no punishment for sins after a person dies. The Bible says that “the wages of sin is death” and that “a dead person has been absolved from sin.” (Romans 6:​7, 23, NAB) Death is the full and complete punishment for sin.



What is the doctrine of purgatory?
Purgatory is defined in Catholic teaching as the state, place, or condition where the souls of those who die atone for their unforgiven sins and are purified.b According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church, this purification is needed “to achieve the holiness necessary to enter the joy of heaven.” The Catechism adds that “the tradition of the Church . . . speaks of a cleansing fire,” as depicted in the artwork accompanying this article. However, this is not a Scriptural teaching.


Where did the doctrine of purgatory come from?
The ancient Greeks believed in Limbo and purgatory. Influenced by Greek philosophy, Clement of Alexandria asserted that the dead could be cleansed of sin by a purifying fire. However, it was Pope Gregory the Great who stressed the fire of purgatory as a matter of unquestioned belief, according to The History of Christian Doctrines. This reference work adds that Gregory, who was pope from 590 to 604 C.E., “is usually called ‘the inventor of purgatory.’” The Catholic Church defined its official teaching of purgatory at the councils of Lyons (1274) and Florence (1439) and reaffirmed it at the Council of Trent in 1547.


a Regarding purgatory, the book Orpheus: A General History of Religions says that “there is not a word about it in the Gospels.” Likewise, the New Catholic Encyclopedia states: “In the final analysis, the Catholic doctrine on purgatory is based on tradition, not Sacred Scripture.”​—Second Edition, Volume 11, page 825.
b See the New Catholic Encyclopedia, Second Edition, Volume 11, page 824.

