





What Does the Bible Say About Dinosaurs?


The Bible’s answer
There is no direct reference to dinosaurs in the Bible. However, the Bible credits God with having “created all things,” so it is evident that they were among the things he made.a (Revelation 4:​11) Without mentioning dinosaurs specifically, the Bible does refer to groups of creatures that may include them:
  “Great sea creatures,” or “monsters.”​—Genesis 1:​21; New American Bible.

  “All the creeping animals of the ground.”​—Genesis 1:​25.

  “The wild animals of the earth.”​—Genesis 1:​25.


Did dinosaurs evolve from other animals?
Rather than appearing gradually as if by evolution, dinosaurs appear abruptly in the fossil record. This harmonizes with Bible statements showing that God created all the animals. For example, Psalm 146:6 describes God as “the Maker of heaven and earth, of the sea, and of all that is in them.”
When did the dinosaurs live?
The Bible describes sea and land animals as being created during the fifth and sixth days, or epochs, of creation.b (Genesis 1:​20-​25, 31) Thus, the Bible allows for the appearance and existence of dinosaurs over a lengthy period of time.
Were Behemoth and Leviathan dinosaurs?
No. Although these animals mentioned in the book of Job cannot be identified with certainty, Behemoth is generally identified as the hippopotamus and Leviathan as the crocodile. These identifications match the descriptions of them given in the Scriptures. (Job 40:15-​23; 41:​1, 14-​17, 31) In any case, the terms “Behemoth” and “Leviathan” cannot refer to dinosaurs. God told Job to observe these animals personally, and Job lived long after the dinosaurs had passed off the scene.​—Job 40:16; 41:8.
What happened to the dinosaurs?
The Bible does not comment on the disappearance of the dinosaurs. However, it does state that all things were created “because of [God’s] will,” so God clearly had a purpose for making dinosaurs. (Revelation 4:​11) When that purpose was fulfilled, God allowed the dinosaurs to become extinct.

a The fossil record proves that dinosaurs existed. In fact, fossils show that for a time dinosaurs were abundant in a great variety of forms and sizes.
b In the Bible, the word “day” can refer to periods of time that last thousands of years.​—Genesis 1:​31; 2:​1-4; Hebrews 4:​4, 11.

